Contents
Introduction 
1. Doppler ultrasound: principles and practice (Colin Deane)
Introduction
Basic principles
Continuous wave and pulsed wave
Ultrasound flow modes
Factors affecting the color flow image
Spectral or pulsed wave Doppler
Blood flow measurements
2. Safety of diagnostic ultrasound in fetal scanning (Colin Deane)
Introduction
Effects
Output regulations, standards and guidelines -who does what?
A practical approach to fetal scanning 
Selected WFUMB statements on the safety of diagnostic ultrasound 
3. Methodology of Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal circulations 
Factors affecting flow velocity waveform 
Uteroplacental circulation 
Umbilical artery flow 
Fetal arterial flow 
Fetal cardiac flow
Fetal venous flow
4. Doppler studies in fetal hypoxemic hypoxia
Fetal oxygenation
Pathological findings in pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction 
Doppler studies 
5. Screening for placental insufficiency by uterine artery Doppler
Introduction
Studies in selected populations
Studies in unselected populations
Prophylaxis studies
Conclusions
6. Doppler studies in red blood cell isoimmunization
Pathophysiology
Diagnosis and treatment of fetal anemia
Doppler studies
Conclusions

7. Doppler studies in pregnancies with maternal diabetes mellitus 
Pathophysiology 
Doppler studies of the umbilical and uterine arteries 
Doppler studies of the fetal middle cerebral artery and aorta 
Doppler studies of the fetal heart 
Conclusions 
8. Doppler studies in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 
Pathophysiology 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
9. Doppler studies in maternal autoimmune disease 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Antiphospholipid syndrome 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
10. Doppler studies in post-term pregnancies 
Post-term pregnancy 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
11. Doppler studies in twin pregnancy 
Chorionicity in twins 
Pregnancy complications 
Doppler studies in twins 
Doppler studies in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
Conclusions 
12. Color Doppler sonography in the assessment of the fetal heart (Rabih Chaoui) 
Introduction 
Examination of the normal heart 
Examination of the abnormal heart 
Differential diagnosis of tricuspid regurgitation 
13. Color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of fetal abnormalities (Rabih Chaoui) 
Introduction 
Placental and umbilical vessels 
Renal vessels 
Intracranial vessels 
Intrathoracic vessels 
Intra-abdominal vessels 
Fetal tumors 
Visualization of fluid movements 
Differential diagnosis of oligohydramnios 
.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Introduction 
Doppler assessment of the placental circulation plays an important role in screening for impaired placentation and its 
complications of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction and perinatal death. Assessment of the fetal circulation 
is essential in the better understanding of the pathophysiology of a wide range of pathological pregnancies and their 
clinical management. This book provides a comprehensive account of Doppler ultrasound in Obstetrics and will be of 
value to those involved in antenatal care and fetal medicine. 
The first chapter explains how the competent use of Doppler ultrasound techniques requires an understanding of the 
hemodynamics within vessels, the capabilities and limitations of Doppler ultrasound, and the different parameters 
which contribute to the flow display. Chapter 2 examines how ultrasound can cause thermal and mechanical effects in 
the body and emphasizes the responsibility of sonographers in ensuring that ultrasound is used safely. Chapter 3 
describes the methodology for obtaining and analyzing flow velocity waveforms from the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and fetal heart, arteries and veins and explains the physiological changes that occur during pregnancy. 
Chapter 4 reviews the effects of impaired placental perfusion on fetal oxygenation and the hemodynamic responses to 
fetal hypoxemia. Chapter 5 summarizes the results of screening studies involving assessment of impedance to flow in 
the uterine arteries in identifying pregnancies at risk of the complications of impaired placentation, and examines the 
value of prophylactic treatment with low-dose aspirin, vitamins C and E and nitric oxide donors in reducing the risk for 
subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. The hemodynamic responses to fetal anemia and the value of Doppler 
ultrasound in the management of red cell isoimmunized pregnancies are described in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 outlines 
the relation between impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries and maternal glycemic control or 
maternal nephropathy and vasculopathy in diabetes mellitus. It also describes the hemodynamic consequences of 
fetal acidemia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Chapter 8 discusses the potential value of Doppler ultrasound in the 
management of pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, both in terms of distinction between infected and 
non-infected cases and in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. The value of uterine and umbilical artery Doppler in 
identifying pregnancies at risk of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction and perinatal death in systemic lupus 
erythematosus and antiphospholipidsyndrome is summarized in Chapter 9. Chapter 10 reviews the Doppler findings in 
the placental and fetal circulations in post-term pregnancies and examines the value of Doppler in the prediction of 
perinatal death. Chapter 11 presents the Doppler findings in twin pregnancies and the hemodynamic changes 
associated with discordant fetal growth due to placental insufficiency and twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
Chapters 12 and 13 describe the application of color Doppler in the diagnosis of cardiac and extracardiac 
abnormalities, respectively. 
As with the introduction of any new technology into routine clinical practice, it is essential that those undertaking 
Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal circulations are adequately trained and their results are subjected to 
rigorous audit. The Fetal Medicine Foundation, under the auspices of the International Society of Ultrasound in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, has introduced a process of training and certification to help to establish high standards of 
scanning on an international basis. The Certificates of Competence in Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal 
circulations are awarded to those sonographers that can perform these scans to a high standard, can demonstrate a 
good knowledge of the indications and limitations of Doppler and can interpret the findings in both high-risk and lowrisk 
pregnancies. 
.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 1 
Doppler ultrasound: principles and practice 
by Colin Deane 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the capabilities of ultrasound flow imaging have increased enormously. Color flow imaging is now 
commonplace and facilities such as ‘power’ or ‘energy’ Doppler provide new ways of imaging flow. With such 
versatility, it is tempting to employ the technique for ever more demanding applications and to try to measure 
increasingly subtle changes in the maternal and fetal circulations. To avoid misinterpretation of results, however, it is 
essential for the user of Doppler ultrasound to be aware of the factors that affect the Doppler signal, be it a color flow 
image or a Doppler sonogram. 
Competent use of Doppler ultrasound techniques requires an understanding of three key components: 
(1) The capabilities and limitations of Doppler ultrasound; 
(2) The different parameters which contribute to the flow display; 
(3) Blood flow in arteries and veins. 
This chapter describes how these components contribute to the quality of Doppler ultrasound images. Guidelines are 
given on how to obtain good images in all flow imaging modes. For further reading on the subject, there are texts 
available covering Doppler ultrasound and blood flow theory in more detail 1-3. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES 
Ultrasound images of flow, whether color flow or spectral Doppler, are essentially obtained from measurements of 
movement. In ultrasound scanners, a series of pulses is transmitted to detect movement of blood. Echoes from 
stationary tissue are the same from pulse to pulse. Echoes from moving scatterers exhibit slight differences in the 
time for the signal to be returned to the receiver (Figure 1). These differences can be measured as a direct time 
difference or, more usually, in terms of a phase shift from which the ‘Doppler frequency’ is obtained (Figure 2). They 
are then processed to produce either a color flow display or a Doppler sonogram. 

Figure 1: Ultrasound velocity measurement. The diagram shows a scatterer S moving at velocity V with a 
beam/flow angle ... The velocity can be calculated by the difference in transmit-to-receive time from the first 
pulse to the second (t2), as the scatterer moves through the beam. 
Figure 2: Doppler ultrasound. Doppler ultrasound measures the movement of the scatterers through the 
beam as a phase change in the received signal. The resulting Doppler frequency can be used to measure 
velocity if the beam/flow angle is known. 

As can be seen from Figures 1 and 2, there has to be motion in the direction of the beam; if the flow is perpendicular 
to the beam, there is no relative motion from pulse to pulse. The size of the Doppler signal is dependent on: 
(1) Blood velocity: as velocity increases, so does the Doppler frequency; 
(2) Ultrasound frequency: higher ultrasound frequencies give increased Doppler frequency. As in B-mode, lower 
ultrasound frequencies have better penetration. 
(3) The choice of frequency is a compromise between better sensitivity to flow or better penetration; 
(4) The angle of insonation: the Doppler frequency increases as the Doppler ultrasound beam becomes more aligned 
to the flow direction (the angle ..between the beam and the direction of flow becomes smaller). This is of the utmost 
importance in the use of Doppler ultrasound. The implications are illustrated schematically in Figure 3. 
Figure 3: Effect of the Doppler angle in the sonogram. (A) higher-frequency Doppler signal is obtained if the 
beam is aligned more to the direction of flow. In the diagram, beam (A) is more aligned than (B) and 
produces higher-frequency Doppler signals. The beam/flow angle at (C) is almost 90° and there is a very poor 
Doppler signal. The flow at (D) is away from the beam and there is a negative signal. 
All types of Doppler ultrasound equipment employ filters to cut out the high amplitude, low-frequency Doppler signals 
resulting from tissue movement, for instance due to vessel wall motion. Filter frequency can usually be altered by the 
user, for example, to exclude frequencies below 50, 100 or 200 Hz. This filter frequency limits the minimum flow 
velocities that can be measured. 
CONTINUOUS WAVE AND PULSED WAVE 
As the name suggests, continuous wave systems use continuous transmission and reception of ultrasound. Doppler 
signals are obtained from all vessels in the path of the ultrasound beam (until the ultrasound beam becomes 
sufficiently attenuated due to depth). Continuous wave Doppler ultrasound is unable to determine the specific location 
of velocities within the beam and cannot be used to produce color flow images. Relatively inexpensive Doppler 
ultrasound systems are available which employ continuous wave probes to give Doppler output without the addition of 
B-mode images. Continuous wave Doppler is also used in adult cardiac scanners to investigate the high velocities in 
the aorta. 

Doppler ultrasound in general and obstetric ultrasound scanners uses pulsed wave ultrasound. This allows 
measurement of the depth (or range) of the flow site. Additionally, the size of the sample volume (or range gate) can 
be changed. Pulsed wave ultrasound is used to provide data for Doppler sonograms and color flow images. 
Aliasing 
Pulsed wave systems suffer from a fundamental limitation. When pulses are transmitted at a given sampling 
frequency (known as the pulse repetition frequency), the maximum Doppler frequency ƒd that can be measured 
unambiguously is half the pulse repetition frequency. If the blood velocity and beam/flow angle being measured 
combine to give a ƒd value greater than half of the pulse repetition frequency, ambiguity in the Doppler signal occurs. 
This ambiguity is known as aliasing. A similar effect is seen in films where wagon wheels can appear to be going 
backwards due to the low frame rate of the film causing misinterpretation of the movement of the wheel spokes. 

Figure 4 : Aliasing of color doppler imaging and Figure 5 : Reduce color gain and increase pulse
artefacts of color. Color image shows regions of aliased repetition frequency.
flow (yellow arrows).
Figure 6 (a,b): Example of aliasing and correction of the aliasing. (a) Waveforms with aliasing, with abrupt 
termination of the peak systolic and display this peaks bellow the baseleineSonogram clear without aliasing. 
(b) Correction: increased the pulse repetition frequency and adjust baseline (move down) 
The pulse repetition frequency is itself constrained by the range of the sample volume. The time interval between 
sampling pulses must be sufficient for a pulse to make the return journey from the transducer to the reflector and 
back. If a second pulse is sent before the first is received, the receiver cannot discriminate between the reflected 
signal from both pulses and ambiguity in the range of the sample volume ensues. As the depth of investigation 
increases, the journey time of the pulse to and from the reflector is increased, reducing the pulse repetition frequency 
for unambiguous ranging. The result is that the maximum ƒd measurable decreases with depth. 
Low pulse repetition frequencies are employed to examine low velocities (e.g. venous flow). The longer interval 
between pulses allows the scanner a better chance of identifying slow flow. Aliasing will occur if low pulse repetition 
frequencies or velocity scales are used and high velocities are encountered (Figure 4,5 and 6). Conversely, if a high 
pulse repetition frequency is used to examine high velocities, low velocities may not be identified. 

Figure 7 (a,b): Color flow imaging: effects of pulse repetition frequency or scale. (above) The pulse 
repetition frequency or scale is set low (yellow arrow). The color image shows ambiguity within the umbilical 
artery and vein and there is extraneous noise. (b) The pulse repetition frequency or scale is set appropriately 
for the flow velocities (bottom). The color image shows the arteries and vein clearly and unambiguously. 

ULTRASOUND FLOW MODES 
Since color flow imaging provides a limited amount of information over a large region, and spectral Doppler provides 
more detailed information about a small region, the two modes are complementary and, in practice, are used as such. 
Color flow imaging can be used to identify vessels requiring examination, to identify the presence and direction of 
flow, to highlight gross circulation anomalies, throughout the entire color flow image, and to provide beam/vessel 
angle correction for velocity measurements. Pulsed wave Doppler is used to provide analysis of the flow at specific 
sites in the vessel under investigation. When using color flow imaging with pulsed wave Doppler, the color flow/Bmode 
image is frozen while the pulsed wave Doppler is activated. Recently, some manufacturers have produced 
concurrent color flow imaging and pulsed wave Doppler, sometimes referred to as triplex scanning. 
When these modes are used simultaneously, the performance of each is decreased. Because transducer elements are 
employed in three modes (B-mode, color flow and pulsed wave Doppler), the frame rate is decreased, the color flow 
box is reduced in size and the available pulse repetition frequency is reduced, leading to increased susceptibility to 
aliasing. 
Power Doppler is also referred to as energy Doppler, amplitude Doppler and Doppler angiography. The magnitude of 
the color flow output is displayed rather than the Doppler frequency signal. Power Doppler does not display flow 
direction or different velocities. It is often used in conjunction with frame averaging to increase sensitivity to low flows 
and velocities. It complements the other two modes (Table 01). Hybrid color flow modes incorporating power and 
velocity data are also available from some manufacturers. These can also have improved sensitivity to low flow. A 
brief summary of factors influencing the displays in each mode is given in the following sections. Most of these factors 
are set up approximately for a particular mode when the application (e.g. fetal scan) is chosen, although the operator 
will usually alter many of the controls during the scan to optimize the image. 
Table 1: Flow imaging modes 
Spectral Doppler 
.. Examines flow at one site 
.. Detailed analysis of distribution of flow 
.. Good temporal resolution – can examine flow waveform 
.. Allows calculations of velocity and indices 
Color flow 
.. Overall view of flow in a region 
.. Limited flow information 
.. Poor temporal resolution/flow dynamics (frame rate can be low when scanning deep) 
.. color flow map (diferent color maps) 
.. direction information 
.. velocity information (high velocity & low velocity) 
.. turbulent flows 

COLOR FLOW MAPS (DIRECTIONAL) 

Power/energy/amplitude flow 
.. Sensitive to low flows 
.. No directional information in some modes 
.. Very poor temporal resolution 
.. Susceptible to noise 
"Color Power Angio" of the Circle of Willis "Color Power Angio" of a submucosus fibroid, note the 
small vessels inside the tumor.

COLOR POWER/ENERGY DOPPLER (AMPLITUDE FLOW) 

Color flow imaging 
Color flow Doppler ultrasound produces a color-coded map of Doppler shifts superimposed onto a B-mode ultrasound 
image (Color Flow Maps). Although color flow imaging uses pulsed wave ultrasound, its processing differs from that 
used to provide the Doppler sonogram. Color flow imaging may have to produce several thousand color points of flow 
information for each frame superimposed on the B-mode image. Color flow imaging uses fewer, shorter pulses along 
each color scan line of the image to give a mean frequency shift and a variance at each small area of measurement. 
This frequency shift is displayed as a color pixel. The scanner then repeats this for several lines to build up the color 
image, which is superimposed onto the B-mode image. The transducer elements are switched rapidly between Bmode 
and color flow imaging to give an impression of a combined simultaneous image. The pulses used for color flow 
imaging are typically three to four times longer than those for the B-mode image, with a corresponding loss of axial 
resolution. 
Assignment of color to frequency shifts is usually based on direction (for example, red for Doppler shifts towards the 
ultrasound beam and blue for shifts away from it) and magnitude (different color hues or lighter saturation for higher 
frequency shifts). The color Doppler image is dependent on general Doppler factors, particularly the need for a good 
beam/flow angle. Curvilinear and phased array transducers have a radiating pattern of ultrasound beams that can 
produce complex color flow images, depending on the orientation of the arteries and veins. In practice, the 
experienced operator alters the scanning approach to obtain good insonation angles so as to achieve unambiguous 
flow images. 
Table 2: Factors affecting color flow image 
Main factors 
.. Power: transmitted power into tissue* 
.. Gain: overall sensitivity to flow signals 
.. Frequency: trades penetration for sensitivity and resolution* 
.. Pulse repetition frequency (also called scale): low pulse repetition frequency to look at low velocities, high 
pulse repetition frequency reduces aliasing* 
.. Area of investigation: larger area reduces frame rate* 
.. Focus: color flow image optimized at focal zone* 
Other factors 
.. Triplex color: pulse repetition frequency and frame rate reduced by need for B-mode/spectral pulses 
.. Persistence: high persistence produces smoother image but reduces temporal resolution* 
.. Pre-processing: trades resolution against frame rate* 
.. Filter: high filter cuts out more noise but also more of flow signal* 
.. Post-processing assigns color map/variance* 
* Settings appropriate for specific examinations assigned by set-up/application keys 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE COLOR FLOW IMAGE 
The controls that affect the appearance of the color flow image are summarized in Table 2. The main factors include: 
(1) Power and gain:Color flow uses higher-intensity power than B-mode. Attention should be paid to safety indices. 
Power and gain should be set to obtain good signal for flow and to minimize the signals from surrounding tissue. 

Figure 8 : Setting the color gain to minimize the signals (artefacts) from surrondng tissue, on left color gain 
= 71, then on right decreasing the color gain to 35. 
(2) Frequency selection: Many scanner/transducer combinations permit changes of frequency. High frequencies give 
better sensitivity to low flow and have better spatial resolution. Low frequencies have better penetration (Figure 5) 
and are less susceptible to aliasing at high velocities. 
(3) Velocity scale/pulse repetition frequency: Low pulse repetition frequencies should be used to examine low 
velocities but aliasing may occur if high velocities are encountered (Figura 7a,b). 
(4) Region of interest: Because more pulses are needed to look at flow than for the B-mode image, reducing the 
width and maximum depth of the color flow area under investigation will usually improve frame rate and may allow a 
higher color scan line density with improved spatial resolution (Figure 9). 
(5) Focus: The focus should be at the level of the area of interest. This can make a significant difference to the 
appearance and accuracy of the image (Figure 7). 
Figure 9 : Set the focus at the region of interest, and also could use more than one focal zone. 
In practice, the operator will make many changes to the controls and will try different probe positions to optimize the 
image. Practical guidelines are given in Table 3. 

Table 3: Color flow imaging: practical guidelines 
(1) Select the appropriate applications/set-up key. This optimizes parameters for specific examinations 
(2) Set power to within fetal study limits. Adjust color gain. Ensure focus is at the region of interest and adjust gain to 
optimize color signal 
(3) Use probe positioning/beam steering to obtain satisfactory beam/vessel angle 
(4) Adjust pulse repetition frequency/scale to suit the flow conditions. Low pulse repetition frequencies are more 
sensitive to low flows/velocities but may produce aliasing. High pulse repetition frequencies reduce aliasing but are 
less sensitive to low velocities 
(5) Set the color flow region to appropriate size. A smaller color flow ‘box’ may lead to a better frame rate and better 
color resolution/sensitivity 
SPECTRAL OR PULSED WAVE DOPPLER 
Pulsed wave Doppler ultrasound is used to provide a sonogram of the artery or vein under investigation (Figure 12). 
The sonogram provides a measure of the changing velocity throughout the cardiac cycle and the distribution of 
velocities in the sample volume (or gate) (Figure 11). If an accurate angle correction is made, then absolute velocities 
can be measured. The best resolution of the sonogram occurs when the B-mode image and color image are frozen, 
allowing all the time to be employed for spectral Doppler. If concurrent imaging is used (real-time duplex or triplex 
imaging), the temporal resolution of the sonogram is compromised. 
Figure 10 (a): Doppler spectra of uterine artery flow. The color flow image allows beam/flow angle 
visualization. The sonogram shows high velocities throughout the cardiac cycle, indicating low distal 
resistance. 

Figure 10 (b): Doppler spectra of uterine artery flow. The sonogram shows a pulsatile flow waveform with 
low diastolic velocities. This is indicative of high distal resistance 
.. 
.. 
Figure 11: Setting up the sample volume. 
(b) - direction of the Doppler beam, (g) - gate or sample volume (a) - angle correction 
Sonogram of the descending aorta. With the angle correction the peak velocities could be measured. 
.. 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE SPECTRAL IMAGE 
The controls that affect the appearance of the sonogram are summarized in Table 4. The main factors include: 
(1) Power and gain: Pulsed wave Doppler uses higher intensity power than B-mode. Attention should be paid to safety 
indices. Power and gain should be set so that clear signals are obtained. 
(2) Velocity scale/pulse repetition frequency: Low pulse repetition frequencies should be used to look at low velocities 
but aliasing may occur if high velocities are encountered. 
(3) Gate size: If flow measurements are being attempted, the whole vessel should be insonated. A large gate may 
include signals from adjacent vessels (Figure 13). 
.. 

Table 4: Factors affecting the spectral Doppler image 
Main factors 
.. Power: transmitted power into tissue* 
.. Gain: overall sensitivity to flow signals 
.. Pulse repetition frequency (also called scale): low pulse repetition frequency to look at low velocities, high 
pulse repetition frequency reduces aliasing* 
.. Gate size* 
.. Beam steering can allow improved beam/flow angle for better accuracy of velocity calculation* 
.. Live duplex/triplex spectral resolution constrained by need for B-mode/color pulses 
Other factors 
.. Gate: sharpness of resolution* 
.. Filter: high filter cuts out more noise but more of flow signal* 
.. Post-processing: assigns brightness to output* 
*Settings appropriate for specific examinations assigned by set-up/application keys 
.. 
.. 
Figure 12: Umbilical cord displaying umbilical artery (red) and umbilical vein (blue), the gate or sample 
volume include both signals (left). Sonogram of the umbilical artery and vein (right). 

Figure 13: Influence of gate size. The spectral Doppler gate insonates an artery and vein and the sonogram 
shows flow from both of these vessels. The calculation of mean velocity (arrow) is meaningless since 
velocities from one vessel subtract from those of the other 
Guidelines for a practical approach to obtain good-quality spectral images are given in Table 5 . 
Table 5: Spectral Doppler imaging: practical guidelines 
(1) Set power to within fetal study limits 
(2) Position the pulsed wave Doppler cursor on the vessel to be investigated 
(3) Adjust gain so that the sonogram is clearly visible and free of noise 
(4) Use probe positioning/beam steering to obtain a satisfactory beam/vessel angle. Angles close to 90° will give 
ambiguous/unclear values. The beam/vessel angle should be 60° or less if velocity measurements are to be made 
(5) Adjust the pulse repetition frequency/scale and baseline to suit flow conditions. The sonogram should be clear and 
not aliased 
(6) Set the sample volume to correct size. Correct the angle to obtain accurate velocities. Use the B-mode and color 
flow image of the vessel to make the angle correction 
BLOOD FLOW MEASUREMENTS 
Velocity measurement 
Theoretically, once the beam/flow angle is known, velocities can be calculated from the Doppler spectrum as shown in 

the Doppler equation. However, errors in the measured velocity may still occur 1,4. Sources of error can be broadly 
divided into three categories. 
(1) Errors can arise in the formation of the Doppler spectrum due to: 
(a) Use of multiple elements in array transducers; 
(b) Non-uniform insonation of the vessel lumen; 
(c) Insonation of more than one vessel; 
(d) Use of filters removing low-velocity components. 
(2) Errors can arise in the measurement of the ultrasound beam/flow velocity angle. 
(a) Use of high angles ( ..> 60°) may give rise to error because of the comparatively large changes in 
the cosine of the angle which occur with small changes of angle (Figure 14). 
(b) The velocity vector may not be in the direction of the vessel axis. 
(3) Errors can arise in the calculation packages provided by the manufacturers for analysis of the Doppler spectrum 
(for instance, of intensity weighted mean velocity). 
(a) While efforts can be made to minimize errors, the operator should be aware of their likely range. It is 
good practice to try to repeat velocity measurements, if possible using a different beam approach, to 
gain a feel for the variability of measurements in a particular application. However, even repeated 
measurements may not reveal systematic errors occurring in a particular machine. 
(b) The effort applied to produce accurate velocity measurements should be balanced against the 
importance of absolute velocity measurements for an investigation. 
(c) Changes in velocity and velocity waveform shape are often of more clinical relevance when making a 
diagnosis. In this and other cases, absolute values of velocity measurement may not be required. 

Figure 14: Effect of high vessel/beam angles. (a) and (b) A scan of fetal aortic flow is undertaken at a high 
beam/vessel angle. Beam/flow angles should be kept to to 60° or less. A huge discrepancy is observed when 
using angles > 60°. If absolute velocities are to be measured, beam/flow angles should be kept to 60° or less. 

Calculation of absolute flow 
Total flow measurement using color or duplex Doppler ultrasound is fraught with difficulties, even under ideal 
conditions 5. Errors that may arise include: 
(1) Those due to inaccurate measurement of vessel cross-sectional area, for example the cross-sectional area of 
arteries which pulsate during the cardiac cycle; 
(2) Those originating in the derivation of velocity (see above). 
These errors become particularly large when flow calculations are made in small vessels; errors in measurement of 
diameter are magnified when the diameter is used to derive cross-sectional area. As with velocity measurements, it is 
prudent to be aware of possible errors and to conduct repeatability tests. 
Flow waveform analysis 
Non-dimensional analysis of the flow waveform shape and spectrum has proved to be a useful technique in the 
investigation of many vascular beds. It has the advantage that derived indices are independent of the beam/flow 
angle. 
Changes in flow waveform shape have been used to investigate both proximal disease (e.g. in the adult peripheral 
arterial circulation) and distal changes (in the fetal circulation and uterine arteries). While the breadth of possible uses 
shows the technique to be versatile, it also serves as a reminder of the range of factors which cause changes to the 
local Doppler spectrum. If waveform analysis is to be used to observe changes in one component of the proximal or 
distal vasculature, consideration must be given to what effects other components may have on the waveform. 
Flow waveform shape: indices of measurement 
Many different indices have been used to describe the shape of flow waveforms 1 . Techniques range from simple 
indices of systolic to diastolic flow to feature extraction methods such as principal component analysis. All are 
designed to describe the waveform in a quantitative way, usually as a guide to some kind of classification. In general, 
they are a compromise between simplicity and the amount of information obtained. 
Figure 15: Arterial velocity sonogram (waveform). 

The relative merits of indices used in uterine arteries have been discussed elsewhere 6,7. Commonly used indices 
available on most commercial scanners are: 
(1) Resistance index (RI) (also called resistive index or Pourcelot’s index); 
(2) Systolic/diastolic (S/D) ratio, sometimes called the A/B ratio; 
(3) Pulsatility index (PI) 8. 
These indices are all based on the maximum Doppler shift waveform and their calculation is described in Figure 12. 
The PI takes slightly longer to calculate than the RI or S/D ratio because of the need to measure the mean height of 
the waveform. It does, however, give a broader range of values, for instance in describing a range of waveform 
shapes when there is no end-diastolic flow. 
Figure 16: Flow velocity indices 
In addition to these indices, the flow waveform may be described or categorized by the presence or absence of a 
particular feature, for example the absence of end-diastolic flow and the presence of a post-systolic notch. 
Generally, a low pulsatility waveform is indicative of low distal resistance and high pulsatility waveforms occur in high-
resistance vascular beds (Figure 8), although the presence of proximal stenosis, vascular steal or arteriovenous 
fistulas can modify waveform shape. Care should be taken when trying to interpret indices as absolute measurements 
of either upstream or downstream factors. For example, alterations in heart rate can alter the flow waveform shape 
and cause significant changes in the value of indices. 

REFERENCES 
.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
1. Evans DH, McDicken WN, Skidmore R, Woodcock JP. Doppler Ultrasound: Physics, Instrumentation, and 
Clinical Applications. Chichester: Wiley, 1989. 
2. Powis RL, Schwartz RD. Practical Doppler Ultrasound for the Clinician. Williams and Wilkins, 1991. 
3. Goldberg BB, Merton DA, Deane CR. An Atlas of Ultrasound Color Flow Imaging. London: Martin Dunitz, 
1997. 
4. Gill RW. Measurement of blood flow by ultrasound: accuracy and sources of error. Ultrasound Med Bio, 
1985;7:625–42. 
5. Rourke C, Hendrickx P, Roth U, Brassel F, Creutzig A, Alexander K. Color and conventional image-directed 
ultrasonography: accuracy and sources of error in quantitative blood flow measurement. J Clin Ultrasound 
1992;20:187–93 
6. Thompson RS, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. A comparison of Doppler ultrasound waveform indices in the 
umbilical artery. I. Indices derived from the maximum velocity waveform. Ultrasound Med Biol 
1986;12:835–44. 
7. Thompson RS, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. A comparison of Doppler ultrasound waveform indices in the 
umbilical artery. II. Indices derived from the mean velocity and first moment waveforms. Ultrasound Med 
Biol 1986;12:845–54. 
8. Gosling RG, King DH. Continuous wave ultrasound as an alternative and complement to X-rays in vascular 
examination. In Reneman RS, ed. Cardiovascular Applications of Ultrasound. Amsterdam: North Holland, 
1974:266–82. 

Chapter 2 
Safety of diagnostic ultrasound in fetal scanning 
by Colin Deane 
INTRODUCTION 
Diagnostic ultrasound is generally perceived by users and patients as a safe technique with no adverse effects. Since 
ultrasound is so widely used in pregnancy, it is essential for all practitioners to ensure that its use remains safe. 
Ultrasound causes thermal and mechanical effects in tissue which are increased as the output power is increased. 
In the last decade, there has been a general trend towards increased output with the introduction of color flow 
imaging, more use of pulsed ‘spectral Doppler’ and higher demands on B-mode imaging 1. In response to these 
increases, recommendations for the safe use of ultrasound have been issued by several bodies. In addition, recent 
regulations have changed the emphasis of responsibility so that more onus is now placed on the operator to ensure 
that ultrasound is used safely. This chapter summarizes the effects and the standards issued and outlines 
recommendations for safe use in obstetric practice. 
EFFECTS 
Ultrasound is a mechanical energy in which a pressure wave travels through tissue. Reflection and scattering back to 
the transducer are used to form the image. The physical effects of ultrasound are generally categorized as: 
(1) Thermal effects – heating of tissue as ultrasound is absorbed by tissue. Heat is also produced at the transducer 
surface; 
(2) Cavitation – the formation of gas bubbles at high negative pressure; 
(3) Other mechanical effects – radiation forces leading to streaming in fluids and stress at tissue interfaces. 
The implications of these effects have been determined by in vitro, animal and human epidemiological studies and are 
briefly summarized below. 
Thermal effects 
As the ultrasound waves are absorbed, their energy is converted into heat. The level of conversion is highest in tissue 
with a high absorption coefficient, particularly in bone, and is low where there is little absorption (e.g. amniotic fluid). 
The temperature rise is also dependent on the thermal characteristics of the tissue (conduction of heat and 
perfusion), the ultrasound intensity and the length of time for which the tissue volume is scanned. The intensity is, in 
turn, dependent on the power output and the position of the tissue in the beam profile. The intensity at a particular 
point is altered by many of the operator controls, for example power output, mode (B-mode, color flow, spectral 
Doppler), scan depth, focus, zoom and area of color flow imaging. With so many variables, it has proved difficult to 
model temperature rises in tissue. In vitro studies have been used with a ‘worst case’ model of tissue to predict 
temperature rises o, for instance in the formation of thermal indices (see below). The transducer face itself can 
become heated during an examination. Heat is localized to the tissue in contact with the transducer. 
Cavitation 
Cavitation is the formation of transient or stable bubbles, described as inertial or non-inertial cavitation. Inertial 
cavitation has the most potential to damage tissue and occurs when a gas-filled cavity grows, during pressure 
rarefaction of the ultrasound pulse, and contracts, during the compression phase. Collapse of the bubble can generate 

local high temperatures and pressures. 
It has been hypothesized that ultrasonically induced cavitation is the cause of hemorrhage in the lungs and intestines 
in animal studies 2–6 . In these studies, effects have been seen at tissue interfaces with gas. The absence of gas in 
fetuses means that the threshold for cavitation is high and does not occur at current levels of diagnostic ultrasound. 
The introduction of contrast agents leads to the formation of microbubbles that potentially provide gas nuclei for 
cavitation. The use of contrast agents lowers the threshold at which cavitation occurs, but this is not current practice 
in obstetrics. 
Other mechanical effects 
The passage of ultrasound through tissue causes a low-level radiation force on the tissue. This force produces a 
pressure in the direction of the beam and away from the transducer and should not be confused with the oscillatory 
pressure of the ultrasound itself. The pressure that results and the pressure gradient across the beam are very low, 
even for intensities at the higher end of the diagnostic range 7. The effect of the force is manifest in volumes of fluid 
where streaming can occur with motion within the fluid. The fluid velocities which result are low and are unlikely to 
cause damage. 
Effects on fetuses 
Effects are divided into mechanical and thermal. For mechanical effects, there is no evi-dence that cavitation occurs in 
fetal scanning. In a study of low-amplitude lithotripsy pulses in mouse fetuses, there has been concern that 
hemorrhage may be the result of tissue movement caused by radiation forces 8 . There is no evidence that this occurs 
in vivo in fetal scanning. The primary concern in fetal imaging is temperature rise. It is known that hyperthermia is 
teratogenic. The efforts of investigators have concentrated on defining the temperature increases and exposure times 
which may give rise to biological effects and on determining the ultrasound levels which might, in turn, lead to those 
temperature rises. With this information, criteria have been identified for the safe use of diagnostic ultrasound. 
Temperature rises of 2.5°C have been demonstrated in excised unperfused guinea pig brain tissue after 2 minutes’ 
exposure to ultrasound at the high end of pulsed wave Doppler ultrasound intensity levels 9 . At the bone surface, 
temperature increases of up to 5°C were found. In a study on sheep using different intensity criteria 10 , the 
temperature rise in utero was found to be 40% lower than that in the equivalent non-perfused test. While the 
observed temperature increases occurred in high-intensity modes (typical of pulsed wave Doppler used at maximum 
power), these levels of intensity are achievable with some current scanner/transducer combinations. 
The issue of sensitivity of fetal tissue to temperature rise is complex and is not completely understood. Acute and 
chronic temperature rises have been investigated in animals, but study designs and results are varied. Work carried 
out in this field is summarized elsewhere 11 . 
The uncertainty over chronic changes is reflected in the WFUMB guidelines 12 . These state that ultrasound that 
produces temperature rises of less than 1.5°C may be used without reservation. They also state that ultrasound 
exposure causing temperature rises of greater than 4°C for over 5 min should be considered potentially hazardous. 
This leaves a wide range of temperature increases which are within the capability of diagnostic ultrasound equipment 
to produce and for which no time limits are recommended. 
Epidemiology 
Several studies have examined the development of fetuses receiving different levels of ultrasound investigation. In 
trials comparing ultrasound screened and non-screened groups, there has generally been no difference in birth 
weights between groups. There have been no unequivocal data to suggest that there is impaired development of 
hearing, vision, behavior or neurological function due to ultrasound screening. In a large, randomized trial of over 
3200 pregnant women in which half were offered routine ultrasonography at 19 and 32 weeks, there was no evidence 
of impaired growth or neurological development up to follow-up at 8–9 years. There was a possible association of left-
handedness amongst boys undergoing ultrasonography 13 . Scanning of this group was performed with B-mode only. 
There have been concerns that epidemiological studies to date do not reflect the higher output capabilities of modern 
scanners. 

OUTPUT REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES – WHO DOES WHAT? 
Regulations governing the output of diagnostic ultrasound have been largely set by the USA’s Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), although the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is currently in the process of 
setting internationally agreed standards. 
The relevant national societies for ultrasound users (e.g. American Institutue of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM), British 
Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS)) usually have safety committees who offer advice on the safe use of ultrasound. 
In 1992, the AIUM, in conjunction with the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) developed the 
Output Display Standard (ODS), including the thermal index and mechanical index which have been incorporated in 
the FDA’s new regulations 14,15. 
Within Europe, the Federation of Societies of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology (EFSUMB) also addresses safety and 
has produced safety guidelines (through the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety). The World 
Federation (WFUMB) held safety symposia in 1991 (on thermal issues) and 1996 (thermal and non-thermal issues), 
at which recommendations were proffered. Following review, these were published in 1992 and 1998 as guidelines. 
Past regulations 
The initial FDA regulations on ultrasound output were produced in 1976. These imposed application-specific limits, 
based on existing output levels which had demonstrated no adverse effects. Limits were divided into: 
(1) Ophthalmic applications; 
(2) Fetal and other (including abdominal, pediatric, small parts); 
(3) Cardiac; 
(4) Peripheral vessels. 
For spatial peak time-averaged intensity (I-SPTA) (the measure most associated with temperature rise), the 
maximum levels were: 
.. 
Scanners typically had a key/button which limited output for obstetric applications. Although power and intensity 
limits could be exceeded in some scanners, especially when using pulsed wave Doppler or color Doppler, this required 
a deliberate effort on the behalf of the users. 
Current regulations 
In revising its regulations in 1993, the FDA 15 altered its approach to ultrasound safety. The new regulations combine 
an overall limit of I-SPTA of 720 mW/cm 2 for all equipment with a system of output displays to allow users to employ 
effective and judicious levels of ultrasound appropriate to the examination undertaken. 
The new regulations allow an eight-fold increase in ultrasound intensity to be used in fetal examinations. They place 
considerably more responsibility on the user to understand the output measurements and to use them in their 
scanning. 
The output display is based on two indices, the mechanical index (MI) and the thermal index (TI). 
Ophthalmic 17 mW/cm2 
Fetal and other 94 mW/cm2 
Cardiac 430 mW/cm2 
Peripheral vessel 720 mW/cm2

Mechanical index 
The mechanical index is an estimate of the maximum amplitude of the pressure pulse in tissue. It gives an indication 
as to the relative risk of mechanical effects (streaming and cavitation). The FDA regulations allow a mechanical index 
of up to 1.9 to be used for all applications except ophthalmic (maximum 0.23). 
Thermal index 
The thermal index is the ratio of the power used to that required to cause a maximum temperature increase of 1°C. A 
thermal index of 1 indicates a power causing a temperature increase of 1°C. A thermal index of 2 would be twice that 
power but would not necessarily indicate a peak temperature rise of 2°C. Because temperature rise is dependent on 
tissue type and is particularly dependent on the presence of bone, the thermal index is subdivided into three indices: 
(1) TIS: thermal index for soft tissue; 
(2) TIB: thermal index with bone at/near the focus; 
(3) TIC: thermal index with bone at the surface (e.g. cranial examination). 
For fetal scanning, the highest temperature increase would be expected to occur at bone and TIB would give the 
‘worst case’ conditions. The mechanical index and thermal index must be displayed if the ultrasound system is 
capable of exceeding an index of 1. The displayed indices are based on the manufacturer’s experimental and modelled 
data. These measurements are not infallible; an independent study has demonstrated significant discrepancies over 
declared I-SPTA output of up to 400% 16. 
Future IEC standards 
An IEC standard (Draft IEC 61681) is being drawn up to establish a safety classification for ultrasound equipment 
based on its ability to produce cavitation or a temperature rise. The standard proposes two classifications of 
equipment: class A, which has a lower output and for which no output display is required, and class B which has a 
higher output and for which an output display is required. The draft is currently undergoing review. 
Guidelines 
Ultrasound organizations have produced statements on the safe use of ultrasound. These are not regulatory 
statements but are intended to educate and advise. WFUMB guidelines have been issued in two special issues of 
Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology 12-17 . Statements and recommendations are given on B-mode scanning, Doppler 
imaging, transducer heating, thermal effects (see page 33). The AIUM have produced statements on the safety of 
ultrasound. They are available from the AIUM office and can be obtained from the AIUMwebsite – 
http://www.aium.org/stmts.htm. The European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety has published statements 
18,19 on the use of pulsed Doppler measurement in fetuses, stating that its use in routine examinations during the 
period of organogenesis is considered inadvisable at present. 
A PRACTICAL APPROACH TO SAFE FETAL SCANNING 
No injurious effects have been identified from ultrasound scanning of the fetus. However, changes in power output, 
increased use of Doppler ultrasound and a change in regulations governing outputs means that every measure should 
be taken by users to maintain safe practices. 
Scanning practice 
.. The ALARA ("As Low As Reasonably Achievable") principle should be maintained. Power outputs used should 
be adequate to conduct the examination. If in doubt, use a low power and increase it as necessary. 
Application keys for obstetrics should bring in each mode at its lowest output so that the operator is 
required to increase power if the examination demands it. 
.. B-mode generally has the lowest power output and intensity. M-mode, color flow and spectral Doppler have 
higher outputs which can cause more heating at the site of examination. The examination should begin with 
B-mode and use color and spectral Doppler only when necessary. 

.. The intensity (and temperature rise) is highly dependent on scanner settings. For example, the intensity 
changes in response to changes in: 
(a) Power Output, 
(b) Depth of examination, 
(c) Mode used (color flow, spectral Doppler), 
(d) Transmitted frequency used, 
(e) Color pulse repetition frequency (scale), 
(f) Region of color flow interest, 
(g) Focus. 
If the display for the scanner/transducer combination shows thermal and mechanical indices, the indices 
should be readily visible. Of the thermal indices, TIB is most relevant to heating in the second and third 
trimesters. The operator should be aware of changes to the indices in response to changes in control 
settings. 
.. Special care should be taken in febrile patients, since ultrasound heating will cause additional heating to the 
fetus. 
.. The WFUMB recommends that ultrasound causing a temperature rise of no more than 1.5°C may be used 
without reservation on thermal grounds. 
.. Thermal indices exceeding 1.5 should not be used routinely and, if required for specific diagnostic 
information, should be used for the minimum time necessary. The influence of higher intensity levels can be 
moderated by moving the transducer so that specific areas of tissue are not subjected to long periods of 
higher intensity investigation. 
.. Do not scan for longer than is necessary to obtain the diagnostic information. 
SELECTED WFUMB STATEMENTS ON THE SAFETY OF DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND 
B-mode imaging (issued 1992) 
Known diagnostic ultrasound equipment as used today for simple B-mode imaging operates at acoustic outputs that 
are not capable of producing harmful temperature rises. Its use in medicine is therefore not contraindicated on 
thermal grounds. This includes endoscopic, transvaginal and transcutaneous applications. 
Doppler (1992) 
It has been demonstrated in experiments with unperfused tissue that some Doppler diagnostic equipment has the 
potential to produce biologically significant temperature rises, specifically at bone/soft tissue interfaces. The effects of 
elevated temperatures may be minimized by keeping the time during which the beam passes through any one point 
in tissue as short as possible. Where output power can be controlled, the lowest available power level consistent with 
obtaining the desired diagnostic information should be used. 
Although the data on humans are sparse, it is clear from animal studies that exposures resulting in temperatures less 
than 38.5°C can be used without reservation on thermal grounds. This includes obstetric applications. 
Transducer heating (1992) 
A substantial source of heating may be the transducer itself. Tissue heating from this source is localized to the volume 
in contact with the transducer. 

Recommendations on thermal effects (1997) 
A diagnostic exposure that produces a maximum temperature rise of no more than 1.5°C above normal physiological 
levels (37°C) may be used without reservation on thermal grounds. 
A diagnostic exposure that elevates embryonic and fetal in situ temperature to 4°C (4°C above normal temperature) 
for 5 min or more should be considered potentially hazardous. 

REFERENCES 
1. Henderson J, Willson K, Jago JR, et al. A survey of the acoustic outputs of diagnostic ultrasound equipment 
in current clinical use in the Northern Region. Ultrasound Med Biol 1995;21:699–705. 
2. Baggs R, Penney DP, Cox C, Child SZ. Thresholds for ultrasonically induced lung hemorrhage in neonatal 
swine. Ultrasound Med Biol 1996;22:119–28. 
3. Dalecki D, Child SZ, Raeman CH, Cox C, Carstensen EL. Ultrasonically-induced lung haemorrhage in young 
swine. Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:777–81. 
4. Frizzell LA, Chen E, Chong L. Effects of pulsed ultrasound on the mouse neonate: hind limb paralysis and 
lung haemorrhage. Ultrasound Med Biol 1994;20:53–63. 
5. Holland CK, Zheng X, Apfel RE, Alderman JL, Fernandez L, Taylor KJW. Direct evidence of cavitation in vivo 
from diagnostic ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol 1996;22:917–25. 
6. Zacchary JG, O’Brien WD. Lung lesions induced by continuous and pulsed wave (diagnostic) ultrasound in 
mice, rabbits and pigs. Vet Pathol 1995;32:43–54. 
7. Duck FA. Acoustic streaming and radiation pressure in diagnostic applications: what are the implications? In 
Barnett SB, Kossoff G, eds. Safety of Diagnostic Ultrasound. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 1998:87– 
98. 
8. Dalecki D, Child SZ, Raeman CH, Penney DP, Mayer R, Cox C, Carstensen EL. Thresholds for fetal 
haemorrhages produced by a piezoelectric lithotripter. Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:287–97. 
9. Bosward KL, Barnett SB, Wood AKW, Edwards MJ, Kossoff G. Heating of the guinea pig fetal brain during 
exposure to pulsed ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol 1993;19:415–24. 
10. Duggan PM, Liggins GC, Barnett SB. Ultrasonic heating of the brain of the fetal sheep in utero. Ultrasound 
Med Biol 1995;21:553–60. 
11. Tarantal AF. Effects of ultrasound exposure on fetal development in animal models. In Barnett SB, Kossoff 
G, eds. Safety of Diagnostic Ultrasound. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 1998:39–51. 
12. Barnett SB, ed. Conclusions and recommendations on thermal and non-thermal mechanisms for biological 
effects of ultrasound. In WFUMB Symposium on Safety of Ultrasound in Medicine. Ultrasound Med Biol, 
1998;24, special issue 
13. Salveson K, Vatten L, Eik-Nes S, Hugdahl K, Bakketeig L. Routine ultrasonography in utero and subsequent 
handedness and neurological development. Br Med J 1993;307:159–64. 
14. AIUM / NEMA. Standard for Real-Time Display of Thermal and Mechanical Acoustic Output Indices on 
Diagnostic Ultrasound Equipment. Rockville: American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 1992 
15. FDA. Revised 510(k) Diagnostic Ultrasound Guidance for 1993. Rockville, MD: Food and Drug 
Administration, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, 1993. 
16. Jago JR, Henderson J, Whittingham TA, Willson K. How reliable are manufacturer’s reported acoustic output 
data? Ultrasound Med Biol 1995;12:135–6. 
17. Barnett SB, Kossoff G. eds. Issues and recommendations regarding thermal mechanisms for biological 
effects of ultrasound. In WFUMB Symposium on Safety and Standardization in Medical Ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Med Biol 1992;18, special issue. 
18. European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. Guidelines for the safe use of 
Doppler ultrasound for clinical applications. Report from the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation 
Safety. Eur J Ultrasound 1995;2:167–8. 
19. European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. Clinical safety statement for 
diagnostic ultrasound. Report from the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety. Eur J 
Ultrasound 1996;3:283. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 3 
Methodology of Doppler assessment of the placental 
and fetal circulations 
Doppler ultrasound provides a non-invasive method for the study of fetal hemodynamics. Investigation of the uterine 
and umbilical arteries gives information on the perfusion of the uteroplacental and fetoplacental circulations, 
respectively, while Doppler studies of selected fetal organs are valuable in detecting the hemodynamic 
rearrangements that occur in response to fetal hypoxemia. 
FACTORS AFFECTING FLOW VELOCITY WAVEFORM 
Maternal position 
During Doppler studies, the mother should lie in a semirecumbent position with a slight lateral tilt. This minimizes the 
risk of developing supine hypotension syndrome due to caval compression. 
Fetal Heart Rate 
There is an inverse relation between fetal heart rate and length of cardiac cycle and, therefore, fetal heart rate 
influences the configuration of the arterial Doppler waveform. When the heart rate drops, the diastolic phase of the 
cardiac cycle is prolonged and the end-diastolic frequency shift declines. Although the Doppler indices are affected by 
the fetal heart rate, the change is of no clinical significance when the rate is within the normal range. 
Fetal breathing movements 
During fetal breathing movements, there are variations in the shape of the flow velocity waveforms from fetal vessels 
and, therefore, Doppler examinations should be conducted only during fetal apnea and in the absence of fetal hiccup 
or excessive movement. 
Blood viscosity 
Animal studies have demonstrated that increased blood viscosity is associated with reduced cardiac output and 
increased peripheral resistance, and vice versa. However, Giles et al. were unable to demonstrate a significant 
association between blood viscosity (measured in post-delivery umbilical cord blood) and impedance to flow in the 
umbilical artery1. 
UTEROPLACENTAL CIRCULATION 
Anatomy 
The blood supply to the uterus comes mainly from the uterine arteries, with a small contribution from the ovarian 
arteries. These vessels anastomose at the cornu of the uterus and give rise to arcuate arteries that run 
circumferentially round the uterus. The radial arteries arise from the arcuate vessels and penetrate at right angles 
into the outer third of the myometrium. These vessels then give rise to the basal and spiral arteries, which nourish 
the myometrium and decidua and the intervillous space of the placenta during pregnancy, respectively. There are 
about 100 functional openings of spiral arteries into the intervillous space in a mature placenta, but maternal blood 
enters the space in discrete spurts from only a few of these 2,3. 

Physiological changes in pregnancy 
Physiological modification of spiral arteries is required to permit the ten-fold increase in uterine blood flow which is 
necessary to meet the respiratory and nutritional requirements of the fetus and placenta. Brosens et al. examined 
microscopically several hundred placental bed biopsies, seven Cesarean hysterectomy specimens and two intact 
second-trimester uteri 4. Basal arteries showed no changes, but spiral arteries were invaded by cytotrophoblastic cells 
and were converted into uteroplacental arteries. These have a dilated and tortuous lumen, a complete absence of 
muscular and elastic tissue, no continuous endothelial lining, mural thrombi and fibrinoid deposition. 
This conversion of the spiral arteries to uteroplacental arteries is termed ‘physiological change’. It has been reported 
to occur in two stages: the first wave of trophoblastic invasion converts the decidual segments of the spiral arteries in 
the first trimester and the second wave converts the myometrial segments in the second trimester 5 . As a result of 
this ‘physiological change’, the diameter of the spiral arteries increases from 15–20 to 300–500 mm, thus reducing 
impedance to flow and optimizing fetomaternal exchange in the intervillous space. 
Invasive assessment of blood flow 
Assali et al . measured uterine blood flow by placing electromagnetic flow meters in the uterine vessels at the time of 
hysterotomy for termination of pregnancy and demonstrated that both uterine blood flow and oxygen consumption 
increase with gestation 6. Browne and Veall injected 24 Na tracer directly into the choriodecidual space of women with 
anterior placentae and used a Geiger counter to construct decay curves for the falling levels of radioactivity 7. 
Although this method was beset by technical failures, it established the commonly quoted figure of 600 ml/min for 
uterine blood flow at term. 
Methodology of obtaining waveforms 
Campbell et. al. used pulsed wave Doppler to obtain velocity waveforms from ‘arcuate’ arteries, which were described 
as vessels in the wall of the uterus distinct from the common, internal and external iliac arteries 8. Trudinger et al . 
described the use of continuous wave Doppler to obtain velocity waveforms from branches of the uterine artery in the 
placental bed 9. The placental site was located using real-time ultrasound and the Doppler probe was then pointed at 
the center of the placental bed and ‘searched’ until characteristic waveforms were obtained. Validation of the method 
was performed by directing a pulsed wave Doppler facility along the same line and obtaining identical waveforms from 
subplacental vessels. 
Schulman et al . described the use of continuous wave Doppler ultrasound to locate the uterine artery 10. The Doppler 
probe was directed into the parauterine area in the region of the lower uterine segment and rotated until a 
characteristic waveform pattern was recognized. In the early stages of the study, the methodology was validated with 
Duplex equipment or by in vivo measurements obtained during Cesarean section. They found that patterns of uterine, 
arcuate and iliac vessels could be differentiated from each other and from other vessels in the pelvis. The presence of 
an early diastolic notch was noted and was found to disappear between 20 and 26 weeks. 
Bewley et al . used continuous wave Doppler to obtain flow velocity waveforms from four fixed points on the uterus 
(Figure 1) 11. The two lower ‘uterine’ sites were insonated in a similar way to that described by Schulman et al. 10, 
except that the transducer was pointed medially and caudally about 2 cm above and halfway along the inguinal 
ligament on either side of the uterus. The two upper ‘arcuate’ sites were halfway between the fundus of the uterus 
and its most lateral point. 
Arduini et al . compared color flow imaging and conventional pulsed Doppler in the study of the uterine artery12. Color 
flow imaging was used to visualize the flow through the main uterine artery medial to the external iliac artery (Figure 
2) and the Doppler sample gate was placed at the point of maximal color brightness. Color flow imaging was found to 
allow a higher number of reliable recordings to be obtained, to shorten the observation time, and to reduce the intra-
and interobserver coefficients of variation. 

Figure 1: Sites of insonation of uterine artey. Adapted from Bewley et. al. 1989 
.. 
Figure 2: Ultrasound image with convencional color Doppler showing the uterine artery and the external iliac 
artery (left). Normal flow velocity waveforms from the uterine artery at 24 weeks of gestation demonstrating 
high diastolic flow (right). 
Impedance to flow in the uterine arteries decreases with gestation (Figure 3). The initial fall until 24–26 weeks is 
thought to be due to trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries, but a continuing fall in impedance may be explained 
in part by a persisting hormonal effect on elasticity of arterial walls. Impedance in the uterine artery on the same site 
as the placenta is lower, which is thought to be due to the trophoblastic invasion only taking place in placental spiral 
arteries and the fall in impedance engendered by this being transmitted to other parts of the uterine circulation 
through collaterals. The intra- and interobserver coefficients of variation in the measurement of impedance to flow 
from the uterine arteries are both 5–10%. 

.. 
Figure 3: Pulsatility index in the uterine artery with gestation (mean 95th and 5th centiles) 
UMBILICAL ARTERY FLOW 
The umbilical artery was the first fetal vessel to be evaluated by Doppler velocimetry. Flow velocity waveforms from 
the umbilical cord have a characteristic saw-tooth appearance of arterial flow in one direction and continuous 
umbilical venous blood flow in the other. Continuous wave Doppler examination of the umbilical artery is simple. The 
transducer, usually a pencil-shaped probe, is placed on the mother’s abdomen overlying the fetus and is 
systematically manipulated to obtain the characteristic waveforms from the umbilical artery and vein. With a pulsed 
wave Doppler system, an ultrasound scan is first carried out, a free-floating portion of the cord is identified and the 
Doppler sample volume is placed over an artery and the vein (Figure 4). 
Normal Pregnancy - Development of the uterine artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in 
1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in early 2º 
trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in late 2º and 3º 
trimester

.. 
The location of the Doppler sampling site in the umbilical cord affects the Doppler waveform and the impedance 
indices are significantly higher at the fetal end of the cord than at the placental end. A possible explanation for this 
finding is that the fetal placental vascular bed is a low impedance system associated with minimal wave reflection, 
which explains the presence of continuing forward flow in the umbilical artery during diastole. The closer the 
measurement site is to the placenta, the less is the wave reflection and the greater the end-diastolic flow. 
Consequently, the Doppler waveform that represents arterial flow velocity demonstrates progressively declining 
pulsatility and the indices of pulsatility from the fetal to the placental end of the cord13. 
Figure 4a: Ultrasound image with color Doppler showing the umbilical cord, red umbilical artery and blue 
umbilical vein (left). Normal flow velocity waveforms from the umbilical vein (bottom) and artery (top) at 32 
weeks of gestation (right). 
Normal Pregnancy - Development of the umbilcal artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and normal 
pattern of pulsatility at the umbilical vein in 1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and umbilical 
vein in early 2ºtrimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and umbilcal vein 
in late 2º and 3º trimester

Figure 4b: Normal flow velocity waveforms from the umbilical vein (top) and artery (bottom) at 32 weeks of 
gestation. 
There are no appreciable diurnal changes or significant day-to-day variations in pregnancies with normal umbilical 
arterial Doppler waveforms. Umbilical venous blood flow increases with fetal inspiration (during which the fetal 
abdominal wall moves inward) and decreases with expiration (during which the wall moves outward). There is also a 
breathing-related modulation of arterial pulsatility, and umbilical artery Doppler studies should be avoided during fetal 
breathing. Maternal exercise may cause an increase in fetal heart rate but mild to moderate exercise does not affect 
flow impedance in the umbilical artery. Umbilical arterial flow waveforms are not affected by fetal behavioral states 
(sleep or wakefulness). Although, in certain pregnancy disorders (such as pre-eclampsia), fetal blood viscosity is 
increased, the contribution to the increased impedance in the umbilical artery from viscosity is minimal compared to 
the coexisting placental pathology. Therefore, the viscosity of fetal blood need not be considered when interpreting 
the umbilical Doppler indices. 
With advancing gestation, umbilical arterial Doppler waveforms demonstrate a progressive rise in the end-diastolic 
velocity and a decrease in the impedance indices (Figure 5). When the high-pass filter is either turned off or set at the 
lowest value, end-diastolic frequencies may be detected from as early as 10 weeks and in normal pregnancies they 
are always present from 15 weeks. Human placental studies have demonstrated that there is continuing expansion of 
the fetoplacental vascular system throughout the pregnancy. Furthermore, the villous vascular system undergoes a 
transformation, resulting in the appearance of sinusoidal dilatation in the terminal villous capillaries as pregnancy 
approaches term, and more than 50% of the stromal volume may be vascularized. The intra-and interobserver 
variations in the various indices are about 5% and 10%, respectively 14. 

Figure 5: Pulsatility index in the umbilical artery with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
FETAL ARTERIAL FLOW 
Descending aorta 
Velocity waveforms from the fetal descending aorta are usually recorded at the lower thoracic level just above the 
diaphragm, keeping the angle of insonation of the Doppler beam below 45° (Figure 6). It may be difficult to obtain a 
low angle because the aorta runs anterior to the fetal spine and, therefore, parallel to the surface of the maternal 
abdomen. This problem can be overcome, by moving the transducer either toward the fetal head or toward its breech 
and then tilting the transducer. 
Diastolic velocities are always present during the second and third trimesters of normal pregnancy, and the pulsatility 
index (PI) remains constant throughout gestation (Figure 7) 15. 
Flow velocity waveforms in the descending aorta represent the summation of blood flows to and resistance to flow in 
the kidneys, other abdominal organs, femoral arteries (lower limbs) and placenta. Approximately 50% of blood flow in 
the descending thoracic aorta is distributed to the umbilical artery. With advancing gestation, the PI in the umbilical 
artery decreases, due to reduced resistance in the placental compartment, whereas, in the aorta, the PI remains 
constant. The absence of a change in PI suggests the presence of a compensatory vasoconstrictive mechanism in the 
other major branches of the aorta distribution, such as the extremities. The mean blood velocity increases with 
gestation up to 32 weeks and then remains constant up to 40 weeks, when there is a small fall (Figure 7) 15. 

Figure 6: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with superimposed color Doppler showing the descending aorta 
(left). Flow velocity waveforms from the fetal descending aorta at 32 weeks of gestation demonstrating 
positive end-diastolic velocities (right). 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Descending Aorta 
Color Doppler energy with visualization of the aortic arch and 
descending thoracic aorta 
Normal flow of the descending thoracic aorta in 2º and 3º 
trimesters 
Figure 7: Pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the fetal aorta with gestation (mean, 95th 
and 5th centiles). 

Renal Artery 
Color Doppler allows easy identification in a longitudinal view of the fetal renal artery from its origin as a lateral 
branch of the abdominal aorta to the hilus of the kidney (Figure 8). Diastolic velocities may be physiologically absent 
until 34 weeks, and then increase significantly with advancing gestation. The PI decreases linearly with gestation, 
indicating a fall in impedance to flow, and presumably an increase in renal perfusion 16,17. This may offer an 
explanation for the increase of fetal urine production that occurs with advancing gestation 18. 
Figure 8a: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with Power Color Doppler showing the renal artery originating 
from the descending aorta (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the renal artery and vein at 32 weeks of 
gestation with physiologically absent end-diastolic velocities (right). 
Figure 8b: Flow velocity waveforms from the renal artery and vein at 32 weeks of gestation with 
physiologically absent end-diastolic velocities (right). 

Cerebral Arteries 
With the color Doppler technique, it is possible to investigate the main cerebral arteries such as the internal carotid 
artery, the middle cerebral artery, and the anterior and the posterior cerebral arteries and to evaluate the vascular 
resistances in different areas supplied by these vessels. 
A transverse view of the fetal brain is obtained at the level of the biparietal diameter. The transducer is then moved 
towards the base of the skull at the level of the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. Using color flow imaging, the 
middle cerebral artery can be seen as a major lateral branch of the circle of Willis, running anterolaterally at the 
borderline between the anterior and the middle cerebral fossae (Figure 9). The pulsed Doppler sample gate is then 
placed on the middle portion of this vessel to obtain flow velocity waveforms. Due to the course of this blood vessel, it 
is almost always possible to obtain an angle of insonation which is less than 10°. During the studies, care should be 
taken to apply minimal pressure to the maternal abdomen with the transducer, as fetal head compression is 
associated with alterations of intracranial arterial waveforms 19. 
Figure 9: Transverse view of the fetal head with color Doppler showing the circle of Willis (left). Flow velocity 
waveforms from the middle cerebral artery at 32 weeks of gestation (right). 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Middle Cerebral Artery 
Color Doppler energy with visualization of the circle of Willis and the 
middle cerebral artery 
Normal flow of the middle cerebral artery in 1º trimester 
Normal flow of the middle cerebral artery in 2º and 3º trimester 
In healthy fetuses, impedance to flow in the fetal aorta does not change with gestation during the second and early 
third trimesters of pregnancy, but it subsequently decreases (Figure 7) 15,20–22. The PI is significantly higher in the 
middle cerebral artery than in the internal carotid artery or in the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries. It is, 
therefore, important to know exactly which cerebral vessel is sampled during a Doppler examination, as a PI value 
that might be normal for the internal carotid artery may be abnormal for the middle cerebral artery. The use of color 
Doppler greatly improves the identification of the cerebral vessels, thus limiting the possibility of sampling errors. The 

blood velocity increases with advancing gestation, and this increase is significantly associated with the decrease in PI 
(Figure 10). 
Figure 10: Pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the fetal middle cerebral artery with 
gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
Figure 11: Transverse view of the fetal head color 3D power Doppler showing the circle of Willis with digital 
subtraction of the grayscale. 
.. 

Other arterial vessels 
Improvements in flow detection with the new generation of color Doppler equipment have made it possible to 
visualize and record velocity waveforms from several fetal arterial vessels, including those to the extremities 
(femural, tibial and brachial arteries), adrenal, splenic (Figure 12), mesenteric, lung, and coronary vessels. Although 
study of these vessels has helped to improve our knowledge of fetal hemodynamics, there is no evidence at present 
to support their use in clinical practice. 
Figure 12: Flow velocity waveforms from the fetal splenic artery/vein at 32 weeks of gestation in a normal 
fetus. 
Figure 13: Color Doppler showing the femural flow (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the femural artery at 
26 weeks of gestation in a normal fetus (right). 
.. 

FETAL CARDIAC FLOW 
Examination of the fetal heart using Doppler ultrasound is achieved similarly to the examination in gray-scale mode. 
Several planes including the abdominal view, four-chamber, five-chamber, short-axis and three-vessel views have to 
be assessed in order to get spatial information on different cardiac chambers and vessels, as well as their connections 
to each other. The difference in the application of color Doppler is the insonation angle, which should be as small as 
possible to permit optimal visualization of flow. 
Figure 14: Flow velocity waveform across the tricuspid valve at 28 weeks of gestation (left).
(E-wave = early ventricular filling and A-wave = atrial ventricular filling).
In the abdominal plane, the position of the aorta and inferior vena cava are first checked as well as the correct 
connection of the vein to the right atrium. Pulsed Doppler sampling from the interior vena cava, the ductus venosus 
or the hepatic veins can be achieved in longitudinal planes. The next plane, the four-chamber view, is considered as 
the most important, since it allows an easy detection of numerous severe heart defects. Using color Doppler in an 
apical or basal approach, the diastolic perfusion across the atrioventricular valves can be assessed (Figure 14). The 
separate perfusion of both inflow tracts is characteristic. The sampling of diastolic flow using pulsed Doppler will show 
the typical biphasic shape of diastolic flow velocity waveform with an early peak diastolic velocity (E) and a second 
peak during atrial contraction (A-wave). E is smaller than A and the E/A ratio increases during pregnancy toward 1, to 
be inversed after birth (Figure 15). In this plane, regurgitations of the atrioventricular valves, which are more 
frequent at the tricuspid valve, are easily detected during systole using color Doppler. 
Figure 15: Ratio of early peak diastolic velocity (E) to second peak during atrial contraction (A-wave) across 
the mitral valve (left) and tricuspid valve (right) with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 

Flow across the foramen ovale is visualized in a lateral approach of the four-chamber-view. Color Doppler allows the 
confirmation of the physiological right–left shunt. Furthermore, careful examination of the left atrium allows the 
imaging of the correct connections of pulmonary veins entering the left atrium. 
The transducer is then tilted to obtain, first, the five-chamber and then the short-axis view. Using color Doppler, flow 
during systole is visualized. In these planes, the correct ventriculo-arterial connections, the non-aliased flow and the 
continuity of the interventricular septum with the aortic root are checked. The sampling of flow velocity waveforms 
with pulsed Doppler will demonstrate, for the aortic and pulmonary valves, a single peak flow velocity waveform. The 
peak systolic velocity increases from 50 to 110 cm/s during the second half of gestation and is higher across the 
aortic than the pulmonary valve. Time to peak velocity in the aorta is longer than in the pulmonary trunk. The three-
vessel view will enable the assessment of the aortic arch and the ductus arteriosus. In the last trimester of 
pregnancy, an aliased flow is found within the ductus as a sign of beginning constriction. In the case of optimal fetal 
position, the aortic and ductus arteriosus arch can be seen in a longitudinal plane, allowing the visualization of the 
neck vessels. 
The parameters used to describe fetal cardiac velocity waveforms differ from those used in fetal peripheral vessels. 
Indices such as PI and resistance index, used for peripheral vessels, are derived from relative ratios between systolic, 
diastolic and mean velocity and are, therefore, independent of the absolute velocity values and from the angle of 
insonation between the Doppler beam and the direction of the blood flow 23. At the cardiac level, all the 
measurements represent absolute values. Measurements of absolute flow velocities require knowledge of the angle of 
insonation, which may be difficult to obtain with accuracy. The error in the estimation of the absolute velocity 
resulting from the uncertainty of angle measurement is strongly dependent on the magnitude of the angle itself. For 
angles less than about 20°, the error will be reduced to practical insignificance. For larger angles, the cosine term in 
the Doppler equation changes the small uncertainty in the measurement of the angle to a large error in velocity 
equations 23. As a consequence, recordings should be obtained always keeping the Doppler beam as parallel as 
possible to the bloodstream and all the recordings with an estimated angle greater than 20° should be rejected. 
Color Doppler solves many of these problems because visualization of the direction of flow allows alignment of the 
Doppler beam in the direction of the blood flow. 
To record velocity waveforms, pulsed Doppler is generally preferred to continuous wave Doppler because of its range 
resolution. During recordings, the sample volume is placed immediately distal to the locations being investigated (e.g. 
distal to the aortic semilunar valves to record the left ventricle outflow). However, in conditions of particularly high 
velocities (such as the ductus arteriosus), continuous Doppler may be useful because it avoids the aliasing effect. 
Parameters measured 
The parameters most commonly used to describe the cardiac velocity waveforms are 24: 
(1) Peak velocity (PV), expressed as the maximum velocity at a given moment (such as systole or diastole) on the 
Doppler spectrum; 
(2) Time to peak velocity (TPV) or acceleration time, expressed by the time interval between the onset of the 
waveform and its peak; 
(3) Time velocity integral (TVI), calculated by planimetering the area underneath the Doppler spectrum. 
It is also possible to calculate absolute cardiac flow from both the atrioventricular valve and outflow tracts by 
multiplying TVI by the valve area and fetal heart rate. These measurements are particularly prone to errors, mainly 
due to inaccuracies in valve area. Area is derived from the valve diameter, which is near the limits of ultrasound 
resolution, and is then halved and squared in its calculation, thus amplifying potential errors. However, they can be 
used properly in longitudinal studies over a short period of time during which the valve dimensions are assumed to 
remain constant. Furthermore, it is also possible to accurately calculate the relative ratio between the right and left 
cardiac output (RCO/LCO) avoiding the measurements of the cardiac valve, because, in the absence of cardiac 
defects, the relative dimensions of the aorta and pulmonary valves remain constant through gestation 25. 
Evaluation of ventricular ejection force (VEF) has also been used to assess fetal cardiac function 26,27. This index 
estimates the energy transferred from right and left ventricular myocardial shortening to work done by accelerating 
blood into the pulmonary and systemic circulations, respectively 28. This index appears to be less influenced by 
changes in preload and afterload than other Doppler indices 28 and may be more accurate than other Doppler 

variables, such as peak velocities, for the assessment of ventricular function in adults with chronic congestive heart 
failure. VEF is calculated according to Newton’s second law of motion. The force developed by ventricular contraction, 
to accelerate a column of blood into the aorta or pulmonary artery, represents transfer of energy of myocardial 
shortening to work done on the pulmonary and systemic circulation. Newton’s second law estimates the force as the 
product of mass and acceleration. The mass component in this model is the mass of blood accelerated into the 
outflow tract over a time interval, and may be calculated as the product of the density of blood (1.055), the valve 
area and the flow velocity time integral during acceleration (FVI AT), which is the area under the Doppler spectrum 
envelope up to the time of peak velocity. The acceleration component of the equation is estimated as the PV divided 
by the TPV [VEF = (1.055 x valve area x FVIAT) x (PV/TPV)]. 
Doppler depiction of fetal cardiac circulation 
In the human fetus, blood flow velocity waveforms can be recorded at all cardiac levels, including venous return, 
foramen ovale, atrioventricular valves, outflow tracts, pulmonary arteries and ductus arteriosus. The factors affecting 
the shape of the velocity waveforms include preload 29,30, afterload 30,31, myocardial contractility 32, ventricular 
compliance 33 and fetal heart rate 34. These factors differ in their effect on waveforms recorded from different sites 
and parts of the cardiac cycle. 
Atrioventricular valves 
Flow velocity waveforms at the level of the mitral and tricuspid valves are recorded from the apical four-chamber view 
of the fetal heart and are characterized by two diastolic peaks, corresponding to early ventricular filling (E-wave) and 
to active ventricular filling during atrial contraction (A-wave) (Figure 14). The ratio between the E and A waves (E/A) 
is a widely accepted index of ventricular diastolic function and is an expression of both the cardiac compliance and 
preload conditions 24,29,35. 
Outflow tracts 
Flow velocity waveforms from the aorta and pulmonary arteries are recorded respectively from the five-chamber and 
short-axis views of the fetal heart (Figure 13). PV and TPV are the most commonly used indices. The former is 
influenced by several factors, including valve size, myocardial contractility and afterload 24,30,31, while the latter is 
believed to be secondary to the mean arterial pressure 36. 
Coronary blood flow 
Coronary blood flow may be visualized with the use of high-resolution ultrasound equipment and color Doppler 
echocardiography. In normal fetuses, both right and left coronary arteries may be identified after 31 weeks of 
gestation under optimal conditions of fetal imaging 37. In compromised fetuses, these vessels may be identified at an 
earlier gestational age, probably due to an increased coronary blood flow 37. 
Pulmonary vessels 
Velocity waveforms may be recorded from the right and left pulmonary arteries or from peripheral vessels within the 
lung 38–41. The morphology of the waveforms is different according to the site of sampling and there is a progressive 
increase in the diastolic component in the more distal vessels 40,41 (Figure 17). Their analysis may be used to study 
the normal development of lung circulation. 
Ductus arteriosus 
Ductal velocity waveforms are recorded from a short-axis view showing the ductal arch and are characterized by a 
continuous forward flow through the entire cardiac cycle 42. The parameter most commonly analyzed is the PV during 
systole or, similarly to peripheral vessels, the pulsatility index: 
[PI = (systolic velocity -diastolic velocity)/ time averaged maximum velocity] 42,43. 

Figure 16: Five-chamber view of the fetal heart with superimposed color Doppler showing the aorta (blue) 
originating from the left ventricle (top). Short-axis view of the fetal heart with superimposed color Doppler 
showing the pulmonary artery originating from the right ventricle (bottom). 
.. 
Errors in Doppler blood flow velocity waveforms 
A major concern in obtaining absolute measurements of velocities or flow is their reproducibility. To obtain reliable 
recordings, it is particularly important to minimize the angle of insonation, to verify in real-time and color flow 
imaging the correct position of the sample volume before and after each Doppler recording, and to limit the 
recordings to periods of fetal rest and apnea, as behavioral states greatly influence the recordings44,45. In these 
conditions, it is necessary to select a series of at least five consecutive velocity waveforms characterized by uniform 
morphology and high signal to noise ratio before performing the measurements. Using this technique of recording and 
analysis, it is possible to achieve a coefficient of variation below 10% for all the echocardiographic indices with the 
exception of those needing the valve dimensions 46–48. 

Figure 17a: Flow velocity waveform from the pulmonary artery at 32 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 17b: Flow velocity waveform from the pulmonary vein at 32 weeks of gestation. 

.. 
Normal ranges of Doppler echocardiographic indices 
It is possible to record cardiac flow velocity waveforms from as early as 8 weeks of gestation by transvaginal color 
Doppler 49,50. In early pregnancy (8–20 weeks), there are major changes at all cardiac levels. The E/A ratio at both 
atrioventricular levels increases 49–51. PV and TVI in outflow tracts increase and this is particularly evident at the level 
of the pulmonary valve 49. These changes suggest a rapid development of ventricular compliance and a shift of 
cardiac output towards the right ventricle; this shift is probably secondary to decreased right ventricle afterload 
which, in turn, is due to the fall in placental resistance. 
At the level of the atrioventricular valves, the E/A ratios increase 52,53, while PV values linearly increase at the level 
of both pulmonary and aortic valves 54. Small changes are present in TPV values during gestation 55. TPV values at 
the level of the pulmonary valve are lower than at aortic level, suggesting a slightly higher blood pressure in the 
pulmonary artery than in the ascending aorta 56. Quantitative measurements have shown that the right cardiac 
output (RCO) is higher than the left cardiac output (LCO) and that, from 20 weeks onwards, the RCO to LCO ratio 
remains constant, with a mean value of 1.3 57,58. This value is lower than that reported in fetal sheep (RCO/LCO = 
1.8), and this difference may be explained by the higher brain weight in humans which necessitates an increase in left 
cardiac output 59. 
In normal fetuses, VEF exponentially increases with advancing gestation, both at the level of the right and left 
ventricles 27. No significant differences are present between right and left VEF values and the ratio between right and 
left VEF values remains stable with advancing gestation (mean value = 1.09) 27. 
Ductal PV increases linearly with gestation and its values represent the highest velocity in the fetal circulation 
occurring in normal conditions while the PI is constant 42,43. Values of systolic velocity above 140 cm/s, in 
conjunction with a diastolic velocity greater than 35 cm/s or a PI of less than 1.9, are considered to be an expression 
of ductal constriction 42. 
FETAL VENOUS FLOW 
Anatomy 
The fetal liver with its venous vasculature – umbilical and portal veins, ductus venosus and hepatic veins – and the 
inferior vena cava are the main areas of interest in the investigation of venous blood return to the fetal heart. The 
intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein ascends relatively steeply from the cord insertion in the inferior part of the 
falciform ligament. Then the vessel continues in a more horizontal and posterior direction and turns to the right to the 
confluence with the transverse part of the left portal vein, which joins the right portal vein with its division into an 
anterior and a posterior branch. 
The ductus venosus originates from the umbilical vein before it turns to the right (Figure 18). The diameter of the 
ductus venosus measures approximately one-third of that of the umbilical vein. It courses posteriorly and in a 
cephalad direction, with increasing steepness in the same sagittal plane as the original direction of the umbilical vein, 
and enters the inferior vena cava in a venous vestibulum just below the diaphragm. The three (left, middle, and right) 
hepatic veins reach the inferior vena cava in the same funnel-like structure 60. 
The ductus venosus can be visualized in its full length in a mid-sagittal longitudinal section of the fetal trunk (Figure 
15). In an oblique transverse section through the upper abdomen, its origin from the umbilical vein can be found 
where color Doppler indicates high velocities compared to the umbilical vein, and sometimes this produces an aliasing 
effect (Figure 15). The blood flow velocity accelerates due to the narrow lumen of the ductus venosus, the maximum 
inner width of the narrowest portion being 2 mm 61. The best ultrasound plane to depict the inferior vena cava is a 
longitudinal or coronal one, where it runs anterior, to the right of and nearly parallel to the descending aorta (Figure 
16). The hepatic veins can be visualized, either in a transverse section through the upper abdomen or in a sagittalcoronal 
section through the appropriate lobe of the liver. 

Figure 18: Sagittal view of the fetal thorax and abdomen showing the ductus venosus originating from the 
umbilical vein, inferior vena cava and descending aorta. (Color Doppler -Amplitude Mode) 
Figure 19: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with superimposed color Doppler showing the descending aorta 
(red) and the inferior vena cava (blue). 
Physiology 
The ductus venosus plays a central role in the return of venous blood from the placenta. Well-oxygenated blood flows 
via this shunt directly towards the heart. Approximately 40% of umbilical vein blood enters the ductus venosus and 
accounts for 98% of blood flow through the ductus venosus, because portal blood is directed almost exclusively to the 
right lobe of the liver 62. Oxygen saturation is higher in the left hepatic vein compared to the right hepatic vein. This 
is due to the fact that the left lobe of the liver is supplied by branches from the umbilical vein. 
Animal studies have shown that there is a streamlining of blood flow within the thoracic inferior vena cava 63. Blood 
from the ductus venosus and the left hepatic vein flows in the dorsal and leftward part, whereas blood from the distal 
inferior vena cava and the right lobe of the liver flows in the ventral and rightward part of the inferior vena cava. The 
ventral and rightward stream, together with blood from the superior vena cava, is directed towards the right atrium 
and through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. From there the blood is ejected into the main pulmonary 
artery and most of it is shunted through the ductus arteriosus into the descending aorta. The dorsal and leftward 
stream is directed towards the foramen ovale, thereby delivering well-oxygenated blood directly to the left heart and 
from there via the ascending aorta to the myocardium and the brain. In sheep, the two bloodstreams show different 
flow velocities, with the higher velocity found in the stream that originates from the ductus venosus 64. Color Doppler 
studies in human fetuses confirm these findings. The crista dividens, which forms the upper edge of the foramen 
ovale, separates the two pathways, and the blood delivered to the left atrium circumvents the right atrium 65. 
The typical waveform for blood flow in venous vessels consists of three phases (Figure 20). The highest pressure 

gradient between the venous vessels and the right atrium occurs during ventricular systole (S), which results in the 
highest blood flow velocities towards the fetal heart during that part of the cardiac cycle. Early diastole (D), with the 
opening of the atrioventricular valves and passive early filling of the ventricles (E-wave of the biphasic atrioventricular 
flow waveform), is associated with a second peak of forward flow. The nadir of flow velocities coincides with atrial 
contraction (a) during late diastole (A-wave of the atrioventricular flow waveform). During atrial contraction, the 
foramen ovale flap and the crista dividens meet, thereby preventing direct blood flow from the ductus venosus to the 
left atrium during that short period of closure of the foramen ovale. 
Figure 20: Normal flow velocity waveforms of the ductus venosus visualized in a sagittal section through the 
fetal abdomen. The first peak indicates systole, the second early diastole and the nadir of the waveform 
occurs during atrial contraction. 
Normal Doppler findings -Venous Blood Flow 
The easiest vessel in which to investigate venous blood flow is the umbilical vein. Investigation of fetal venous 
umbilical blood flow by Doppler ultrasound was published in 1980 by Eik-Nes and colleagues 66 and in 1981 by Gill et 
al. 67. They reported on mean volume flow in the intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein, which averaged 110–120 
ml/kg/min in uncomplicated third-trimester pregnancies. Continuous forward flow without pulsations is seen in most 
pregnancies after the first trimester. It is interesting that there seems to be an intrinsic inhibition of retrograde flow in 
the umbilical vein. This was concluded from a study comparing flow volume and velocity measurements of test fluid 
pumped through the cord under standardized conditions in antegrade and retrograde directions 68. This was 
attributed to the orientation of the endothelial cells within the vessel wall. 
In a study during early gestation, pulsations were always seen until 8 weeks and they progressively disappeared 
between 9 and 12 weeks 69. Other investigators observed them up to 15 weeks and no relation between the 
pulsatility of venous waveforms and the descending aorta and umbilical artery could be established 70. Changes in 
cardiac filling patterns were thought to be responsible for these findings. Other studies reported umbilical venous 
pulsations synchronous with the fetal heart rate in normal fetuses between 34 and 38 weeks 71. They were present in 
20% of measurements in a freefloating loop of the cord, in 33% of intra-abdominal umbilical venous measurements, 
and in 78% of waveforms from the umbilical sinus and left portal vein. These mild pulsations and the sinusoidal 
waveforms occurring during fetal breathing movements must be distinguished from severe pulsations showing a sharp 
decrease in blood flow, corresponding to the fetal heart rate in cases of fetal compromise. 
There is an abrupt change in the blood flow waveforms at the origin of the ductus venosus from continuous to 
pulsatile flow and an approximately three-to four-fold increase in maximum velocities. An abrupt pressure drop is 
present at the entrance of the ductus venosus and there is a high-velocity jet from the inlet throughout the lower 
portion of the ductus, with a decrease of velocities toward its outlet due to its conicity72. Flow in the ductus venosus 
is directed toward the heart throughout the whole cycle. Even in early pregnancy, there is no retrograde flow during 

atrial contraction (Figure 21) 73. The high velocities probably support the preferential direction of blood flow towards 
the foramen ovale, and avoid mixing with blood with lower oxygen saturation from the inferior vena cava and right 
hepatic vein. The mean peak velocities increase from 65 cm/s at 18 weeks to 75 cm/s at term 61. 
In contrast to the ductus venosus waveform, atrial contraction can cause absence or reversal of blood flow in the 
inferior vena cava and this is almost always the case in the hepatic veins (Figure 21 and 22). 
Figure 21(a): Normal ductus venosus waveform at 12 weeks of gestation with positive flow during atrial 
contraction. 
Figure 21(b): Normal ductus venosus waveform at 25 weeks of gestation with positive flow during atrial 
contraction. 

Figure 22: Ductus venosus flow velocity waveform with low but positive forward flow during atrial 
contraction. 
The percentage of reverse flow in the inferior vena cava decreases with advancing gestational age. At 12–15 weeks, it 
is four-to five-fold of that seen near term. Studies attempting to describe the pulsatility of flow velocity waveforms 
have used the S/D ratio in the inferior vena cava or ductus venosus 74–77, the preload index (a/S) in the inferior vena 
cava 78, and the resistance index [(S -a)/S] and the S/a ratio in the ductus venosus 79,80. With one exception 76, no 
significant change with gestational age has been found for the S/D ratio. Similarly, no relationship has been found 
between the preload index and gestational age, which is inconsistent with the finding of a decrease in percentage of 
reverse flow with advancing gestation 78. The ductus venosus index [(S -a)/S], which is equivalent to the resistance 
index, decreases significantly with gestational age 79. This is in agreement with a decrease of the S/a ratio with 
gestational age, which also shows a significant relationship with the percentage of reverse flow in the inferior vena 
cava . 

Figure 23: Flow velocity waveform from the middle hepatic vein. Compared to the ductus venosus (see 
Figure 19), the velocities are significantly lower and there is reversal of blood flow during atrial contraction. 
A study of blood flow in the ductus venosus, inferior vena cava and right hepatic vein in 143 normal fetuses during 
the second half of pregnancy established reference ranges for mean and maximum velocities and two indices for 
venous waveform analysis 81. The first one was the peak velocity index [(S -a)/D] and the second one the equivalent 
to the PI [(S -a)/time-averaged maximum velocity]. Mean and peak blood velocities increased, whereas the indices 
decreased with advancing gestation (Figure 21). Velocities were highest in the ductus venosus and lowest in the right 
hepatic vein, whereas the lowest indices were found in the ductus venosus and highest indices in the right hepatic 
vein. The finding that the degree of pulsatility decreases with gestation is consistent with a decrease in cardiac 
afterload due to a decrease in placental resistance, and may also reflect increased ventricular compliance and 
maturation of cardiac function. A decrease in end-diastolic ventricular pressure causes an increase in venous blood 
flow velocity towards the heart during atrial contraction. 

Figure 24: PIV, which is the equivalent of pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the ductus 
venosus with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
The sampling site (Figure 25) is of crucial importance in venous Doppler studies. Velocities at the inlet of the ductus 
venosus, immediately above the umbilical vein, are higher than at the outlet into the inferior vena cava and the 
sampling site should be standardized at the inlet 82. There are relatively wide limits of agreement for intraobserver 
variation for velocity measurements. Inferior vena cava signals at the entrance to the right atrium show a large 
standard deviation for various waveform parameters 74. To avoid a mixture of overlapping signals from different 
bloodstreams, flow velocity waveforms from the inferior vena cava should be obtained more distally. The highest 
reproducibility of inferior vena cava waveforms is achieved by placing the sample volume between the entrance of the 
renal vein and the ductus venosus 83. 
Figure 25: the sampling site of the ductus venousus (yellow circle). 
Generally, flow volume measurements and absolute velocity measurements seem to have considerably higher 
inaccuracies and intra-patient variations compared to velocity ratios. This is due to problems caused by a high or 
unreliable angle of insonation and the fact that vessel diameter measurements are very vulnerable to errors. Ratios 
and indices of velocities, on the other hand, are to a large extent independent of the angle of insonation. 
Furthermore, fetal behavioral states have to be taken into account when measuring blood flow velocities in the ductus 
venosus. A 30% decrease of velocities was found during fetal behavioral state 1F compared to 2F, but no change in 
S/D ratio 84. 
Waveforms of the ductus venosus with very little or even without pulsatility seem to be normal variants. They were 
found in 3% of measurements in a longitudinal study of normal pregnancies 82. There are conflicting reports on the 

existence of a sphincter regulating blood flow through the ductus venosus. Autonomous innervation may have an 
influence on ductal blood flow, but it is questionable whether there is an isolated muscular structure functioning as a 
sphincter. Apparent ductus venosus dilatation has been reported in two cases with growth-restricted fetuses, causing 
modifications of flow velocity waveforms with a reduction of velocities during atrial contraction and, consequently, an 
increase in pulsatility 85. These findings were confirmed in a simulation of ductal dilatation by means of a 
mathematical model. 
During Doppler studies of the fetal circulation, it is essential to avoid measurements during fetal breathing 
movements. This is well described for the arterial side but it is even more important for venous flow, because the 
changes in intrathoracic pressure during breathing movements have a profound influence on flow velocity waveforms. 
A raised abdomino–thoracic pressure gradient seems to be responsible for this phenomenon. By applying the Bernoulli 
equation, the pressure gradient across the ductus venosus ranges between 0 and 3 mmHg during the heart cycle, but 
increases to 22 mmHg during fetal inspiratory movements 86. As the shape of velocity waveforms during breathing 
movements shows persistent changes, velocity ratios or indices should only be calculated during fetal apnea. 
On the other hand, comparison between umbilical arterial and venous waveforms during fetal breathing movements 
offers an interesting model to investigate the interdependence between fetal cardiovascular and placental blood flow 
87. Variation in umbilical venous velocity may alter placental filling and thereby affect umbilical arterial diastolic 
velocity. It may also alter ventricular filling and thereby affect umbilical arterial systolic velocity through the Frank– 
Starling mechanism, which results in limited changes in stroke volume. Therefore, changes in velocity of venous blood 
flow returning to the heart have an influence on velocities of arterial blood flow returning to the placenta and vice 
versa . In other words, cardiac preload influences afterload and is influenced by afterload itself. 
Recent studies have investigated the venous circulation of the fetal brain and various sinuses 88,89. The increase of 
flow velocities and decrease of pulsatility with gestational age and the increase of the pulsatility of waveforms from 
the periphery toward the proximal portion of the venous vasculature is in accordance with findings in precardial 
venous vessels. 

REFERENCES 
1. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Paimer AA. Umbilical cord whole blood viscosity and the umbilical artery flow velocity 
time waveforms: a correlation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1986;93:466 
2. Boyd JD, Hamilton WJ. The Human Placenta. Cambridge: Heffer & Sons, 1970:207–74 
3. Ramsey EM, CornerGW, DonnerMW. Serial and cineradioangiographic visualization of maternal circulation in 
the primate (hemochorial) placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1963;86:213–25 
4. Brosens I, Robertson WB, Dixon HG. The physiological response of the vessels of the placental bed to normal 
pregnancy. J Pathol Bacteriol 1967;93:569–79 
5. Pijnenborg R, Bland JM, Robertson WB, Brosens I. Uteroplacental arterial changes related to interstitial 
trophoblast migration in early human pregnancy. Placenta 1983;4:387–414 
6. Assali NS, Rauramo L, Peltonen T. Measurement of uterine blood flow and uterine metabolism. VIII. Uterine 
and fetal blood flow and oxygen consumption in early human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1960;79:86– 
98 
7. Browne JCM, Veall N. The maternal placental blood flow in normotensive and hypertensive women. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Br Empire 1953;60:141–7 
8. Campbell S, Diaz-Recasens J, Griffin DR, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Pearce JM, Willson K, Teague MJ. New Doppler 
technique for assessing uteroplacental blood inflow. Lancet 1983;i:675–7 
9. Trudinger BJ,Giles WB, Cook CM. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity-time waveforms in normal and 
complicated pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:39–45 
10. Schulman H, Fleischer A, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Rochelson B, Grunfeld L. Development of uterine artery 
compliance in pregnancy as detected by Doppler ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;155:1031–6 
11. Bewley S, Campbell S, Cooper D. Uteroplacental Doppler flow velocity waveforms in the second trimester. A 
complex circulation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1040–6 
12. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Boccolini MR, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Functional assessment of uteroplacental and fetal 
circulations by means of color Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1990;9: 249–53 
13. Maulik D, Yarlagadda P, Downing G. Doppler velocimetry in obstetrics. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 
1990;17:163–86 
14. Maulik D. Basic principles of Doppler ultrasound as applied in obstetrics. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1989;32:628 .. – 
44 
15. Bilardo CM, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Mean blood velocities and flow impedance in the fetal descending 
thoracic aortic and common carotid artery in normal pregnancy. Early Hum Dev 1988; 18:213–21 
16. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Renal artery flow-velocity waveforms in normal and hypoxemic fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:168–72 
17. Hecher K, Spernol R, Szalay S. Doppler blood flow velocity waveforms in the fetal renal artery. Arch Gynecol 
Obstet 1989;246:133–7 
18. Rabinowitz R, Peters MT, Vyas S, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Measurement of fetal urine production in 
normal pregnancy by real-time ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1264–6 
19. Vyas S, Campbell S, Bower S, Nicolaides KH. Maternal abdominal pressure alters fetal cerebral blood flow. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:740–2 
20. Kirkinen P, Muller R, Huch R, Huch A. Blood flow velocity waveforms in human fetal intracranial arteries. 
Obstet Gynecol 1987,70:617–21 
21. van den Wiingaard JAGW, Groenenberg IAL, Wiadimiroff JW, Hop WCJ. Cerebral Doppler ultrasound in the 
human fetus. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:845–9 
22. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Bower S, Campbell S. Middle cerebral artery flow velocity waveforms in fetal 
hypoxaemia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:797–803 

23. Burns PN. Doppler flow estimations in the fetal and maternal circulations: principles, techniques and some 
limitations. In Maulik D, McNellis D, eds. Doppler Ultrasound Measurement of Maternal-Fetal Hemodynamics. 
Ithaca, New York, USA: Perinatology Press, 1987:43–78 
24. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of fetal cardiac function. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:434–45 
25. Comstock CH, Riggs T, LeeW, Kirk J. Pulmonary to aorta diameter ratio in the normal and abnormal fetal 
heart. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:1038–43 
26. St John Sutton M, Gill T, Plappert T, Saltzman DH, Doubilet P. Assessment of right and left ventricular 
function in term of force development with gestational age in the normal human fetus. Br Heart J 
1991,61:285–9 
27. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Rinaldo D, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ventricular ejection force in growthretarded fetuses. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:247–52 
28. Isaaz K, Ethevenot G, Admant P, Brembilla B, Pernot C. A new Doppler method of assessing left ventricular 
ejection force in chronic congestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol 1989; 64:81–7 
29. Stottard MF, Pearson AC, Kern MJ, Ratcliff J, Mrosek DG, Labovitz AJ. Influence of alteration in preload of left 
ventricular diastolic filling as assessed by Doppler echocardiography in humans. Circulation 1989;79:1226– 
36 
30. Gardin JM. Doppler measurements of aortic blood velocity and acceleration: load-independent indexes of left 
ventricular performance. Am J Cardiol 1989;64:935–6 
31. Bedotto JB, Eichorn EJ, Grayburn PA. Effects of left ventricular preload and afterload on ascending aortic 
blood velocity and acceleration in coronaric artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1989:64:856–9 
32. Brownwall E, Ross J, Sonnenblick EH. Mechanism of Contraction in the Normal and Failing Heart, 2nd edn. 
Boston: Little Brown, 1976, 92–129 
33. Takaneka K, Dabestani A, Gardin JM, Russel D, Clark S, Allfie A, Henry WL. Left ventricular filling in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a pulsed Doppler echocardiographic study. J Am Coll Cardiol 1986;7:1263–71 
34. Kenny J, Plappert T, Doubilet P, Saltzam D, St John Sutton MG. Effects of heart rate on ventricular size, 
stroke volume and output in the normal human fetus: a prospective Doppler echocardiographic study. 
Circulation 1987;76:52–8 
35. Labovitz AJ, Pearson C. Evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function: clinical relevance and recent Doppler 
echocardiographic insights. Am Heart J 1987;114:836–51 
36. Kitabatake A, Inoue M, Asao M, et al. Noninvasive evaluation of pulmonary hypertension by a pulsed Doppler 
technique. Circulation 1983;68:302–9 
37. Baschat AA, Gembruch U, Reiss I, Gortner L, Diedrich K. Demonstration of fetal coronary blood flow by 
Doppler ultrasound in relation to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms and perinatal outcome. The 
heart sparing effect. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:162–72 
38. Laudy JAM, De Riddler MA, Wladimiroff J. Doppler velocimetry in branch pulmonary arteries of normal human 
fetuses during the second half of pregnancy. Pediatr Res 1997;41:897–901 
39. Rasanen J, Huhta JC,Weiner S,Wood DC, Ludormisky A. Fetal branch pulmonary arterial vascular impedance 
during the second half of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1441–9 
40. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Chaoui R, Taddei F, Arduini D, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in normally grown and growth-retarded fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1996;8:87–92 
41. Chaoui R, Taddei F, Rizzo G, Bast C, Lenz F, Bollmann R. Doppler echocardiography of the main stems of the 
pulmonary arteries in the normal human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 173–9 
42. Huhta JC, Moise KJ, Fisher DJ, Sharif DF,Wasserstrum N, Martin C. Detection and quantitation of constriction 
of the fetal ductus arteriosus by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation 1987;75, 406–12 
43. Van de Mooren K, Barendregt LG, Wladimiroff J. Flow velocity waveforms in the human fetal ductus 
arteriosus during the normal second trimester of pregnancy. Pediatr Res 1991;30:487–90 

44. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Valensise H, Romanini C. Effects of behavioural states on cardiac output in the healthy 
human fetus at 36–38 weeks of gestation. Early Hum Dev 1990;23:109–15 
45. Huisman TW, Brezinka C, Stewart PA, StijenT, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus flow velocity waveforms in 
relation to fetal behavioural states. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1994;101:220–4 
46. Groenenberg IAL, Hop WCJ, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler flow velocity waveforms in the fetal cardiac outflow 
tract; reproducibility of waveformrecording and analysis. Ultrasound Med Biol 1991; 17:583–7 
47. Al-GhazaliW, Chita SK, Chapman MG, Allan LD. Evidence of redistribution of cardiac output in asymmetrical 
growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989; 96:697–704 
48. Reed KL, Meijboom EJ, Sahn DJ, Scagnelli SA, Valdes-Cruz LM, Skenker L. Cardiac Doppler flow velocities in 
human fetuses. Circulation 1986;73:41–56 
49. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Fetal cardiac and extra-cardiac circulation in early gestation. J Maternal-Fetal 
Invest 1991;1:73–8 
50. van Splunder P, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal atrioventricular flow-velocity waveforms and their 
relationship to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms at 8 to 20 weeks of gestation. Circulation 
1996;94:1372–8 
51. Wladimiroff JW, HuismanTWA, Stewart PA, Stijnen Th. Normal fetal Doppler inferior vena cava, transtricuspid 
and umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms between 11 and 16 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1992;166:46–9 
52. Reed KL, Sahn DJ, Scagnelli S, Anderson CF, Shenker L. Doppler echocardiographic studies of diastolic 
function in the human fetal heart: changes during gestation. J Am Coll Cardiol 1986;8: 391–5 
53. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of atrioventricular 
velocity waveforms in normal and small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:65–9 
54. Kenny JF, Plappert T, Saltzman DH, Cartire M, Zollars L, Leatherman GF, St John Sutton MG. Changes in 
intracardiac blood flow velocities and right and left ventricular stroke volumes with gestational age in the 
normal human fetus: a prospective Doppler echocardiographic study. Circulation 1986;74:1208–16 
55. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of time to peak velocity in 
the aorta and pulmonary artery of small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:603–7 
56. Machado MVL, Chita SC, Allan LD. Acceleration time in the aorta and pulmonary artery measured by Doppler 
echocardiography in the midtrimester normal human fetus. Br Heart J 1987;58:15–18 
57. Allan LD, Chita SK, Al-GhazaliW, Crawford DC, Tynan M. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of the normal 
human fetal heart. Br Heart J 1987;57:528–33 
58. De Smedt MCH, Visser GHA, Meijboom EJ. Fetal cardiac output estimated by Doppler echocardiography 
during mid-and late gestation. Am J Cardiol 1987;60:338–42 
59. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Cardiac output in anencephalic fetuses. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1991;32:33–5 
60. HuismanTWA, Gittenberger-De Groot AC, Wladimiroff JW. Recognition of a fetal subdiaphragmatic venous 
vestibulum essential for fetal venous Doppler assessment. Pediatr Res 1992;32:338–41 
61. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HGK, Hellevik LR. Ultrasonographic velocimetry of the fetal ductus venosus. 
Lancet 1991;338:1412–14 
62. Edelstone DI, Rudolph AM, Heymann MA. Liver and ductus venosus blood flows in fetal lambs in utero. Circ 
Res 1978;42:426–33 
63. Edelstone DI, Rudolph AM. Preferential streaming of ductus venosus blood to the brain and heart in fetal 
lambs. Am J Physiol 1979;237:H724–9 
64. Schmidt KG, Silverman NH, Rudolph AM. Assessment of flow events at the ductus venosus–inferior vena 
cava junction and at the foramen ovale in fetal sheep by use of multimodal ultrasound. Circulation 
1996;93:826–33 
65. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HG, Hellevik LR. Foramen ovale: an ultrasonographic study of its relation to the 
inferior vena cava, ductus venosus and hepatic veins. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:389–96 
66. Eik-Nes SH, Brubakk AO, Ulstein MK. Measurement of human fetal blood flow. Br Med J 1980; 280:283–4 

67. Gill RW, Trudinger BJ, Garrett WJ, Kossoff G,Warren, PS. Fetal umbilical venous flow measured in utero by 
pulsed Doppler and B-mode ultrasound. I. Normal pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;139:720–5 
68. Potter PL. In vitro demonstration of inhibition of retrograde flow in the human umbilical vein. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:319–23 
69. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Umbilical vein pulsations: a physiologic finding in early gestation. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:675–7 
70. van Splunder P, Huisman TWA, de Ridder MAJ, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal venous and arterial flow velocity wave 
forms between eight and twenty weeks of gestation. Pediatr Res 1996;40:158–62 
71. van Splunder IP, Huisman TWA, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Presence of pulsations and reproducibility of 
waveform recording in the umbilical and left portal vein in normal pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1994;4:49–53 
72. Pennati G, Bellotti M, Ferrazzi E, Rigano S, Garberi A. Hemodynamic changes across the human ductus 
venosus: a comparison between clinical findings and mathematical calculations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1997;9:383–91 
73. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW, Stijnen T. Flow velocity waveforms in the ductus venosus, 
umbilical vein and inferior vena cava in normal human fetuses at 12–15 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Med 
Biol 1993;19:441–5 
74. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW. Flow velocity waveforms in the fetal inferior vena cava during 
the second half of normal pregnancy. Ultrasound Med Biol 1991;17:679–82 
75. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus blood flow velocity waveforms in the human 
fetus – a Doppler study. Ultrasound Med Biol 1992;18:33–7 
76. Reed KL, Appleton CP, Anderson CF, Shenker L, Sahn DJ. Doppler studies of vena cava flows in human 
fetuses. Insights into normal and abnormal cardiac physiology. Circulation 1990;81:498–505 
77. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Inferior vena cava flow velocity waveforms in appropriate-and small-for-
gestational-age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1271–80 
78. Kanzaki T, Chiba Y. Evaluation of the preload condition of the fetus by inferior vena caval blood flow pattern. 
Fetal Diagn Ther 1990;5:168–74 
79. DeVore GR, Horenstein J. Ductus venosus index: a method for evaluating right ventricular preload in the 
second-trimester fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:338–42 
80. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ductus venosus velocity waveforms in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Early Hum Dev 1994;39:15–26 
81. Hecher K, Campbell S, Snijders R, Nicolaides K. Reference ranges for fetal venous and atrioventricular blood 
flow parameters. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:381–90 
82. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Hellevik LR, Blaas HG. Ductus venosus – a longitudinal Doppler velocimetric study of 
the human fetus. J Matern Fetal Invest 1992;2:5–11 
83. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Caforio L, Romanini C. Effects of sampling sites on inferior vena cava f low velocity 
waveforms. J Matern Fetal Invest 1992;2:153–6 
84. HuismanTWA, Brezinka C, Stewart PA, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus flow velocity waveforms in 
relation to fetal behavioural states. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1994;101: 20–4 
85. Bellotti M, Pennati G, Pardi G, Fumero R. Dilatation of the ductus venosus in human fetuses: 
ultrasonographic evidence and mathematical modeling. Am J Physiol 1998; 275:H1759–67 
86. Kiserud T, Hellevik LR, Eik-Nes SH, Angelsen BAJ, Blaas HG. Estimation of the pressure gradient across the 
fetal ductus venosus based on Doppler velocimetry. Ultrasound Med Biol 1994;20:225–32 
87. Indik J, Reed KL. Variation and correlation in human fetal umbilical Doppler velocities with fetal breathing: 
evidence of the cardiac–placental connection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1792–6 
88. Laurichesse-Delmas H, Grimaud O, Moscoso G, Ville Y. Color Doppler study of the venous circulation in the 
fetal brain and hemodynamic study of the cerebral transverse sinus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;13:34–42 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
89. Pooh RK, Pooh KH, Nakagawa Y, Maeda K, Fukui R, Aono T. Transvaginal Doppler assessment of fetal 
intracranial venous flow. Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:697–701 

Chapter 4 
Doppler studies in fetal hypoxemic hypoxia 
FETAL OXYGENATION 
Oxygenation is the process of transporting molecular oxygen from air to the tissues of the body. In the fetus, this 
involves, first, oxygen transfer across the placenta, second, reversible binding of oxygen to fetal hemoglobin and fetal 
blood flow, and, third, oxygen consumption for growth and metabolism. Energy is derived from the combination of 
oxygen and glucose to form carbon dioxide and water. Removal of carbon dioxide and protection against acidosis is 
by the reverse of the mechanisms for oxygen delivery and is helped by the rapid diffusion, high solubility and 
volatility of this gas. In the adult, carbon dioxide is excreted in the lungs while bicarbonate and hydrogen ions are 
removed by the kidney. In the fetus, both these functions are carried out by the placenta. 
When there is inadequate oxygen supply, the Krebs cycle cannot operate and pyruvate is converted to lactic acid. This 
enters the blood, leading to systemic acidosis unless it is either metabolized or excreted. The amount of oxygen 
bound to hemoglobin is not linearly related to oxygen tension (pO2). Each type of hemoglobin has a characteristic 
oxygen dissociation curve which can be modified by environmental factors, such as pH and the concentration of 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). For example, when 2,3-DPG rises, in response to anemia or hypoxia, it binds to and 
stabilizes the deoxygenated form of hemoglobin, resulting in a shift of the oxygen dissociation curve to the right and 
therefore release ofoxygen to the tissues. Although, in vitro , both adult (HbA) and fetal (HbF) hemoglobins have the 
same oxygen dissociation curves, human adult blood has a lower affinity for oxygen than fetal because of its greater 
binding of 2,3-DPG. The higher affinity of fetal blood helps placental transfer of oxygen. Furthermore, since the P50 of 
fetal blood is similar to the umbilical arterial pO2, the fetus operates over the steepest part of the hemoglobin oxygen 
dissociation curve and, therefore, a relatively large amount of oxygen is released from the hemoglobin for a given 
drop in pO2. 
Normal fetal oxygenation 
In normal fetuses, the blood oxygen tension is much lower than the maternal, and it has been suggested that this is 
due either to incomplete venous equilibration of uterine and umbilical circulations and/or to high placental oxygen 
consumption 1,2. Studies in a variety of animals have also demonstrated that the umbilical venous blood pO2 is less 
than half the maternal arterial pO2 and this observation led to the concept of ‘Mount Everest in utero'. However, the 
high affinity of fetal hemoglobin for oxygen, together with the high fetal cardiac output in relation to oxygen demand, 
compensates for the low fetal pO2 
3. The umbilical venous and arterial pO2 and pH decrease, while pCO2 increases, 
with gestation 1,2. The blood oxygen content increases with gestational age because of the rise in fetal hemoglobin 
concentration 2. Fetal blood lactate concentration does not change with gestation and the values are similar to those 
in samples obtained at elective Cesarean section at term 2. The umbilical venous concentration is higher than the 
umbilical arterial, suggesting that the normoxemic human fetus is, like the sheep fetus, a net consumer of lactate 4. 
Furthermore, the concentration of lactate in umbilical cord blood is higher than in the maternal blood and the two are 
correlated significantly. This suggests a common source of lactate, which is likely to be the placenta. 
Fetal hypoxia 
Fetal hypoxia, oxygen deficiency in the tissues, of any cause leads to a conversion from aerobic to anaerobic 
metabolism, which produces less energy and more acid. If the oxygen supply is not restored, the fetus dies. Hypoxia 
may result from: 
(1) Reduced placental perfusion with maternal blood and consequent decrease in fetal arterial blood oxygen content 
due to low pO2 (hypoxemic hypoxia); 
(2) Reduced arterial blood oxygen content due to low fetal hemoglobin concentration (anemic hypoxia); 

(3) Reduced blood flow to the fetal tissues (ischemic hypoxia). 
Hypoxemic hypoxia (uteroplacental insufficiency) 
Small-for-gestational age fetuses may be constitutionally small, with no increased perinatal death or morbidity, or 
they may be growth-restricted due to either low growth potential, the result of genetic disease or environmental 
damage, or due to reduced placental perfusion and ‘uteroplacental insufficiency’. 
Analysis of samples obtained by cordocentesis has demonstrated that some small-for-gestation fetuses are 
hypoxemic, hypercapnic, hyperlacticemic and acidemic 2,5. Furthermore, both respiratory and metabolic acidemia 
increase with hypoxemia. In umbilical venous blood, mild hypoxemia may be present in the absence of hypercapnia 
or acidemia. In severe uteroplacental insufficiency, the fetus cannot compensate hemodynamically and hypercapnia 
and acidemia increase exponentially 2. The carbon dioxide accumulation is presumably the result of reduced exchange 
between the uteroplacental and fetal circulations due to reduced blood flow. The association between hypoxemia and 
hyperlacticemia supports the concept of reduced oxidative metabolism of lactate being the cause of hyperlacticemia, 
and, under these circumstances, the fetus appears to be a net producer of lactate. Hypoxemic growth-restricted 
fetuses also demonstrate a whole range of hematological and metabolic abnormalities, including erythroblastemia, 
thrombocytopenia, hypoglycemia, deficiency in essential amino acids, hypertriglyceridemia, hypoinsulinemia and 
hypothyroidism 5-10 . 
Cross-sectional studies in pregnancies with growth-restricted fetuses have shown that increased impedance to flow in 
the uterine and umbilical arteries is associated with fetal hypoxemia and acidemia 11,12 . These data support the 
findings from histopathological studies that, in some pregnancies with small-for-gestation fetuses, there are: 
(1) Failure of the normal development of maternal placental arteries into low-resistance vessels and therefore 
reduced oxygen and nutrient supply to the intervillous space 13; 
(2) Reduction in the number of placental terminal capillaries and small muscular arteries in the tertiary stem villi and 
therefore impaired maternal–fetal transfer 14. 
Animal studies have demonstrated that, in fetal hypoxemia, there is a redistribution in blood flow, with increased 
blood supply to the brain, heart and adrenals and a simultaneous reduction in the perfusion of the carcase, gut and 
kidneys 15. Doppler ultrasound has enabled the non-invasive confirmation of the so-called ‘brain-sparing’ effect in 
human fetuses. 
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA AND INTRAUTERINE GROWTH 
RESTRICTION 
Pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction are associated with an inadequate quality and quantity of the 
maternal vascular response to placentation. In both conditions, there are characteristic pathological findings in the 
placental bed. Brosens et al. examined placental bed biopsies from pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and 
reported absence of physiological changes in the spiral arteries beyond the decidual– myometrial junction in more 
than 80% of the cases 13. Robertson et al. examined placental bed biopsies from hypertensive women and found a 
difference between the lesions seen in women with pre-eclampsia and those with essential hypertension 16. In preeclampsia, 
there was a necrotizing lesion with foam cells in the wall of the basal and spiral arteries, which was 
referred to as ‘acute atherosis’. In essential hypertension, there were hyperplastic lesions in the basal and spiral 
arteries. 
Sheppard and Bonnar reported that, in pregnancies with intrauterine growth restriction (irrespective of whether there 
is coexistent pre-eclampsia or not), there are atheromatous-like lesions that completely or partially occlude the spiral 
arteries; these changes are not present in pregnancies with pre-eclampsia in the absence of intrauterine growth 
restriction 17. In contrast, Brosens et a. reported lack of physiological changes in all cases of pre-eclampsia, 
irrespective of the birth weight, and in most cases of intrauterine growth restriction; however, acute atherosis was 
found only in preeclampsia 18. Khong et al. reviewed some of the archived biopsies of Brosens et al. 18,19. They 
assessed the proportion of spiral arteries converted to uteroplacental arteries. In all cases of pre-eclampsia and in 
two-thirds of those with intrauterine growth restriction (defined as birth weight < 10th centile), there was no 
evidence of physiological change in the myometrial segments. Furthermore, complete absence of physiological change 
throughout the entire length of some spiral arteries was seen in approximately half the cases of pre-eclampsia and 
intrauterine growth restriction. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Uterine arteries 
In pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction, impedance to flow in the uterine 
arteries is increased (Figure 1). Studies in women with hypertensive disease of pregnancy have reported that, in 
those with increased impedance (increased resistance index or the presence of an early diastolic notch), compared to 
hypertensive women with normal flow velocity waveforms, there is a higher incidence of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine 
growth restriction, emergency Cesarean delivery, placental abruption, shorter duration of pregnancy and poorer 
neonatal outcome 20-23. 
Site of insonation of uterine artery ("crossing over") 
Figure 1: Normal (left) and abnormal (right) flow velocity waveforms from the uterine arteries at 24 weeks of 
gestation. (S= peak systolic; D= End diastolic) 
.. 

Abnormal Development of the uterine artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the 
characteristic waveform of early diastolic notching) 
Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the 
characteristic waveform of early diastolic notching) 
Very high resistance to flow in the uterine arteries (with reverse 
diastolic flow) 
Umbilical arteries 
Pathological studies have demonstrated that increased impedance in the umbilical arteries becomes evident only 
when at least 60% of the placental vascular bed is obliterated 14. In pregnancies with reversed or absent end-
diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery, compared to those with normal flow, mean placental weight is reduced 
and the cross-sectional diameter of terminal villi is shorter 24. 
In pregnancies with fetal growth restriction, those with absent end-diastolic frequencies, compared to those with 
normal Doppler, have more fetal stem vessels with medial hyperplasia and luminal obliteration, and those with 
reversed end-diastolic flow have more poorly vascularized terminal villi, villous stromal hemorrhage, ‘hemorrhagic 
endovasculitis’ and abnormally thin-walled fetal stem vessels 25. In pregnancies with absent end-diastolic frequencies 
in the Doppler waveform from the umbilical arteries, the capillary loops in placental terminal villi are decreased in 
number, they are longer and they have fewer branches than in normal pregnancies 27. 
The reduced number and maldevelopment of peripheral villi result in a marked impairment of oxygen extraction from 
the intervillous space. In contrast, placentas from growth-restricted fetuses with positive end-diastolic frequencies 
have a normal pattern of stem artery development, increased capillary angiogenesis and development of terminal 
villi, as signs of an adaptative mechanism 28. Clinical studies of umbilical arterial flow velocity waveforms in 
intrauterine growth restriction have reported progressive increase in impedance to flow until absence and, in extreme 
cases, reversal of end-diastolic frequencies (Figure 2) 28–32. The latter represents the extreme end of the spectrum 
and this finding is associated with a high perinatal mortality, as well as an increased incidence of lethal fetal structural 
and chromosomal defects 33,34. 
Nicolaides et al. measured blood gases in umbilical cord blood samples obtained by cordocentesis in 39 growth-
restricted fetuses 12. End-diastolic frequencies were absent in 22 cases; 80% of these fetuses were found to be 
hypoxemic and 46% also acidemic. In contrast, only 12% of the fetuses with positive end-diastolic frequencies were 
hypoxemic and none was acidemic. In a multicenter study involving high-risk pregnancies, the patients were 
subdivided into three groups depending on the flow velocity waveforms in the umbilical artery (positive end-diastolic 
frequencies, n = 214; absent end-diastolic frequencies, n = 178); and reversed end-diastolic frequencies, n = 67) 35. 
The overall perinatal mortality rate was 28% and the relative risk was 1.0 for patients with present frequencies, 4.0 
for those with absent frequencies and 10.6 for those with reversed frequencies. Significantly more neonates in the 
groups with absent or reversed frequencies needed admittance to the neonatal intensive care unit and they had a 
higher risk of cerebral hemorrhage, anemia or hypoglycemia 35. In addition to increased fetal and neonatal mortality, 
gowth restriction with absent or reversed end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery is associated with increased 
incidence of long-term permanent neurological damage 36. 

Abnormal Development of the umbilical artery 
Umbilical arteries 
-high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
-high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
-very high pulsatility index. 
-end diastolic velocity 
-pulsation in the umbilical vein 
Umbilical arteries 
Severe cases absence of reversal of end diastolic frequencies 
Figure 2: Abnormal Development of the umbilical artery 
A review of 12 randomized, controlled trials of Doppler ultrasonography of the umbilical artery in high-risk 
pregnancies reported that, in the Doppler group, there was a significant reduction in the number of antenatal 
admissions (44%, 95% confidence interval (CI) 28–57%), induction of labor (20%, 95% CI 10–28%), and Cesarean 
section for fetal distress (52%, 95% CI 24–69%) 37. Furthermore, the clinical action guided by Doppler 
ultrasonography reduced the odds of perinatal death by 38% (95% CI 15–55%). Post hoc analyses revealed a 
statistically significant reduction in elective delivery, intrapartum fetal distress, and hypoxic encephalopathy in the 
Doppler group. It was concluded that there is now compelling evidence that women with high-risk pregnancies, 
including pre-eclampsia and suspected intrauterine growth restriction, should be offered Doppler ultrasonographic 
study of umbilical artery waveforms 37. 
In terms of monitoring growth-restricted pregnancies, abnormal waveforms in the umbilical artery are an early sign of 
fetal impairment. For example, Bekedam et al. followed up growth-restricted fetuses longitudinally and reported that 
abnormalities in the umbilical artery preceded the occurrence of cardiotocographic signs of fetal hypoxemia in more 
than 90% of cases 38. The median time interval between absence of end-diastolic frequencies and the onset of late 
decelerations was 12 days (range 0–49 days). 
Fetal arterial blood flow redistribution 
In fetal hypoxemia, there is an increase in the blood supply to the brain, myocardium and the adrenal glands and 
reduction in the perfusion of the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract and the lower extremities (Figure 3 and 4, Table 1 ) 
39–66. Although knowledge of the factors governing circulatory readjustments and their mechanism of action is 
incomplete, it appears that partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide play a role, presumably through their 
action on chemoreceptors. This mechanism allows preferential delivery of nutrients and oxygen to vital organs, 
thereby compensating for diminished placental resources. However, compensation through cerebral vasodilatation is 
limited and a plateau corresponding to a nadir of pulsatility index (PI) in cerebral vessels is reached at least 2 weeks 
before the development of the fetus is jeopardized. Consequently, arterial vessels are unsuitable for longitudinal 
monitoring of growth-restricted fetuses. Cardiac and venous velocity waveforms give more information regarding fetal 
well-being or compromise. 

Figure 3: Color Doppler examination of the circle of Willis (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the middle 
cerebral artery in a normal fetus with low diastolic velocities (right, top) and in a growth-restricted fetus with 
high diastolic velocities (right, bottom). 
Arduini et al. examined growth-restricted fetuses longitudinally and described a curvilinear relationship between 
impedance in cerebral vessels and the state of fetal oxygenation; the progressive fall in impedance reached a nadir 2 
weeks before the onset of late fetal heart rate decelerations 55. This suggests that the maximum degree of vascular 
adaptation to hypoxemia precedes the critical degree of impairment of fetal oxygenation. Similarly, Potts et al. 
described a curvilinear relationship between cerebral vascular response and hypercapnia 56. Vyas et al. reported that, 
concomitant to severe oxygen deficit, there was a sudden rise in middle cerebral artery PI; they suggested that 
vascular dilatation may be suppressed by the development of cerebral edema 53. An alternative explanation may be 
that, in severe hypoxemia, an increase in PI may be the consequence of alterations in flow due to reduced cardiac 
contractility and to a fall in absolute cardiac output. Moreover, in fetal sheep, chronic hypoxemia was found to alter 
cerebral vascular contractility through changes in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells, with the net result of 
a relative decrease in cerebral blood flow 57. 
.. 
Fetal arterial Doppler studies are useful in the differential diagnosis of small-forgestation fetuses. In the hypoxemic 
group, due to impaired placental perfusion, the PI in the umbilical artery is increased and, in the fetal middle cerebral 
artery, the PI is decreased; consequently, the ratio in PI between the umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery 
(UA/MCA) is increased 58–61. Bahado-Singh et al. reported that an abnormally low cerebroplacental ratio is associated 
Table 1 - Hemodynamic changes occurring in fetal arterial vessels during hypoxemia and 
acidemia induced by uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Vessel Impedance to flow 
Descending aorta increased 
Renal artery increased 
Femoral artery increased 
Peripheral pulmonary artery increased 
Mesenteric arteries increased 
Cerebral arteries decreased 
Adrenal arteries decreased 
Splenic arteries decreased 
Coronary arteries decreased 

with increased perinatal morbidity and mortality and that the ratio improves the prediction of perinatal outcome 
compared with umbilical artery PI alone 65. However, the cerebroplacental ratio did not appear to correlate 
significantly with outcome after 34 weeks. In third-trimester fetuses, the ratio in PI between the fetal descending 
thoracic aorta and the middle cerebral artery may be more useful 66. 
There is no evidence that the use of other peripheral arterial fetal vessels, such as renal artery 51, splenic artery 64 or 
peripheral pulmonary arteries 63provides any advantage in the identification of intrauterine growth-restricted fetuses. 
Figure 4: Color Doppler examination of the descending thoracic aorta (left) with normal flow velocity 
waveforms showing positive flow velocities during diastole (right, top) and in a growth-restricted fetus with 
reversed end-diastolic velocities (right, bottom). 
Fetal cardiac Doppler 
Cardiac flow is greatly influenced by the modifications of arterial impedance to flow. Cerebral vasodilatation produces 
a decrease in left ventricle afterload, whereas increased placental and systemic resistance produce increased right 
ventricle afterload. Hypoxemia may also impair cardiac contractility directly, while changes in blood viscosity due to 
polycythemia may alter preload 5. Consequently, growth-restricted fetuses show, at the level of the atrioventricular 
valves, impaired ventricular filling (lower ratio of early passive to late active ventricular filling phase – E/A ratio) 67, 
lower peak velocities in the aorta and pulmonary arteries. These hemodynamic intracardiac changes are compatible 
with a preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle, leading to improved cerebral perfusion. Thus, in 
the first stages of the disease, the supply of substrates and oxygen can be maintained at near normal levels despite 
any absolute reduction of placental transfer 71. 
Longitudinal studies of deteriorating growth-restricted fetuses have shown that peak velocity and cardiac output 
gradually decline, suggesting a progressive worsening in cardiac function 71. Similarly, there is a symmetrical 
decrease in ventricular ejection force at the level of both ventricles, despite the dramatically different hemodynamic 
conditions present in the vascular district of ejection of the two ventricles (i.e. reduced cerebral resistances for the 
left ventricle and increased splachnic and placental resistance for the right ventricle) 72. This supports a pivotal role of 
the intrinsic myocardial function in the compensatory mechanism of the growth-restricted fetus following the 
establishment of the brain-sparing effect. Ventricular ejection force dramatically decreases in a short time interval 
(about 1 week), showing an impairment of ventricular force close to fetal distress. As a consequence, cardiac filling 
also is impaired. 
Fetal venous Doppler 
Animal studies have shown that, in severe hypoxemia, there is redistribution in the umbilical venous blood towards 
the ductus venosus at the expense of hepatic blood flow. Consequently, the proportion of umbilical venous blood 
contributing to the fetal cardiac output is increased. There is a doubling of umbilical venous-derived oxygen delivery 
to the myocardium and an increase in oxygen delivery to the fetal brain 73,74. In vitro perfusion studies have shown 
that, at reduced umbilical venous pressures, a proportionally greater fraction of umbilical venous flow is directed 
through the ductus venosus in comparison to blood flow through the liver 75. 

The same is true during perfusion with blood of high hematocrit. Mechanical forces seem to play a key role in the 
regulation of umbilical venous flow distribution between the liver and the ductus venosus. Under unfavorable 
conditions, the ductus venosus seems to ensure blood flow directly to the fetal heart and, in extreme conditions, 
umbilical blood may pass exclusively through the ductus venosus. This may lead to an impaired perfusion of the liver 
with potential impact on its metabolic properties. Blood flow measurements with chronically implanted 
electromagnetic flow transducers in fetal sheep have shown an increase of the amplitude of vena caval pulsations 
during hypoxemia and increased afterload 76. Flow waveforms show an increase in peak systolic forward flow, and 
during atrial contraction retrograde flow occurs. In contrast, reductions in afterload are associated with an increase in 
peak diastolic forward flow, indicating that fetal systemic vascular resistance has a major influence on venous return 
and filling patterns of the right heart. Increased placental resistance and peripheral vasoconstriction, as seen in fetal 
arterial redistribution, cause an increase in right ventricular afterload, and thus ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
increases. This may result in highly pulsatile venous blood flow waveforms and umbilical venous pulsations due to 
transmission of atrial pressure waves through the ductus venosus 77. 
Studies in growth-restricted human fetuses have demonstrated that, in the inferior vena cava, an increase of reverse 
flow during atrial contraction occurs with progressive fetal deterioration, suggesting a higher pressure gradient in the 
right atrium (Figure 5) 78,79. 
Figure 5: Color Doppler examination of the inferior vena cava with normal flow velocity waveforms (top). 
Abnormal waveform with increase in reversed flow during atrial contraction in a growth-restricted fetus 
(bottom). 
The next step of the disease is the extension of the abnormal reversal of blood velocities in the inferior vena cava to 
the ductus venosus, inducing an increase of the S/A ratio, mainly due to a reduction of the A component of the 
velocity waveforms (Figure 6). 

Figure 6: Color Doppler examination of the ductus venosus with normal flow velocity waveforms (top). 
Abnormal waveformwith reversal of flow during atrial contraction and markedly increased pulsatility in a 
growth-restricted fetus (bottom). 
Finally, the high venous pressure induces a reduction of velocity at end-diastole in the umbilical vein, causing typical 
end-diastolic pulsations (Figure 7) 80. The development of these pulsations is close to the onset of abnormal fetal 
heart rate patterns and is frequently associated with acidemia and fetal endocrine changes81,82. At this stage, 
coronary blood flow may be visualized with higher velocity than in normally grown third-trimester fetuses and, if 
fetuses are not delivered, intrauterine death may occur within a few days 83. In a study of 37 fetuses with absent 
end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery, the main factors determining the length of the interval between the 
first occurrence of absent end-diastolic frequencies were gestational age (the lower the gestation, the longer was the 
interval), pre-eclampsia (shorter interval) and the presence of pulsations in the umbilical vein; the neonatal mortality 
in this group with pulsatile venous flow was 63%, compared to 19% in fetuses without pulsations 84. 
Fetal venous Doppler studies are useful in monitoring the growth-restricted redistributing fetus. Normal venous flow 
suggests continuing fetal compensation, whereas abnormal flow indicates the breakdown of hemodynamic 
compensatory mechanisms 79. Hecher et al. compared fetal venous and arterial blood flow with biophysical 
assessment in 108 high-risk pregnancies after 23 weeks of gestation 85. The results of this study suggest that venous 
Doppler findings in the late third-trimester fetus may not be as reliable as during the late second and early third 
trimesters. However, the most interesting results were found in a group of 41 fetuses displaying arterial blood flow 
redistribution. There were no significant differences in arterial PI values between fetuses with normal and abnormal 
biophysical assessment parameters (except for the aorta and abnormal fetal heart rate trace), whereas venous 
pulsatility was significantly increased in compromised fetuses compared to the non-compromised group. 

Figure 7: Pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein of a severely compromised growth-restricted fetus. 
Fetal hypoxemia is associated with a reduction in umbilical venous blood flow, but, despite this decrease, a normal 
peak velocity in the ductus venosus is maintained 86. In the growth-restricted fetus, the percentage of umbilical 
venous blood passing through the ductus venosus is increased from about 40% (in normal fetuses) to about 60% 87. 
Therefore, there is a redistribution in venous blood flow in favor of the ductus venosus at the expense of hepatic 
blood flow. Unlike peak velocity during ventricular systole, there were reduced or even reversed flow velocities during 
atrial contraction. One may speculate that increased end-diastolic right ventricular pressure would not influence 
ductus venosus blood flow velocities during atrial contraction, as flow is preferentially directed through the foramen 
ovale to the left atrium. However, the foramen ovale is closed during atrial contraction and blood flow velocity 
through the foramen ovale decreases to zero. 
Alterations of venous flow velocity waveforms are in a closer temporal relationship to intrauterine fetal jeopardy, 
compared to changes in arterial flow, which may occur quite early during the course of impaired placental function. 
The degree of fetal acidemia can be estimated from Doppler measurements of pulsatility in both the arterial system 
and the ductus venosus. This was shown in a cross-sectional study of 23 severely growth-retstricted fetuses, 
examining the relationship between Doppler measurements and umbilical venous blood gases obtained at 
cordocentesis 88. With moderate acidemia (pH between -2 and -4 standard deviations from the normal mean for 
gestational age), almost all fetuses had a middle cerebral artery PI below two standard deviations, whereas there was 
a wide scatter of individual results for the ductus venosus, with the majority of measurements being still within the 
reference ranges. With increasing severity of hypoxemia and acidemia, ductus venosus PIs increased and, in the most 
severe cases, velocities with atrial contraction were reduced to zero or even became negative. In a study 
investigating the association of arterial and venous Doppler findings with adverse perinatal outcome in severe fetal 
growth restriction, abnormal Doppler velocimetry of the ductus venosus was the only significant parameter associated 
with perinatal death and low 5-min Apgar scores 89. 
There are two possible mechanisms for abnormal venous blood flow waveforms: increasing right ventricular afterload 
and myocardial failure. As long as the fetus is able to compensate for a reduced placental supply by arterial 
redistribution, there is preferential myocardial oxygenation, which delays development of right heart failure, despite 
an increasing afterload. Therefore, fetal Doppler measurements show high placental resistance and arterial 
redistribution in the presence of normal venous waveforms. At this stage, the majority of fetuses have normal, 
reactive heart rate traces and biophysical profiles. Progressive changes in the venous circulation may indicate failure 
of the compensatory mechanism and herald the development of right heart failure due to myocardial hypoxia. 
Another interesting aspect has been raised by a study examining fetal central venous pressure. The pressure 
waveform from the inferior vena cava was recorded by following the movement of the vessel wall and thereby 
recording changes in the vessel lumen diameter 90. There were two groups of abnormal waveforms: one with a high 
pulsatile pattern and the other with a shallow and low pulsatile pattern. Both groups had significantly worse clinical 
outcomes compared to the normal waveform group. However, fetuses in the low pulsatile group were the most 
severely compromised, all of them showing an abnormal heart rate pattern. It was postulated that impaired 
contractility and reduced ventricular output, with a concomitantly reduced ventricular filling, were responsible for this 
waveform pattern. 

Timing of delivery 
In the management of the very preterm (before 33 weeks of gestation) growth-restricted fetus, there is uncertainty 
as to whether iatrogenic delivery should be undertaken before the development of signs of severe hypoxemia, with a 
consequent risk of prematurity-related neonatal complications, or whether delivery should be delayed, but with the 
risks of prolonged exposure to hypoxia and malnutrition imposed by a hostile intrauterine environment. A growth-
restricted fetus leading an ascetic existence from chronic starvation during the late second or early third trimester is 
capable of tolerating chronic hypoxemia without damage for much longer than a well-nourished late third-trimester 
fetus with a high energy consumption. 
Postnatal follow-up studies, at the age of 7 years, have reported that growth-restricted fetuses with abnormal aortic 
velocity waveforms had minor neurological dysfunction and impaired intellectual outcome 91,92. If these findings are 
confirmed in prospective studies with adequate controls for confounding variables, such as degrees of prematurity, 
smallness, and management, it may be advisable to deliver growth-restricted fetuses before these blood flow 
alterations occur. On the other hand, fetuses showing the brain-sparing effect did not have an increased risk for 
moderate or severe neurological handicap at the age of 2 years 93. It will always be a challenge to weigh the risks 
and benefits of early interventions against each other and it is a dynamic process, in which advancements in both 
fetal and neonatal medicine are of crucial importance for the counselling of parents and the management of these 
pregnancies. 
In the growth-restricted hypoxemic fetus, redistribution of well-oxygenated blood to vital organs, such as the brain, 
heart and adrenals, represents a compensatory mechanism to prevent fetal damage. When the reserve capacities of 
the circulatory redistribution reach their limits, fetal deterioration may occur rapidly. In clinical practice, it is 
necessary to carry out serial Doppler investigations to estimate the duration of fetal blood flow redistribution. The 
onset of abnormal venous Doppler results indicates deterioration in the fetal condition and iatrogenic delivery should 
be considered. 
In the sequence of deterioration of the condition of the growth-restricted fetus, the first pathological finding is 
increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery. This is followed by evidence of arterial redistribution in the fetal 
circulation and, subsequently, the development of pathological fetal heart rate patterns. On average, the time interval 
between the onset of abnormal umbilical arterial Doppler results and the onset of late fetal heart rate decelerations is 
about 2 weeks, but this interval differs considerably among fetuses and is shorter in late than early pregnancy and in 
the presence of hypertensive disease 31,38,84,94,95. Increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is usually 
associated with evidence of arterial redistribution in the fetal circulation; this is best monitored by examining the PI in 
the middle cerebral artery, which is decreased. 
Late fetal heart rate decelerations are preceded by approximately 2 weeks with Doppler evidence of a nadir in the 
brain-sparing effect and by a few days with an abrupt increase in impedance in the umbilical arteries 55. In the first 
stages of the disease, there is a preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle, leading to improved 
cerebral perfusion 71, but, with deterioration in the fetal condition, there are a decline in cardiac output and 
progressive worsening in cardiac function 71. Normal venous flow suggests continuing fetal compensation, whereas 
abnormal flow indicates the breakdown of hemodynamic compensatory mechanisms79. 
An abrupt increase in pulsatility of ductus venosus waveforms with loss of forward flow velocity during atrial 
contraction precede the onset of pathological fetal heart rate patterns and decreased short-term variation. However, 
the interval may be as short as a few hours in late gestation and in patients with pre-eclampsia; in contrast, during 
the second trimester, severely abnormal venous waveforms can be present for several days before intrauterine death. 

REFERENCES 
1. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Effect of gestational age on fetal and intervillous blood 
gas and acid–base values in human pregnancy. Fetal Ther 1986;1:168–75 
2. Nicolaides KH, Economides DL, Soothill PW. Blood gases and pH and lactate in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:996–1001 
3. Battaglia FC, Meschia G. An Introduction to Fetal Physiology. London: Academic Press, 1986:154–67 
4. Burd LI, Jones MD, Simmons MA. Placental production and fetal utilisation of lactate and pyruvate. Nature 
(London) 1975;254:210–1 
5. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Prenatal asphyxia, hyperlacticaemia, hypoglycaemia and 
erythroblastosis in growth retarded fetuses. Br Med J 1987;294:1051–3 
6. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH. Blood glucose and oxygen tension levels in small for gestational age fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:385–9 
7. Economides DL, Proudler A, Nicolaides KH. Plasma insulin in appropriate and small for gestational age 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:1091–4 
8. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH, GahlW, Bernardini I, Evans M. Plasma amino acids in appropriate and small 
for gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1219–27 
9. Economides DL, Crook D, Nicolaides KH. Hypertriglyceridemia and hypoxemia in small for gestational age 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:382–6 
10. Thorpe-Beeston JG, Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJM, Felton CV, McGregor AM. Thyroid function in small for 
gestational age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:701–6 
11. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Hackett G, Campbell S. Utero-placental blood flow velocity resistance 
index and venous pO2, pCO2, pH, lactate and erythroblast count in growth retarded fetuses. Fetal Ther 
1986;l:l76–9 
12. Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Soothill PW, Campbell S. Absence of end diastolic frequencies in the umbilical 
artery: a sign of fetal hypoxia and acidosis. Br Med J 1988;297:1026–7 
13. Brosens I, Robertson WB, Dixon HG. The role of the spiral arteries in the pathogenesis of pre-eclampsia. 
Obstet Gynecol Annu 1972;1:177–91 
14. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Baird PJ. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms and placental resistance: 
pathological correlation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:31–8 
15. Peeters LL, Sheldon RE, Jones MD, Makowsky EL, Meschia G. Blood flow to fetal organs as a function of 
arterial oxygen content. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;135:637–46 
16. Robertson WB, Brosens I, Dixon HG. The pathological response of the vessels of the placental bed to 
hypertensive pregnancy. J Pathol Bacteriol 1967;93:581–92 
17. Sheppard BL, Bonnar J. An ultrastructural study of utero-placental spiral arteries in hypertensive and 
normotensive pregnancy and fetal growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1981;88:695–705 
18. Brosens IA. Morphological changes in the utero-placental bed in pregnancy hypertension. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol 1977;4:573–93 
19. Khong TY, De Wolf F, Robertson WB, Brosens I. Inadequate maternal vascular response to placentation in 
pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and by small-for-gestational age infants. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1986;93:1049–59 
20. Campbell S, Griffin DR, Pearce JM, Diaz-Recasens J, Cohen-Overbeek T,Wilson K, Teague MJ. New Doppler 
technique for assessing uteroplacental blood flow. Lancet 1983;26:675–7 
21. Trudinger BJ, Giles WB, Cook CM. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity-time waveforms in normal and 
complicated pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:39–45 

22. Campbell S, Pearce JM, Hackett G, Cohen-Overbeek T, Hernandez C. Qualitative assessment of 
uteroplacental blood flow: an early screening test for high risk pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68: 649– 
53 
23. Fleisher A, Schulman H, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Rochelson B, Koenigsberg M. Uterine artery Doppler 
velocimetry in pregnant women with hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;154:806–13 
24. Karsdorp VH, Dirks BK, van der Linden JC, van Vugt JM, Baak JP, van Geijn HP. Placenta morphology and 
absent or reversed end diastolic flow velocities in the umbilical artery: a clinical and morphometrical study. 
Placenta 1996;17:393–9 
25. Salafia CM, Pezzullo JC, Minior VK, Divon MY. Placental pathology of absent and reversed end-diastolic flow 
in growth-restricted fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:830–6 
26. Schulman H, Fleisher A, Stern W, Farmakides G, Jagani N, Blattner P. Umbilical velocity wave ratios in 
human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;148:985–90 
27. Krebs C, Macara LM, Leiser R, Bowman AW, Greer IA, Kingdom JCP. Intrauterine growth restriction with 
absent end-diastolic flow velocity in the umbilical artery is associated with maldevelopment of the placental 
terminal villous tree. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1534–42 
28. Todros T, Sciarrone A, Piccoli E, Guiot C, Kaufmann P, Kingdom J. Umbilical Doppler waveforms and 
placental villous angiogenesis in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol 
1999;93:499–503 
29. Erskine RL, Ritchie JW. Umbilical artery blood flow characteristics in normal and growth retarded fetuses. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:605–10 
30. Trudinger BJ, Giles WB, Cook CM, Bombardieri J, Collins L. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms and 
placental resistance: clinical significance. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:23–30 
31. Reuwer PJ, Sijmons EA, Rietman GW, van Tiel MW, Bruinse HW. Intrauterine growth retardation: prediction 
of perinatal distress by Doppler ultrasound. Lancet 1987;22:415–18 
32. Rochelson B, Shulman H, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Ducey J, Fleisher A, Penny B,Winter D. The significance 
of absent end-diastolic velocity in umbilical artery velocity waveforms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1213– 
38 
33. Mandruzzato GP, Bogatti P, Fischer L, Gigli C. The clinical significance of absent or reverse end-diastolic flow 
in the fetal aorta and umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1991;1:192–6 
34. Brar HS, Platt LD. Reverse end-diastolic flow velocity on umbilical artery velocimetry in high risk 
pregnancies: an ominous finding with adverse pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159: 559–61 
35. Karsdorp VH, van Vugt JM, van Geijn HP, Kostense PJ, Arduini D, Montenegro N, Todros T. Clinical 
significance of absent or reversed end diastolic velocity waveforms in umbilical artery. Lancet 
1994;344:1664–8 
36. Valcamonico A, Danti L, Frusca T, Soregaroli M, Zucca S, Abrami F, Tiberti A. Absent enddiastolic velocity in 
umbilical artery: risk of neonatal morbidity and brain damage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:796–801 
37. Alfirevic Z, Neilson JP. Doppler ultrasonography in high-risk pregnancies: systematic review with meta-
analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1379–87 
38. Bekedam DJ, Visser GHA, van der Zee AGJ, Snijders RJM, Poelmann-Weesjes G. Abnormal velocity 
waveforms of the umbilical artery in growth-retarded fetuses: relationship to antepartum late heart rate 
decelerations and outcome. Early Hum Dev 1990;24:79–89 
39. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Bilardo KM, Campbell S. The relationship of fetal hypoxia in growth retardation to 
the mean blood velocity in the fetal aorta. Lancet 1986;2:1118–20 
40. Wladimiroff JW, Tonge HM, Stewart PA. Doppler ultrasound assessment of cerebral blood flow in the human 
fetus. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1986;93:471–5 
41. Tonge HM, Wladimiroff JW, Noordam MJ, van Kooten C. Blood flow velocity waveforms in the descending 
fetal aorta: comparison between normal and growth retarded pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:851–5 

42. van Eyck J, Wiadimiroff JW, Noordam MJ, Tonge HM, Prechtl HFR. The blood flow velocity waveformin the 
fetal descending aorta: its relationship to behavioural states in growth retarded fetus at 37–38 weeks of 
gestation. Early Hum Dev 1986;14:99–107 
43. Wladimiroff JW, vanWijngaard JAGW, Degani S, Noordam MJ, van Eijck J, Tonge HM. Cerebral and umbilical 
arterial blood flow velocity waveforms in normal and growth retarded pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 
1987;69:705–9 
44. Laurin J, Lingman G, Marsal K, Persson PH. Fetal blood flow in pregnancies complicated by intrauterine 
growth retardation. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:895–902 
45. Laurin J, Marsal K, Persson P, Lingman H. Ultrasound measurements of fetal blood flow in predicting fetal 
outcome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1987;94:940–8 
46. Arduini D, Rizzo D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Fetal blood flow velocity waveforms as predictors of growth 
retardation. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:7–10 
47. van Eyck J, Wladimiroff JW, van den Wijngaard JAGW, Noordam MJ, Prechtl HFR. The blood flow velocity 
waveformin the internal carotid artery: its relationship to behavioural states in growth retarded fetus at 37– 
38 weeks of gestation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1987;94:736–41 
48. Arabin B, Bergmann PL, Saling E. Simultaneous assessment of blood flow velocity waveforms in 
uteroplacental vessels, umbilical artery, fetal aorta and common carotid artery. Fetal Ther 1987;2: 17–26 
49. Hackett G, Campbell S, Gamsu H, Cohen-Overbeek T, Pearce JMF. Doppler studies in the growth retarded 
fetus and prediction of neonatal necrotising enterocolitis, haemorrhage, and neonatal morbidity. BrMed J 
1987;294:13–16 
50. Bilardo CM, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Mean blood velocities and impedance in the fetal descending thoracic 
aorta and common carotid artery in normal pregnancy. Early Hum Dev 1988; 18:213–21 
51. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Renal artery flow velocity waveforms in normal and hypoxemic fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:168–72 
52. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler measurements of fetal and uteroplacental circulations: 
relationship with umbilical venous blood gases measured at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;162:115–20 
53. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Bower S, Campbell S. Middle cerebral artery flow velocity waveforms in fetal 
hypoxemia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:797–803 
54. Vyas S, Campbell S, Bower S, Nicolaides KH. Maternal abdominal pressure alters fetal cerebral blood flow. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:740–2 
55. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C. Changes of pulsatility index from fetal vessels preceding the onset of late 
decelerations in growth-retarded fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:605–10 
56. Potts P, Connors G, Gillis S, Hunse C, Richardson B. The effect of carbon dioxide on Doppler flow velocity 
waveforms in the human fetus. J Dev Physiol 1992;17:119–23 
57. Longo LD, Pearce WJ Fetal and newborn cerebral vascular responses and adaptations to hypoxia. Semin 
Perinatol 1991;15:49–57 
58. Arduini D, Rizzo G. Prediction of fetal outcome in small for gestational age fetuses: comparison of Doppler 
measurements obtained from different fetal vessels. J Perinat Med 1992;20:29–38 
59. Hecher K, Spernol R, Stettner H, Szalay S. Potential for diagnosing imminent risk to appropriateand small-
for-gestational-age fetuses by Doppler sonographic examination of umbilical and cerebral arterial blood flow. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:266–71 
60. Gramellini D, Folli MC, Raboni S, Vadora E, Merialdi A. Cerebral–umbilical Doppler ratio as a predictor of 
adverse perinatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 1992;74:416–20 
61. Arias F. Accuracy of the middle-cerebral-to-umbilical-artery resistance index ratios in the prediction of 
neonatal outcome in patients at high risk for fetal and neonatal complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1994;171:1541–5 

62. Akalin-Sel T, Nicolaides KH, Peacock J, Campbell S. Doppler dynamics and their complex interrelation with 
fetal oxygen pressure, carbon dioxide pressure, and pH in growth-retarded fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;84:439–44 
63. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Chaoui R, Taddei F, Arduini D, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in normally grown and growth-retarded fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1996;8:87–92 
64. Capponi A, Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Splenic artery velocity waveforms in small for gestational age 
fetuses: relationship with pH and blood gases measured in umbilical blood at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1997;176:300–7 
65. Bahado-Singh RO, Kovanci E, Jeffres A, Oz U, Deren O, Copel J, Mari G. The Doppler cerebroplacental ratio 
and perinatal outcome in intrauterine growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:750–6 
66. Harrington K, Thompson MO, Carpenter RG, Nguyen M, Campbell S. In third trimester fetuses the ratio in 
pulsatility index between the fetal descending thoracic aorta and the middle cerebral artery may be more 
useful. Doppler fetal circulation in pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia or delivery of a small for 
gestational age baby. 2. Longitudinal analysis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999; 106:453–66 
67. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of atrioventricular 
velocity waveforms in normal and small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:65–9 
68. Groenenberg IA, Baerts W, Hop WC, Wladimiroff JW. Relationship between fetal cardiac and extra-cardiac 
Doppler flow velocity waveforms and neonatal outcome in intrauterine growth retardation. Early Hum Dev 
1991;26:185–92 
69. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of time to peak velocity in 
the aorta and pulmonary artery of small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:603–7 
70. Al-GhazaiiW, Chita SK, Chapman MG, Allan LD. Evidence of redistribution of cardiac output in asymmetrical 
growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:697–70 
71. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Fetal cardiac function in intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1991;165:876–82 
72. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Rinaldo D, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ventricular ejection force in growth retarded fetuses. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:247–55 
73. Reuss ML, Rudolph AM. Distribution and recirculation of umbilical and systemic venous blood flow in fetal 
lambs during hypoxia. J Dev Physiol 1980;2:71–84 
74. Tchirikov M, Eisermann K, Rybakowski C, Schröder HJ. Doppler ultrasound evaluation of ductus venosus 
blood flow during acute hypoxemia in fetal lambs. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 426–31 
75. Kiserud T, Stratford L, Hanson MA. Umbilical flow distribution to the liver and the ductus venosus: an in vitro 
investigation of the fluid dynamic mechanism in the fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:86–90 
76. Reuss ML, Rudolph AM, Dae MW. Phasic blood flow patterns in the superior and inferior venae cavae and 
umbilical vein of fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;145:70–8 
77. Kiserud T, Crowe C, Hanson M. Ductus venosus agenesis prevents transmission of central venous pulsations 
to the umbilical vein in fetal sheep. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:190–4 
78. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Inferior vena cava flow velocity waveforms in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1271–80 
79. Hecher K, Hackeloer BJ. Cardiotocogram compared to Doppler investigation of the fetal circulation in the 
premature growth-retarded fetus: longitudinal observations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:152–61 
80. Gudmundusson S, Tulzer G, Huhta JC, Marsal K. Venous Doppler in the fetus with absent end diastolic flow in 
umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:262–7 
81. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Soregaroli M, Arduini D, Romanini C. Umbilical vein pulsations and acid base status at 
cordocentesis in growth retarded fetuses with absent end diastolic velocity in umbilical artery. Biol Neonate 
1995;68:163–8 
82. Capponi A, Rizzo G, De Angelis C, Arduini D, Romanini C. Atrial natriuretic peptide levels in fetal blood in 
relation to inferior vena cava velocity waveforms. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:242–7 

.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
83. Baschat AA, Gembruch U, Reiss I, Gortner L, Diedrich K. Demonstration of fetal coronary blood flow by 
Doppler ultrasound in relation to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms and perinatal outcome. The 
heart sparing effect. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:162–72 
84. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C. The development of abnormal heart rate patterns after absent end-diastolic 
velocity in umbilical artery: analysis of risk factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168: 43–50 
85. Hecher K, Campbell S, Doyle P, Harrington K, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal compromise by Doppler 
ultrasound investigation of the fetal circulation. Arterial, intracardiac, and venous blood flow velocity studies. 
Circulation 1995;91:129–38 
86. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HG, Hellevik LR, Simensen B. Ductus venosus blood velocity and the umbilical 
circulation in the seriously growth-retarded fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4: 109–14 
87. Tchirikov M, Rybakowski C, Hüneke B, Schröder HJ. Blood flow through the ductus venosus in singleton and 
multifetal pregnancies and in fetuses with intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998;178:943–9 
88. Hecher K, Snijders R, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Fetal venous, intracardiac, and arterial blood flow 
measurements in intrauterine growth retardation: relationship with fetal blood gases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1995;173:10–15 
89. Ozcan T, Sbracia M, d’Ancona RL, Copel JA, Mari G. Arterial and venous Doppler velocimetry in the severely 
growth-restricted fetus and association with adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:39–44 
90. Mori A, Trudinger B, Mori R, Reed V, Takeda Y. The fetal central venous pressure waveform in normal 
pregnancy and in umbilical placental insufficiency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:51–7 
91. Ley D, Laurin J, Bjerre I, Marsal K. Abnormal fetal aortic velocity waveform and minor neurological 
dysfunction at 7 years of age. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:152–9 
92. Ley D, Tideman E, Laurin J, Bjerre I, Marsal K. Abnormal fetal aortic velocity waveform and intellectual 
function at 7 years of age. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:160–5 
93. Chan FY, Pun TC, Lam P, Lam C, Lee CP, Lam YH. Fetal cerebral Doppler studies as a predictor of perinatal 
outcome and subsequent neurologic handicap. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:981–8 
94. Divon MY, Girz BA, Lieblich R, Langer O. Clinical management of the fetus with markedly diminished 
umbilical artery end-diastolic flow. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1523–7 
95. Arabin B, SiebertM, Jimenez E, Saling E. Obstetrical characteristics of a loss of end-diastolic velocities in the 
fetal aorta and/or umbilical artery using Doppler ultrasound. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1988;25:173–80 

Chapter 5 
Screening for placental insufficiency by uterine 
artery Doppler 
INTRODUCTION 
Impaired trophoblastic invasion of the maternal spiral arteries is associated with increased risk for subsequent 
development of intrauterine growth restriction, pre-eclampsia and placental abruption (see Chapter 4). A series of 
screening studies involving assessment of impedance to flow in the uterine arteries have examined the potential value 
of Doppler in identifying pregnancies at risk of the complications of impaired placentation (Figures 1–3). 
STUDIES IN SELECTED POPULATIONS 
Arduini et al. examined 60 women who had essential hypertension or renal disease or a previous pregnancy 
complicated by pregnancy-induced hypertension 1. They measured impedance to flow in the arcuate arteries at 18–20 
weeks of gestation and defined as an abnormal result a resistance index of more than 0.57. They reported that this 
test identified 64% of pregnancies that subsequently developed pregnancy-induced hypertension (Table 1). 
Figure 1: Insonation of the uterine artery at the crossover with the iliac artery. 

.. 
In a similar study, Jacobson et al. examined 91 women who had chronic hypertension, history of pre-eclampsia or 
fetal loss and a variety of other medical conditions 2. They measured impedance to flow in the arcuate arteries at 24 
weeks of gestation and defined as an abnormal result a resistance index of more than 0.57. Doppler signals could not 
be obtained in 8% of women and these pregnancies were considered to have abnormal test results. The sensitivity of 
the test for pregnancy-induced hypertension was 44% (Table 1). This study also examined prediction of intrauterine 
growth restriction (birth weight below the 10th centile for gestation), which was found in 18% of the cases and the 
sensitivity and positive predictive values were 71% and 33%, respectively. 
Zimmermann et al. examined 172 women at high risk for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy or intrauterine growth 
restriction 3. They measured impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 21–24 weeks of gestation and defined an 
abnormal result by a resistance index of more than 0.68. The prevalence of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth 
restriction was 18% and the sensitivity of increased impedance in the prediction of this complication was 56% (Table 
1). 
.. 
Figure 2: Normal flow velocity waveform from the 
uterine artery at 24 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 3: Flow velocity waveform from the uterine 
artery at 24 weeks of gestation in a pregnancy with 
impaired placentation; in early diastole there is a notch 
(yellow arrow) and in late diastole there is decreased 
flow (orange arrow). 
Table 1: Screening for pregnancy-induced hypertension in high-risk pregnancies by measurement of impedance to 
flow in the arcuate or uterine arteries 
.. 
Arduini et al., 
1987 1 
Jacobson et al., 
1990 2 
Zimmermann et al., 
1997 3 
Gestation at Doppler 18-20 weeks 24 weeks 21-24 weeks 
Patients 60 91 172 
Prevalence of pre-eclampsia 37% 29% 18% 
Sensitivity 64% 44% 56% 
Specificity 94% 73% 83% 
Positive predictive value 70% 33% 43% 
Negative predictive value 80% 81% 89% 

STUDIES IN UNSELECTED POPULATIONS 
Several studies in unselected populations have examined the value of Doppler assessment of the uteroplacental 
circulation in the prediction of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. The main characteristics and 
results of the studies are summarized in Tables 2–4. The early studies were limited by the use of continuous wave 
Doppler, which is a blind investigation. However, recent studies have used color Doppler ultrasound to assess flow in 
the uterine artery at the point where it crosses the external iliac artery, which is a more reproducible examination. 
Discrepant results between the studies may be the consequence of differences in Doppler technique for sampling and 
the definition of abnormal flow velocity waveform, differences in the populations examined (for example, the 
prevalence of pre-eclampsia varied from as low as 2% to as high as 24%), the gestational age at which women were 
studied, and different criteria for the diagnosis of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
PW, Pulsed wave; CW, Continuous wave 
.. 
Table 2: Characteristics of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies in unselected populations. Under Abnormal 
result, the values are given as resistance index (RI) equivalent 
Author n Doppler Vessel Abnormal result 
Gestational 
age 
(weeks) 
One-stage screening .. .. .. 
Campbell et al., 
19864 
126 PW arcuate arteries RI > 0.58 16-18 
Hanretty et al., 
19895 
291 CW arcuate arteries RI > 0.52 26-30 
Bewley et al., 
19916 
925 CW uterine and arcuate 
arteries 
mean RI > 95th centile 16-24 
Bower et al., 
19937 
2058 CW uterine RI > 95th centile or notch 18-22 
Valensise et al., 
19938 
272 color uterine mean RI > 0.58 22 
North et al., 
19949 
457 color uterine (placental side) RI > 0.57 19-24 
Chan et al., 
199510 
334 CW uterine arteries RI > 90th centile and bilateral 
notches 
20 
Irion et al., 
199811 
1159 color uterine (placental side) mean RI > 0.57 26 
Kurdi et al., 
199812 
946 color uterine arteries RI > 0.55 and bilateral notches 19-21 
.. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 
199013 
1014 CW/CW uterine arteries RI > 0.58 18 and 24 
Bower et al., 
199314 
2437 CW/color uterine arteries RI > 95th centile or notches 20 and 24 
Harrington et al., 
199615 
1233 CW/color uterine RI > 95th centile or notches 20 and 24 
Frusca et al., 
199716 
419 CW/color uterine arteries mean RI > 0.58 20 and 24 

One-stage screening 
Arcuate arteries 
Campbell et al. examined the arcuate arteries in 126 pregnancies at 16–18 weeks of gestation 4. Subsequently, 12% 
of cases developed pre-eclampsia and 14% developed intrauterine growth restriction. The sensitivity of increased 
impedance (resistance index of more than 0.58) in the prediction of pre-eclampsia was 67% and, for intrauterine 
growth restriction, it was also 67%; the specificity was about 65% for both. In contrast, Hanretty et al. examined the 
arcuate arteries in 291 pregnancies at 26–30 weeks of gestation and found no difference in pregnancy outcome 
between those with normal and abnormal Doppler results 5. 
Definitions of hypertensive disease (PET) used by the different studies: 
PET 1 - Blood pressure rise (systolic > 30 mmHg or diastolic > 15 mmHg) with proteinuria or generalized edema 
PET 2 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg, requiring further investigation or treatment 
PET 3 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 150 mg/24 h) 
PET 4 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 300 mg/24 h) 
PET 5 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 300 mg/24 h) or non-proteinuric hypertension before 37 
weeks 
PET 6 - Blood pressure rise (systolic > 30 mmHg and diastolic > 25 mmHg) with proteinuria (> 500 mg/24 h) 
.. 
Table 3: Results of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies for the prediction of pre-eclampsia (PET) in 
unselected populations providing data on prevalence, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and 
negative predictive value (NPV) 
Author 
Outcome 
measure 
Prevalence 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
(%) 
Specificity 
(%) 
PPV 
(%) 
NPV 
(%) 
One-stage screening 
Campbell et al., 19864 PET 1 11.9 67 64 20 93 
Hanretty et al., 19895 PET 2 24.1 7 94 26 76 
Bewley et al., 19916 PET 3 4.6 24 95 20 96 
Bower et al., 19937 PET 4 2.5 75 86 12 99 
Valensise et al., 19938 PET 4 3.3 89 93 31 99 
North et al., 19949 PET 4 3.3 27 90 8 97 
Chan et al., 199510 PET 5 6.9 22 97 36 94 
Irion et al., 199811 PET 4 4.0 26 88 7 
Kurdi et al., 199812 PET 3 2.2 62 89 11 99 
..
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 199013 PET 4 1.9 63 89 10 99 
Bower et al., 199314 PET 4 1.8 78 95 22 99 
Harrington et al., 199615 PET 6 3.6 77 94 31 99 
Frusca et al., 199716 PET 4 1.9 50 92 11 99 

Uterine and arcuate arteries 
Bewley et al. calculated the average resistance index from the left and right uterine and arcuate arteries in 925 
pregnancies at 16–24 weeks gestation 6. When the resistance index was greater than the 95th centile, there was a 
10-fold increase in risk for a severe adverse outcome, defined by fetal death, placental abruption, intrauterine growth 
restriction or pre-eclampsia (prevalence 7%, sensitivity 21%, specificity 95%, positive predictive value 25%). 
However, the sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia or intrauterine growth restriction was only 24% and 19%, 
respectively with a specificity of about 95% for both. 
Uterine arteries 
Bower et al. examined the uterine arteries in 2058 pregnancies at 18–22 weeks 7. An abnormal result, defined by a 
resistance index above the 95th centile or the presence of an early diastolic notch in either of the two uterine arteries, 
was found in 16% of the pregnancies. The sensitivity of the test was 75% for pre-eclampsia and 46% for intrauterine 
growth restriction, and the specificity was 86% for both. This study highlighted the fact that abnormal Doppler results 
provide a better prediction of the more severe types of pregnancy complications. Thus, the sensitivity for mild preeclampsia 
was only 29%, but for moderate/severe disease the sensitivity was 82%. Similarly, the sensitivity for birth 
weight below the 10th centile was 38% and, for birth weight below the 5th centile, it was 46%. 
Valensise et al. examined the uterine arteries in 272 primigravidas at 22 weeks of gestation 8. An abnormal result, 
defined by increased impedance (mean resistance index of more than 0.58) was found in 9.6% of patients. The 
sensitivity of the test in predicting pre-eclampsia was 89% and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 67%; the 
specificities were 93% and 95%, respectively. The sensitivity for predicting nonproteinuric pregnancy-induced 
hypertension was 50%. 
North et al. examined the uterine arteries at 19–24 weeks of gestation in 457 nulliparous women and they found 
increased impedance (resistance index greater than 0.57 on the placental side) in 11% of cases 9. The sensitivity of 
the test for pre-eclampsia was 27%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 47%; the respective specificities 
were 90% and 91%. The test detected women with severe disease requiring delivery before 37 weeks with a 
sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 88%. 
Chan et al. examined the uterine arteries at 20 weeks of gestation in 334 patients considered to be at medium risk for 
the development of pregnancy-induced hypertension 10. A screen-positive result, defined by a mean resistance index 
Table 4: Results of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies for the prediction of intrauterine growth restriction 
(IUGR) in unselected populations providing data on prevalence, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value 
(PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) 
Author 
Outcome 
measure 
Prevalence 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
(%) 
Specificity 
(%) 
PPV 
(%) 
NPV 
(%) 
One-stage screening 
Campbell et al., 19864 IUGR < 10th centile 11.9 67 64 20 93 
Hanretty et al., 19895 IUGR < 5th centile 24.1 7 94 26 76 
Bewley et al., 19916 IUGR < 5th centile 4.6 24 95 20 96 
Bower et al., 19937 IUGR < 5th centile 2.5 75 86 12 99 
Valensise et al., 19938 IUGR < 10th centile 3.3 89 93 31 99 
North et al., 19949 IUGR < 10th centile 3.3 27 90 8 97 
Irion et al., 199811 IUGR < 10th centile 4.0 26 88 7 
Kurdi et al., 199812 IUGR < 5th centile 2.2 62 89 11 99 
.. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 199013 IUGR < 5th centile 1.9 63 89 10 99 
Bower et al., 199314 IUGR < 5th centile 1.8 78 95 22 99 
Harrington et al., 199615 IUGR < 10th centile 3.6 77 94 31 99 
Frusca et al., 199716 IUGR < 10th centile 1.9 50 92 11 99 

above the 90th centile and the presence of diastolic notches in both uterine arteries, was found in 4.2% of cases. The 
sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 22%, with a specificity of 97% and a positive predictive value of 35.7%. 
Irion et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1159 nulliparous women at 26 weeks 11. Pre-eclampsia, intrauterine 
growth restriction and preterm delivery occurred in 4%, 11% and 7% of the pregnancies, respectively. At 26 weeks, 
increased impedance to flow (resistance index greater than 0.57) was present in 13% of cases and the sensitivity of 
the test was 26% for pre-eclampsia, 29% for growth restriction and 15% for preterm delivery. 
Kurdi et al. examined the uterine arteries by color Doppler in 946 unselected women at 19–21 weeks of gestation 12. 
In 12.4% of cases, there were bilateral notches and, in this group, the odds ratio for developing pre-eclampsia was 
12.8, and, for pre-eclampsia requiring delivery before 37 weeks, it was 52.6. When the uterine artery Doppler studies 
were normal, the odds ratio for developing pre-eclampsia was 0.11 and, for intrauterine growth restriction (birth 
weight below the 5th centile for gestation), it was 0.3. In women with bilateral notches and a mean resistance index 
greater than 0.55, the sensitivities for pre-eclampsia and fetal growth restriction were 62% and 37%, respectively 
and, for these complications requiring delivery before 37 weeks, the sensitivities were 88% for both. It was concluded 
that women with normal uterine artery Doppler studies at 20 weeks constitute a group that have a low risk of 
developing obstetric complications related to uteroplacental insufficiency, whereas women with bilateral notches have 
an increased risk of the subsequent development of such complications, in particular those requiring delivery before 
term. Consequently, the results of Doppler studies of the uterine arteries at the time of the routine 20-week anomaly 
scan may be of use in determining the type and level of antenatal care that is offered to women. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1014 nulliparous women by continuous wave Doppler at 18 weeks of 
gestation and, in those with increased impedance (resistance index greater than 0.58), the Doppler studies were 
repeated at 24 weeks 13. A screen-positive result (increased impedance at 24 weeks) was found in 12% of cases, and 
the sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 63% and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 43% (< 5th 
centile). 
Bower et al. examined the uterine arteries in 2437 unselected women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 14. In those with increased impedance to flow (resistance index greater than the 95th centile or early 
diastolic notch in either of the two uterine arteries), the Doppler studies were repeated by color Doppler at 24 weeks. 
Persistently increased impedance was observed in 5.4% of the patients (compared to 16% at 20 weeks). It was 
reported that increased impedance provides good prediction of pre-eclampsia (but not of non-proteinuric pregnancy-
induced hypertension). Furthermore, in terms of low birth weight, abnormal waveforms provide better prediction of 
severe (below the 3rd centile) rather than mild (below the 10th centile) intrauterine growth restriction (Table 5). 
Harrington et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1233 unselected women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 15. In those with increased impedance (resistance index greater than the 95th centile or early diastolic 
notch in either of the uterine arteries), the Doppler studies were repeated by color Doppler at 24 weeks. Persistently 
increased impedance was observed in 8.9% of the patients. The sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 77%, 
and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 32%. Bilateral notching at 24 weeks was observed in 3.9% of patients; 
the sensitivity for pre-eclampsia was 55%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 22%. The respective 
sensitivities for those complications leading to delivery before 35 weeks were 81% and 58%. 
Table 5: The prediction of complications of pregnancy by increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 24 
weeks 14 
Prevalence Sensitivity Specificity PPV NPV 
Outcome (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) 
Pregnancy induced hypertension 6.5 
Pre-eclampsia 1.8 
SGA < 3rd centile 3.4 
SGA < 5th centile 4.9 
SGA < 10th centile 10.3 
8 94 994 
78 95 2299 
36 95 1998 
30 95 2396 
23 96 3792 
PPV, positive predictive value; NPV, negative predictive value; SGA, small for gestational age 

Frusca et al. examined the uterine arteries in 419 nulliparous women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 16. In those with increased mean resistance index (greater than 0.58), the uterine arteries were examined 
by color Doppler at 24 weeks. Persistently high resistance was observed in 8.6% of the patients. The sensitivity of the 
test for pre-eclampsia was 50%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 43%. In the group with increased 
impedance at 20 weeks but normal results at 24 weeks, the prevalence of pregnancy complications was not increased 
compared to those with normal impedance at 20 weeks. 
One-stage screening at 23 weeks 
Albaiges et al. used color Doppler to examine the uterine arteries in 1757 singleton pregnancies attending for routine 
ultrasound examination at 23 weeks 17. Increased impedance was observed in 7.3% of patients, including 5.1% with 
mean pulsatility index of more than 1.45 and 4.4% with bilateral notches. Increased pulsatility index identified 35.3% 
of women who later developed pre-eclampsia and 80% with pre-eclampsia requiring delivery before 34 weeks; the 
respective values for bilateral notches were 32.3% and 80%. The sensitivity of increased pulsatility index (PI) for 
delivery of an infant with birth weight below the 10th centile was 20.9% and 70% for birth weight below the 10th 
centile delivering before 34 weeks; the respective values for bilateral notches were 13.3% and 50%. These findings 
suggest that a one-stage color Doppler screening program at 23 weeks identifies most women who subsequently 
develop the serious complications of impaired placentation associated with delivery before 34 weeks. The screening 
results are similar if the high-risk group is defined either as those with increased PI or those with bilateral notches. 
Randomized controlled trial 
Davies et al. randomized 2600 unselected women to Doppler and non-Doppler groups 18. The Doppler studies were 
performed at 19–22 weeks and then at 32 weeks, unless the women were classified as being at high risk, in which 
case the Doppler studies were performed monthly. Continuous wave Doppler was used to obtain flow velocity 
waveforms in the lower lateral border of the uterus and an abnormal result was defined by the presence of an 
abnormal waveform bilaterally. There was a high frequency of pregnancy complications in women with abnormal 
uterine artery waveforms and it was concluded that abnormal waveforms are an indicator of subsequent fetal 
compromise. However, no improvement in neonatal outcome was demonstrated by routine Doppler screening. 
PROPHYLAXIS STUDIES 
Aspirin 
Studies in the 1980s have suggested that low-dose aspirin in high-risk women reduces the prevalence of intrauterine 
growth restriction and pre-eclampsia 19–22. However, a series of randomized studies have shown no effect on the 
complications 23–27. In most studies, there were no adverse effects from aspirin, but in one study the incidence of 
antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum bleeding was increased 26. The results of the randomized studies have been 
criticized because the women examined were mostly at low risk for placental insufficiency. 
Three randomized studies have examined the value of prophylactic aspirin in women considered to be at high risk of 
pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction because they had increased impedance in the uterine arteries (Table 
6) 28–30 
. 
McParland et al. carried out a two-stage Doppler screening study of the uterine arteries at 18–20 weeks and again at 
24 weeks 28. Those with persistently high resistance index (more than 0.58) were randomized to aspirin (75 mg/day) 
versus placebo for the remainder of the pregnancy. The difference between the aspirin and placebo groups in the 
frequency of pregnancy-induced hypertension (13% vs. 25%) did not achieve significance, but there were significant 
differences in the frequencies of pre-eclampsia (2% vs. 19%) and hypertension occurring before 37 weeks of 
gestation (0% vs. 17%). Fewer aspirin-treated than placebo-treated women had low birth weight babies (15% vs. 
25%), but this difference was not significant. The only perinatal death in the aspirin group followed a cord accident 
during labor, whereas the three perinatal deaths in the placebo group were all due to severe hypertensive disease. No 
maternal or neonatal side-effects were observed in either group. 

Table 6: Randomized studies examining the value of prophylactic asprin in women considered to be at high risk of 
pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction (GR) because they had increased impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries 
Study n Asprin Outcome 
McParland et al., 199028 100 75 mg/day pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 2.5 kg): 
asprin 2%, placebo 19% 
asprin 15%, placebo 25% (NS) 
Bower et al., 199629 60 60 mg/day severe pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 3rd centile): 
asprin 13%, placebo 38% 
asprin 26%, placebo 41% (NS) 
Morris et al., 199630 102 100 mg/day pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 10th centile): 
asprin 8%, placebo 14% (NS) 
asprin 27%, placebo 22% (NS) 
NS, not significant 
Bower et al. carried out a two-stage Doppler screening study of the uterine arteries at 18–22 weeks and again at 24 
weeks 29. Those with persistently high resistance index or an early diastolic notch were randomized to aspirin (60 
mg/day) or placebo. There was no significant difference in the incidence of intrauterine growth restriction (aspirin 
26%, placebo 41%) or pre-eclampsia (aspirin 29%, placebo 41%), but severe pre-eclampsia (defined as a diastolic 
blood pressure of at least 110 mmHg with proteinuria of at least 300 mg/24 h or pre-eclampsia requiring treatment 
with intravenous antihypertensives and anticonvulsants) was significantly lower in the aspirin group (13%) than in the 
placebo group (38%). There was only one perinatal death and this occurred in a woman taking placebo. It was 
concluded that, in high risk pregnancy, low-dose aspirin commenced at 24 weeks may reduce the incidence of severe 
pre-eclampsia. 
Morris et al. examined the uterine arteries by color Doppler at 18 weeks of gestation in 955 nulliparous women30. An 
abnormal result (defined by a high resistance index and the presence of an ipsilateral early diastolic notch) was found 
in 186 women, and 102 of these agreed to randomization to either low-dose aspirin (100 mg/day) or placebo for the 
remainder of the pregnancy. Abnormal uterine artery flow velocity waveforms were associated with statistically 
significant increases in pre-eclampsia (11 vs. 4%), birth weight below the tenth centile (28 vs. 11%), and adverse 
pregnancy outcome (45 vs. 28%). Prophylactic aspirin therapy did not result in a significant reduction in pregnancy 
complications. It was concluded that, although abnormal uteroplacental resistance at 18 weeks of gestation is 
associated with a significant increase in adverse pregnancy outcome, low-dose aspirin does not reduce pregnancy 
complications in women with uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Antioxidants 
Impaired placental perfusion is thought to stimulate the release of pre-eclamptic factors that enter the maternal 
circulation and cause vascular endothelial dysfunction. Free oxygen radicals are possible promoters of maternal 
vascular dysfunction. It was, therefore, hypothesized that early supplementation with antioxidants may be effective in 
decreasing oxidative stress and improving vascular endothelial function, thereby preventing, or ameliorating, the 
course of pre-eclampsia 31. 
Chappellet al. identified 283 women as being at increased risk of pre-eclampsia by abnormal two-stage uterine artery 
Doppler analysis or a previous history of the disorder 32. The patients were randomly assigned to vitamin C (1000 
mg/day) and vitamin E (400 IU/day) or to placebo at 16–22 weeks of gestation. In the intention-to-treat cohort, preeclampsia 
occurred significantly more commonly in the placebo group (17% of 142 women) than in the vitamin group 
(8% of 141). These findings suggest that supplementation with vitamins C and E may be beneficial in the prevention 
of pre-eclampsia in women at increased risk of the disease. Multicenter trials are needed to show whether vitamin 
supplementation affects the occurrence of pre-eclampsia in low-risk women and to confirm these results in larger 
groups of high-risk women from different populations. 
Nitric oxide donors 
Nitric oxide, produced by the endothelium of blood vessels, is a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet 
aggregation. Pre-eclampsia is associated with impaired production or function of nitric oxide and there is some 
evidence that treatment with the nitric oxide donor, glyceryl trinitrate, may reduce the prevalence or severity of this 
complication. 

Ramsay et al. examined 15 women with increased impedance in the uterine arteries (mean resistance index of more 
than 0.6 and bilateral notches) at 24–26 weeks 33 . Infusion of glyceryl trinitrate was associated with a dosedependent 
reduction in impedance to flow in the uterine arteries without a significant change in blood pressure, pulse 
rate or impedance in the umbilical artery or maternal carotid arteries. Grunewald et al. gave glyceryl trinitrate 
intravenously to women with severe pre-eclampsia and reported a decrease in maternal blood pressure and 
impedance in the umbilical artery, with no change in the impedance to flow in the uterine arteries 34. The effect of 
glyceryl trinitrate in this study may have been mediated by its placental transfer into the fetal vascular circuit, 
causing direct vasodilatation of the umbilical circulation. A similar effect has been shown using sublingual isosorbide 
dinitrate in healthy second-trimester pregnancy; umbilical and uterine artery impedances were lowered 35. 
Lees et al. reported a randomized study of 40 women with abnormal uterine artery Doppler results at 24–26 weeks of 
gestation 36. Women were randomly allocated to receive transdermal glyceryl trinitrate 5-mg patches per day or 
equivalent placebo patches for 10 weeks or until delivery. The rates of pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction or 
preterm delivery were not significantly different in the two groups. Furthermore, there were no significant differences 
in maternal systolic and diastolic blood pressure, mean uterine artery resistance index and fetal umbilical and midde 
cerebral artery PIs between the groups. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in both high-risk and low-risk pregnancies is associated 
with increased risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. Women with normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries constitute a group that have a low risk of 
developing obstetric complications related to uteroplacental insufficiency. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 24 weeks of gestation is found in about 5% of 
pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care. The prevalence of high impedance at 20 weeks is about 2– 
3 times higher than at 24 weeks. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care 
identifies about 50% of those that subsequently develop pre-eclampsia. Abnormal Doppler is better in 
predicting severe rather than mild pre-eclampsia. The sensitivity for severe pre-eclampsia is about 75%. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care 
identifies about 30% of those that subsequently develop intrauterine growth restriction. Abnormal Doppler 
is better in predicting severe (birth weight below the 3rd centile or growth restriction requiring delivery 
before 35 weeks) rather than mild growth restriction. 
.. In pregnancies with increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries, prophylactic treatment with lowdose 
aspirin or vitamins C and E may reduce the risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. 

REFERENCES 
1. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity waveforms as predictors of 
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Eur J Obstet Gynaecol Reprod Biol 1987;26:335–41 
2. Jacobson S-L, Imhof R, Manning N, Mannion V, Little D, Rey E, Redman C. The value of Doppler assessment 
of the uteroplacental circulation in predicting preeclampsia or intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1990;162:110–14 
3. Zimmermann P, Eirio V, Koskinen J, Kujansuu E, Ranta T. Doppler assessment of the uterine and 
uteroplacental circulation in the second trimester in pregnancies at high risk for pre-eclampsia and/or 
intrauterine growth retardation: comparison and correlation between different Doppler parameters. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:330–8 
4. Campbell S, Pearce JM, Hackett G, Cohen-Overbeek T, Hernandez C. Qualitative assessment of 
uteroplacental blood flow: early screening test for high-risk pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68: 649–53 
5. Hanretty KP, Primrose MH, Neilson JP, Whittle MJ. Pregnancy screening by Doppler uteroplacental and 
umbilical artery waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1163–7 
6. Bewley S, Cooper D, Campbell S. Doppler investigation of uteroplacental blood flow resistance in the second 
trimester: a screening study for pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1991;98:871–9 
7. Bower S, Schuchter K, Campbell S. Doppler ultrasound screening as part of routine antenatal scanning: 
prediction of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1993;100:989–94 
8. Valensise H, Bezzeccheri V, Rizzo G, Tranquilli AL, Garzetti GG, Romanini C. Doppler velocimetry of the 
uterine artery as a screening test for gestational hypertension. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:18–22 
9. North RA, Ferrier C, Long D, Townend K, Kincaid-Smith P. Uterine artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms in 
the second trimester for the prediction of preeclampsia and fetal growth retardation. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;83:378–86 
10. Chan FY, Pun TC, Lam C, Khoo J, Lee CP, Lam YH. Pregnancy screening by uterine artery Doppler 
velocimetry – which criterion performs best? Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:596–602 
11. Irion O, Masse J, Forest JC, Moutquin JM. Prediction of pre-eclampsia, low birthweight for gestation and 
prematurity by uterine artery blood flow velocity waveforms analysis in low risk nulliparous women. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:422–9 
12. KurdiW, Campbell S, Aquilina J, England P, Harrington K. The role of color Doppler imaging of the uterine 
arteries at 20 weeks’ gestation in stratifying antenatal care. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:339–45 
13. Steel SA, Pearce JM, McParland P, Chamberlain GV. Early Doppler ultrasound screening in prediction of 
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Lancet 1990;335:1548–51 
14. Bower S, Bewley S, Campbell S. Improved prediction of pre-eclampsia by two-stage screening of uterine 
arteries using the early diastolic notch and color Doppler imaging. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82: 78–83 
15. Harrington K, Cooper D, Lees C, Hecher K, Campbell S. Doppler ultrasound of the uterine arteries: the 
importance of bilateral notching in the prediction of pre-eclampsia, placental abruption or delivery of a small-
for-gestational-age baby. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:182–8 
16. Frusca T, Soregaroli M, Valcamonico A, Guandalini F, Danti L. Doppler velocimetry of the uterine arteries in 
nulliparous women. Early Hum Dev 1997;48:177–85 
17. Albaiges G, Missfelder-Lobos H, Lees C, Parra M, Nicolaides KH. One-stage screening for pregnancy 
complications by color Doppler assessment of the uterine arteries at 23 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 
2000;in press 
18. Davies JA, Gallivan S, Spencer JAD. Randomised controlled trial of Doppler ultrasound screening of placental 
perfusion during pregnancy. Lancet 1992;340:1299–303 
19. Beaufils M, Uzan S, Donsimoni R, Colau JC. Prevention of pre-eclampsia by early antiplatelet therapy. Lancet 
1985;1:840–2 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
20. Wallenburg HCS, Dekker GA, Makovitz JW, Rotmans P. Low-dose aspirin prevents pregnancyinduced 
hypertension and pre-eclampsia in angiotensin-sensitive primigravidae. Lancet 1986;1:1–3 
21. Schiff E, Peleg E, GoldenbergM, et al. The use of aspirin to prevent pregnancy induced hypertension and 
lower the ratio of thromboxane A2 to prostacyclin in relatively high risk pregnancies. N Engl J Med 
1989;321:351–6 
22. Uzan S, Beaufils M, Breart G, et al. Prevention of fetal growth retardation with low dose aspirin: findings of 
the EPREDA trial. Lancet 1991;337:1427–31 
23. Italian Study of Aspirin in Pregnancy. Low-dose aspirin in prevention and treatment of intrauterine growth 
retardation and pregnancy-induced hypertension. Lancet 1993;341:396–400 
24. CLASP (Collaborative Low-dose Aspirin Study in Pregnancy) Collaborative Group. CLASP: a randomised trial 
of low-dose aspirin for the prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia among 9364 pregnant women. Lancet 
1994;343:619 
25. Sibai BM, Caritis SN, Thom E, et al. Prevention of preeclampsia with low-dose aspirin in healthy, nulliparous 
pregnant women. The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Network of Maternal–Fetal 
Medicine Units. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1213–18 
26. Golding J. A randomised trial of low dose aspirin for primiparae in pregnancy. The Jamaica Low Dose Aspirin 
Study Group. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:293–9 
27. Caritis S, Sibai B, Hauth J, et al. Low dose aspirin to prevent pre-eclampsia in women at high risk. N Engl J 
Med 1998;338:701–5 
28. McParland P, Pearce JM, Chamberlain GV. Doppler ultrasound and aspirin in recognition and prevention of 
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Lancet 1990;335:1552–5 
29. Bower SJ, Harrington KF, Schuchter K, McGirr C, Campbell S. Prediction of pre-eclampsia by abnormal 
uterine Doppler ultrasound and modification by aspirin. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103: 625–9 
30. Morris JM, Fay RA, Ellwood DA, Cook CM, Devonald KJ. A randomized controlled trial of aspirin in patients 
with abnormal uterine artery blood flow. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:74–8 
31. Schiff E, Friedman SA, Stampfer M, Kao L, Barrett PH, Sibai BM. Dietary consumption and plasma 
concentrations of vitamin E in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1996;175:1024–8 
32. Chappell LC, Seed PT, Briley AL, Kelly FJ, Lee R, Hunt BJ, Parmar K, Bewley SJ, Shennan AH, Steer PJ, 
Poston L. Effect of antioxidants on the occurrence of pre-eclampsia in women at increased risk: a 
randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:810–16 
33. Ramsay B, de Belder A, Campbell S, Moncada S, Martin JF. A nitric oxide donor improves uterine artery 
diastolic blood flow in normal early pregnancy and in women at high risk of pre-eclampsia. Eur J Clin Invest 
1994;24:76–8 
34. Grunewald C, Kublickas M, Carlstrom K, Lunell N-O, Nisell H. Effects of nitroglycerin on the uterine and 
umbilical circulation in severe preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:600–4 
35. Thaler I, Amit A, Jakobi P, et al. The effect of isosorbide dinitrate on uterine artery and umbilical artery flow 
velocity waveforms at mid-pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:838–43 
36. Lees C, Valensise H, Black R, Harrington K, Byers S, Romanini C, Campbell S. The efficacy and fetalmaternal 
cardiovascular effects of transdermal glyceryl trinitrate in the prophylaxis of pre-eclampsia and its 
complications: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:334– 
8 

Chapter 6 
Doppler studies in red blood cell isoimmunization 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, maternal hemolytic antibodies cross the placenta and attach themselves onto 
fetal red cells, which are then destroyed in the fetal reticulo-endothelial system 1. In mild to moderate disease there 
is a compensatory increase in intramedullary erythropoiesis, and in severe disease there is recruitment of 
extramedullary erythropoietic sites, such as liver and spleen 2,3. 
Fetal blood pO2, pCO2 and pH usually remain within the normal range except in extreme anemia, when hypoxia and 
acidosis occur 4,5. The fetal blood oxygen content decreases in proportion to the degree of anemia. The fetal 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) concentration is increased and the consequent decrease in hemoglobin–oxygen affinity 
presumably improves delivery of oxygen to the tissues 6. In moderate anemia, the umbilical arterial plasma lactate 
concentration is increased but this is cleared by a single passage of fetal blood through the placenta and normal 
umbilical venous levels are maintained 7. In severe anemia, when the oxygen content is less than 2 mmol/l, the 
placental capacity for lactate clearance is exceeded and the umbilical venous concentration increases exponentially. 
These data suggest that, in the fetus, systemic metabolic acidosis can be prevented, unless the oxygen content 
decreases below the critical level of 2 mmol/l 7. When the fetal hemoglobin concentration deficit exceeds 6 g/dl, 
hydrops fetalis develops 1. This may be the result of extensive infiltration of the liver by erythropoietic tissue, leading 
to portal hypertension, due to parenchymal compression of portal vessels, and hypoproteinemia, due to impaired 
protein synthesis 8. Furthermore, at this hemoglobin concentration deficit, the oxygen content decreases below the 
critical level of 2 mmol/l. 
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF FETAL ANEMIA 
The severity of fetal hemolysis can be predicted from: 
(1) The history of previously affected pregnancies; 
(2) The level of maternal hemolytic antibodies; 
(3) Changes in the flow velocity waveforms obtained by Doppler studies of the fetal circulation; 
(4) The altered morphometry of fetus and placenta; and 
(5) The presence of pathological fetal heart rate patterns 4. 
However, there is a wide scatter of values around the regression lines describing the associations between the degree 
of fetal anemia and the data obtained from these indirect methods of assessment. The only accurate method for 
determining the severity of the disease is blood sampling by cordocentesis and measurement of the fetal hemoglobin 
concentration. Cordocentesis should be performed for all patients with a history of severe disease and those with a 
hemolytic antibody level of more than 15 IU/ml or a titer of 1 in 128 or more 9–12. At cordocentesis, a fetal blood 
sample is first obtained and the hemoglobin concentration is determined. If this is below the normal range, the tip of 
the needle is kept in the lumen of the umbilical cord vessel and fresh, packed, rhesus-negative blood compatible with 
that of the mother is infused manually into the fetal circulation through a 10-ml syringe or a transfusion set. At the 
end of the transfusion, a further fetal blood sample is aspirated to determine the final hemoglobin concentration 13,14. 
Subsequent transfusions are given at 1–3-weekly intervals until 34–36 weeks, and their timing is based on the 
findings of non-invasive tests, such as Doppler studies, and the knowledge that, following a fetal blood transfusion, 
the mean rate of decrease in fetal hemoglobin is approximately 0.3 g/dl per day14. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Uterine artery 
In a longitudinal study of 12 fetuses, Copel et al. included the uterine artery pulsatility index (PI), together with the 
descending thoracic aortic peak velocity, in a multiple regression model to predict whether the fetal hematocrit was 
below or above 25% before the second fetal blood transfusion 15. The authors suggested that the significant 
contribution of uterine artery PI to the model could be explained by the effect of resolving placental edema after the 
correction of fetal anemia by the second transfusion. However, this is unlikely because there was no difference in 
uterine PI between hydropic and non-hydropic fetuses. 
In a series of 95 red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, impedance in the uterine artery was within the normal range and 
there was no significant association between PI and the degree of fetal anemia 16. Therefore, it is unlikely that fetal 
anemia alters the uteroplacental circulation. 
Umbilical artery 
Rightmire et al. found a significant inverse correlation between impedance to flow in the umbilical artery and fetal 
hematocrit 17. It was suggested that increased impedance to flow in the fetoplacental microcirculation may be due to 
hypoxemia-mediated capillary endothelial cell damage, or clogging of the placental capillaries by the large fetal 
erythroblasts. 
In contrast, Warren et al. reported that impedance in the umbilical artery was not abnormal in red cell isoimmunized 
pregnancies with high amniotic fluid bilirubin concentration 18. Similarly, in a study of 95 affected pregnancies, 
umbilical artery PI, measured immediately before cordocentesis, was not increased and was not associated with fetal 
anemia 16. 
Impedance to flow in fetal vessels 
Vyas et al. measured the PI in the middle cerebral artery of 24 non-hydropic fetuses from red cell isoimmunized 
pregnancies; there were no significant associations between PI and either the degree of fetal anemia or the degree of 
deficit in oxygen content measured in samples obtained by cordocentesis 12. Furthermore, in a study of 95 fetuses 
undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, the PI in both the middle cerebral artery and descending thoracic aorta 
was not significantly different from normal controls and there was no significant association between PI and fetal 
anemia 16. These findings indicate that impedance to flow is not affected by anemic hypoxia and by the alterations of 
blood constituents, such as hypoproteinemia, or red cell morphology, such as erythroblastemia, that accompany 
severe anemia 2,3. 
Fetal cardiac Doppler studies 
Meijboom et al. measured maximal and mean temporal velocity and early passive to late active ventricular filling 
phase (E/A) ratio on the atrioventricular orifices in 12 fetuses immediately before fetal blood transfusion19. There was 
a non-significant increase in both maximal and mean temporal velocities. Furthermore, there was a significant 
reversal in the E/A ratio in the flow waveforms from the tricuspid valve. In normal fetuses, these two peaks present 
an ‘M’ shape, whereas in anemic fetuses the E peak is dominant, suggesting that, in fetal anemia, there is an 
increased pre-load in the right atrium. 
Copel et al. found that anemic fetuses before any intrauterine transfusion had significantly higher stroke volumes and 
ventricular outputs than normal controls. The increase was shared proportionately by both ventricles 20. However, 
there was no significant relationship between fetal hematocrit and cardiac output. Nevertheless, extremely 
compromised fetuses demonstrated diminished cardiac function as a terminal finding. In contrast, Barss et al. 
reported a case of hydrops fetalis where the cardiac output measured before an intravascular transfusion was close to 
the normal mean for gestation 21. 
Rizzo et al. measured right and left cardiac outputs (by multiplying the tricuspid or mitral mean temporal velocities, 
valvular area and heart rate) in 12 anemic fetuses before blood transfusion by cordocentesis 22. Both left and right 
cardiac outputs were significantly higher for gestation than in 187 normal controls. Furthermore, the E/A ratios of 
both atrioventricular valves were higher than normal (Figure 1). 

Lam et al. examined 20 anemic (due to homozygous ..-thalassemia-1) fetuses at 12–13 weeks of gestation and 
reported increased peak velocities at the pulmonary valve and ascending aorta and an increased inner diameter of the 
pulmonary valve 23. The total cardiac output was increased by one-third and this was mainly due to an increase of the 
cardiac output on the right side. 
The findings of increased fetal cardiac output in anemia are in agreement with the results of animal studies and 
confirm the prediction, from a mathematical model, that, in fetal anemia, the cardiac output is increased to maintain 
an adequate oxygen delivery to the tissues 24. Possible mechanisms include, first, decreased blood viscosity leading 
to increased venous return and cardiac preload and, second, peripheral vasodilatation as a result of a fall in blood 
oxygen content and therefore reduced cardiac afterload. 
Figure 1: Flow velocity waveforms across the tricuspid valve in an anemic fetus at 28 weeks of gestation. The 
E/A ratio is increased (0.97 compared to the expected mean for gestation of 0.75). 
The high E/A is suggestive of increased cardiac preload. Since right-to-left cardiac output ratio is normal, there is no 
evidence of redistribution in cardiac output similar to that described in hypoxemic growth-restricted fetuses. These 
findings suggest that, in fetal anemia, the changes in fetal cardiac output are mainly due to low blood viscosity. An 
alternative explanation is that the symmetrical increase in cardiac output is secondary to an increase in catecholamine 
concentrations in fetal blood induced by anemia 25. 
Blood velocity in fetal arteries 
Rightmire et al. examined 21 fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies before fetal blood sampling and 
reported a significant inverse association between aortic mean blood velocity and fetal hemoglobin concentration 17. 
Similarly, from the examination of 68 previously untransfused fetuses at 17–37 weeks of gestation, Nicolaides et al. 
reported a significant association between aortic mean velocity, measured immediately before cordocentesis, and the 
degree of fetal anemia 11. However, separate analysis of non-hydropic and hydropic fetuses demonstrated that in the 
former group there was a significant positive correlation between increased velocity and fetal anemia, whilst in the 
latter group there was a significant negative correlation between these two parameters. 
In an extended series of 95 previously untransfused fetuses undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, there was a 
significant increase in aortic velocity with the degree of fetal anemia 16 . Although, in some hydropic fetuses, aortic 
velocity was decreased, in the majority of cases the velocity was increased. In an additional series of 212 fetuses that 
had a transfusion 2–3 weeks previously, the relation between aortic velocity and anemia was weaker. 
Copel et al. measured the peak velocity in 16 fetuses immediately before cordocentesis and derived a series of 
formulae for the prediction of whether the fetal hematocrit was above or below 25% 15. The best prediction was 
achieved for the untransfused fetuses. For subsequent transfusions, different formulae had to be used, presumably 
because of the different rheological properties of adult, rather than fetal, blood in the fetal circulation. 
Bilardo et al. measured mean velocity in the common carotid artery of 12 previously untransfused anemic fetuses 
immediately before cordocentesis 26. There was a significant association between the degree of fetal anemia and the 

increase in blood velocity. The authors speculated that this increase in common carotid artery velocity reflected 
increased cardiac output associated with fetal anemia, rather than a chemoreceptormediated redistribution in blood 
flow, as seen in hypoxemic growth-restricted fetuses 27. 
Vyas et al., in a study of 24 previously untransfused, non-hydropic fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies at 
18–35 weeks of gestation, reported a significant correlation between an increase in mean velocity in the middle 
cerebral artery and the degree of fetal anemia measured in samples obtained by cordocentesis 12. In an extended 
series of 95 previously untransfused fetuses undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, there was a significant 
association between the increase in mean velocity in the middle cerebral artery with the degree of fetal anemia 16. In 
an additional series of 212 fetuses that had a transfusion 2–3 weeks previously, the relation between blood velocity 
and anemia was weaker 16. 
Mari et al . found a significant association between the peak systolic velocity in the middle cerebral artery and fetal 
hematocrit at cordocentesis. In a prospective study of 16 fetuses from isoimmunized pregnancies, they found that all 
the anemic fetuses had peak velocity values above the normal mean for gestation, whereas none of the fetuses with 
peak velocity below the normal mean was anemic 28. On the basis of these results, they suggested that, in the 
management of isoimmunized pregnancies, the indication for cordocentesis should be a peak systolic velocity above 
the normal mean for gestation. These results were confirmed in a multicenter study involving 111 fetuses from 
isoimmunized pregnancies; all moderately or severely anemic fetuses had increased peak velocity in the middle 
cerebral artery 29. 
Steiner et al. performed 112 fetal blood samplings by cordocentesis in 33 cases with rhesus isoimmunization and 
found that the mean peak systolic aortic velocity of anemic fetuses was significantly higher than that of unaffected 
fetuses 30. Furthermore, there was a good correlation between delta peak velocities and delta hematocrits for the first 
procedure. 
Bahado-Singh et al. examined the main splenic artery waveforms in 22 nonhydropic fetuses from red cell 
isoimmunized pregnancies 31. The deceleration angle between the line describing the average slope during the 
diastolic phase of the cycle and the vertical axis was measured and expressed in multiples of the median (MoM) for 
gestational age. A decrease in the deceleration angle was associated with fetal anemia and, at a threshold 
deceleration angle of < 0.60 MoM, the sensitivity for severe anemia (hemoglobin deficit of 5 g/dl) was 100%, with an 
8.8% false-positive rate. It was concluded that all cases of severe anemia could be identified before the development 
of hydrops, and, if, in the management of red cell isoimmunization, cordocentesis is only carried out if the 
deceleration angle is < 0.60 MoM, then the need for cordocentesis would decrease by more than 90% 31. 
Figure 2: Blood velocity in the fetal thoracic aorta (left) and middle cerebral artery (right) in red cell 
isoimmunized pregnancies plotted on the appropriate reference range (mean, 95th and 5th centiles) for 
gestation. Fetal anemia is associated with a hyperdynamic circulation. 

The findings of increased blood velocity in the fetal arteries with anemia (Figure 2 and Figure 3) are compatible with 
the data from the fetal cardiac Doppler studies. If it is assumed that, in anemia, the cross-sectional area of the fetal 
descending aorta and middle cerebral arteries does not change, the increased velocity would reflect an increase in 
both central and peripheral blood flow due to increased cardiac output. The decreased aortic velocity in some hydropic 
fetuses may be the consequence of cardiac decompensation, presumably due to the associated hypoxia and lactic 
acidosis and to the impaired venous return due to liver infiltration with hemopoietic tissue 2. 
Figure 3: Flow velocity waveform in the fetal middle cerebral artery in a severely anemic fetus at 22 weeks 
(left) and in a normal fetus (right). In fetal anemia, blood velocity is increased 
Blood velocity in fetal veins 
Rightmire et al. measured the fetal inferior vena caval time averaged mean velocity immediately before the first 
intravascular fetal blood transfusion in 19 rhesus-affected pregnancies at 18–28 weeks of gestation 17. Although the 
velocity was higher than in non-anemic controls, there was no significant correlation with fetal hematocrit. In the 
same study, the intrahepatic umbilical venous velocity was not significantly different from non-anemic controls. 
In contrast, Kirkinen et al. examined 18 rhesus isoimmunized pregnancies within 4 days before delivery and reported 
that, in anemic fetuses, the volume flow in the intrahepatic umbilical vein was significantly increased due to both 
increased blood velocity and vessel diameter 32. Similarly, Warren et al. performed serial measurements of fetal blood 
flow in 51 rhesus isoimmunized pregnancies and reported that increased flow was associated with subsequent 
development of fetal hydrops or rise in amniotic fluid bilirubin concentration. It was postulated that the increased flow 
was the result of reduced blood viscosity due to the reduced hematocrit. 
Iskaros et al. performed serial measurements of umbilical vein maximal flow velocity and found that elevated 
velocities prior to delivery were predictive of the need for exchange blood transfusion 33. They concluded that 
pregnancies with a mild or no history of fetal anemia may be monitored by a combination of serial antibody 
quantification and Doppler measurement of umbilical vein maximal flow velocities. 
Oepkes et al., in a study of 21 previously transfused fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, reported 
increased peak systolic and time averaged maximum velocities in the ductus venosus before intravascular fetal blood 
transfusion, which returned to normal values the following day 34. It was suggested that the increase in ductus 
venosus blood flow in anemic fetuses reflects increased venous return and therefore cardiac preload. 
Hecher et al. recorded flow velocity waveforms from the ductus venosus, right hepatic vein, inferior vena cava, middle 
cerebral artery and descending thoracic aorta from 38 red cell isoimmunized pregnancies and found that only the 
velocity in the thoracic aorta was significantly associated with the degree of fetal anemia 35. Furthermore, this study 
showed that heart failure is not the primary mechanism for the development of hydrops, but rather the end-stage of 
severe anemia, because the pulsatility of venous blood flow waveforms was not increased. Hydrops may be due to 
reduced colloid osmotic pressure, hypoxia-induced endothelial damage and increased permeability. 
Severe fetal anemia, with consequent cardiac failure, is associated with a reversed ‘a’ wave in the ductus venosus. 
Under these conditions, pulsations are also present in the venous portal system (which in normal fetuses is 
characterized by a continuous flow). The pulsatile pattern present in the venous system corresponds to findings in 
children with portal hypertension 36. 
Since, in fetal anemia, resistance to flow in the fetal circulation and placenta is unchanged, an increase of umbilical 
venous blood flow is in accordance with high cardiac output and elevated arterial velocities. 

Hemodynamic changes following fetal blood transfusion 
Warren et al. and Kirkinen et al. found that, immediately after a fetal intraperitoneal blood transfusion, there was a 
temporary increase in umbilical venous blood flow and subsequent gradual decrease from above to within the normal 
range 18,32. It was suggested that the gradual decrease in flow, coinciding with resolution of fetal ascites, was the 
result of absorption of the transfused blood and correction of the fetal anemia. 
Copel et al. measured impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries and peak velocity in the descending 
thoracic aorta immediately before and 12 hours after fetal blood exchange transfusion by cordocentesis; no 
differences were found 15. 
Doppler studies of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery before and soon after intravascular top-up transfusion 
provided conflicting results. In a study of 43 cases, Bilardo et al. found no significant changes 26. In contrast, Weiner 
and Anderson and Hanretty et al. reported a significant decrease in impedance immediately after fetal blood 
transfusion in 19 and 22 fetuses, respectively 37,38. It was postulated that simple needling of fetal blood vessels 
stimulates a humoral vasodilator mechanism. Supportive evidence was provided by the finding that fetal blood levels 
of vasoactive substances with vasodilatatory effects, like prostaglandins and atrial natriuretic peptide, are increased 
after an intravascular blood transfusion 39,40. However, as Welch et al. pointed out, the possible changes in indices of 
impedance after an intrauterine transfusion may not be simply due to vasodilatation but due to the complex 
influences of altered fetal whole blood viscosity, increased number of scattering particles (red cells) and vasoactive 
compounds 41. 
Bilardo et al. performed fetal Doppler studies in 43 cases immediately before and within 30 minutes of an 
intravascular top-up transfusion 26. There was a significant decrease in mean blood velocity in both the descending 
thoracic aorta (Figure 4) and common carotid artery. Similarly, Mari et al. found that intrauterine transfusion is 
associated with a significant decrease in the peak velocity in the middle cerebral artery and this decrease is 
proportional to the increase in fetal hematocrit 42. These findings are likely to be the result of a decrease in cardiac 
output following the transfusion due to: 
(1) Increased blood hemoglobin concentration and viscosity, and consequent decrease in venous return; 
(2) Congestive heart failure due to overloading of the fetal circulation; or 
(3) Cardio-inhibition due to increased baroreceptor activity. 
Confirmatory evidence of a decrease in cardiac output following blood transfusion was provided by Rizzo et al.22. They 
measured left and right cardiac outputs before and at 15-min intervals for 2 hours after an intravascular top-up 
transfusion in 12 fetuses. After transfusion, there was a significant temporary fall in both right and left cardiac 
outputs. Furthermore, the E/A ratios in both the tricuspid and mitral valves were increased suggesting that cardiac 
preload was also increased. Within 2 hours after transfusion, both parameters had returned towards the normal 
range. The fall in cardiac output was significantly related to the amount of expansion of the fetoplacental volume due 
to the transfusion. The most likely explanation for these findings is that transfusion results in temporary 
cardiovascular overload. Animal studies have also shown that the fetal heart has very limited reserve capacity to 
increase its output in response to acute overload, and that massive increases in fetal blood volume are associated 
with a decrease in cardiac output. After transfusion, there is a rapid rate of fluid loss and this explains the rapid 
recovery in E/A ratios and cardiac output 43. 
The short-lived nature of the hemodynamic effects of intravascular transfusion can also explain the findings of Mari et 
al. who reported that the middle cerebral artery PI, internal carotid artery PI and umbilical artery PI before and the 
day after fetal transfusion were not significantly different 44. Similarly, Copel et al., in a study of cardiac output at 12 
hours after intravascular blood transfusion, found no significant differences from the pretransfusion levels 20. 

Figure 4: Flow velocity waveform in the fetal descending thoracic aorta in an anemic fetus demonstrating 
high velocities and Doppler ‘window’ for low velocities during systole (top). After blood transfusion, there is a 
decrease in peak systolic velocity and the Doppler ‘window’ has disappeared (bottom). 
.. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, placentation is normal and therefore indices of impedance to flow in 
the uterine and umbilical arteries are normal, irrespective of the severity of fetal anemia. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, normal placental perfusion results in normal fetal blood pO2, pCO2 
and pH and therefore there is no evidence of redistribution in the fetal circulation; the PI in the middle 
cerebral artery, thoracic aorta and renal arteries is normal. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, the left and right cardiac outputs and blood velocity in the umbilical 
vein, middle cerebral artery, thoracic aorta, renal arteries and the fetal venous system are ncreased in 
proportion to the degree of fetal anemia. The most likely mechanism for the hyperdynamic circulation of 
anemic fetuses is decreased blood viscosity, leading to increasedvenous return and cardiac preload. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, fetal heart failure is not the primary mechanism for the development 
of hydrops. However, severe anemia with consequent end-stage cardiac failure may be associated with high 
pulsatility or even reversed ‘a’ wave in the ductus venosus and pulsations in portal sinus. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, intravascular fetal blood transfusion results in temporary 
cardiovascular overload with a temporary fall in both right and left cardiac outputs. 

REFERENCES 
1. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Clewell WH, Rodeck CH, Mibashan R, Campbell S. Fetal haemoglobin 
measurement in the assessment of red cell isoimmunization. Lancet 1988;i:1073–6 
2. Nicolaides KH, Thilaganathan B, Rodeck CH, Mibashan RS. Erythroblastosis and reticulocytosis in anemic 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:1063–5 
3. Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJM, Thorpe-Beeston JG, Van den Hof MC, Gosden CM, Bellingham AJ. Mean red cell 
volume in normal, small and anemic fetuses. Fetal Therapy 1989;4:1–13 
4. Nicolaides KH. Studies on fetal physiology and pathophysiology in rhesus disease. Semin Perinatol 
1989;13:328–37 
5. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Bellingham AJ. The effect of replacing fetal with adult hemoglobin on 
the blood gas and acid–base parameters in human fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158:66–9 
6. Soothill PW, Lestas AN, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Bellingham AJ. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate in normal, 
anaemic and transfused human fetuses. Clin Sci 1988;74:527–30 
7. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Clewell WH, Lindridge J. Relationship of fetal hemoglobin and oxygen 
content to lactate concentration in Rh isoimmunized pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:268–71 
8. Nicolaides KH, Warenski JC, Rodeck CH. The relationship of fetal protein concentration and hemoglobin level 
to the development of hydrops in rhesus isoimmunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;152:341–4 
9. Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH. Maternal serum anti-D concentration in the assessment of rhesus 
isoimmunisation. Br Med J 2000;in press 
10. Nicolaides KH, Sadovsky G, Cetin E. Fetal heart rate patterns in red blood cell isoimmunized pregnancies. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:351–6 
11. Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Campbell S. Prediction of fetal anemia by measurement of the mean blood 
velocity in the fetal aorta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:209–12 
12. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler examination of the middle cerebral artery in anemic fetuses. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:1066–8 
13. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Ultrasound guided sampling of umbilical cord and 
placental blood to assess fetal wellbeing. Lancet 1986;i:1065–7 
14. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Rodeck CH, ClewellW. Rh disease: intravascular fetal blood transfusion by 
cordocentesis. Fetal Therapy 1986;1:185–92 
15. Copel JA, Grannum PA, Belanger K, Green J, Hobbins JC. Pulsed Doppler flow velocity waveforms before and 
after intrauterine intravascular transfusion for severe erythroblastosis fetalis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1988;158:768–74 
16. Nicolaides KH, Kaminopetros P. Red-cell isoimmunization. In Pearce M, ed. Doppler Ultrasound in Perinatal 
Medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992;244–57 
17. Rightmire DA, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Fetal blood velocities in Rh isoimmunization: 
relationship to gestational age and to fetal hematocrit. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:233–6 
18. Warren PS, Gill RW, Fisher CC. Doppler blood flow studies in rhesus isoimmunization. Sem Perinatol 
1987;11:375–8 
19. Meijboom EJ, De Smedt MCH, Visser GHA, Jager W, Nicolaides KH. Fetal cardiac output measurements by 
Doppler echocardiography. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Meeting of The Society of Perinatal 
Obstetricians. San Antonio, Texas, 1986: Abstract 17 
20. Copel JA, Grannum PA, Green JJ, Hobbins JC, Kleinman CS. Fetal cardiac output in the isoimmunized 
pregnancy: a pulsed Doppler echocardiographic study of patients undergoing intravascular intrauterine 
transfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:361–4 
21. Barss VA, Doubilet PM, St.John-Sutton M, Cartier MS, Frigoletto FD. Cardiac output in a fetus with 
erythrobastosis fetalis: assessment using pulsed Doppler. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:442–4 

22. Rizzo G, Nicolaides KH, Arduini D, Campbell S. Effects of intravascular fetal blood transfusion on fetal 
intracardiac Doppler velocity waveforms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163;569–71 
23. Lam YH, Tang MH, Lee CP, Tse HY Cardiac blood flow studies in fetuses with homozygous alpha-thalassemia-
1 at 12–13 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:48–51 
24. Huikeshoven FJ, Hope ID, Power GG, Gilbert RD, Longo LD. A comparison of sheep and human fetal oxygen 
delivery systems with use of a mathematical model. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151: 449–55 
25. Oberhoffer R, Grab D, Keckstein J, Högel J, Terinde R, Lang D. Cardiac changes in fetusessecondary to 
immune hemolytic anemia and their relation to hemoglobin and catecholamine concentrations in fetal blood. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:396–400 
26. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler studies in red cell isoimmunization. Clin Obstet Gynecol 
1989;32:719–27 
27. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler measurements of fetal and utero-placental circulation: 
relationship with umbilical venous blood gases measured at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;162:115–20. 
28. Mari G, Adrignolo A, Abuhamad AZ, Pirhonen J, Jones DC, Ludomirsky A, Copel JA. Diagnosis of fetal anemia 
with Doppler ultrasound in the pregnancy complicated by maternal blood group immunization. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:400–5 
29. Mari G. Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal anemia due to maternal red-cell 
alloimmunization. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 9–14 
30. Steiner H, Schaffer H, Spitzer D, Batka M, Graf AH, Staudach A. The relationship between peak velocity in 
the fetal descending aorta and hematocrit in rhesus isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:659–62 
31. Bahado-Singh R, Oz U, Deren O, Pirhonen J, Kovanci E, Copel J, Onderoglu L. A new splenic artery Doppler 
velocimetric index for prediction of severe fetal anemia associated with Rh alloimmunization. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;180:49–54 
32. Kirkinen P, Jouppila P, Eik-Nes S. Umbilical vein blood flow in rhesus isoimmunization. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1983;90:640–3 
33. Iskaros J, Kingdom J, Morrison JJ, Rodeck C. Prospective non-invasive monitoring of pregnancies complicated 
by red cell alloimmunization. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:432–7 
34. Oepkes D, Vandenbussche FP, van Bel F, Kanhai HHH. Fetal ductus venosus blood flow velocities before and 
after transfusion in red-cell alloimmunized pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82;237–41 
35. Hecher K, Snijders R, Campbell S, Nicolaides K. Fetal venous, arterial, and intracardiac blood flows in red 
blood cell isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:122–8 
36. d’Ancona RL, Rahman F, Ozcan T, Copel JA, Mari G. The effect of intravascular blood transfusion on the flow 
velocity waveform of the portal venous system of the anemic fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997; 
10:333–7 
37. Weiner CP, Anderson TL. The acute effect of cordocentesis with or without fetal curarization and of 
intravascular transfusion upon umbilical artery waveform indices. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73: 219–24 
38. Hanretty KP, Whittle MJ, Gilmore DH, McNay MB, Howie CA, Rubin PC. The effect of intravascular transfusion 
for rhesus haemolytic disease on umbilical artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1989;96:960–3 
39. Weiner CP, Robillard GE. Effect of acute intravascular volume expansion on human fetal prostaglandin 
concentrations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1494–7 
40. Panos MZ, Nicolaides KH, Anderson JV, Economides DL, Rees L, Williams R. Plasma atrial natriuretic peptide: 
response to intravascular blood transfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 357–61 
41. Welch CR, Rodeck CH. The effect of intravascular transfusion for rhesus haemolytic disease on umbilical 
artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:865–6 
42. Mari G, Rahman F, Olofsson P, Ozcan T, Copel JA. Increase of fetal hematocrit decreases the middle cerebral 
artery peak systolic velocity in pregnancies complicated by rhesus alloimmunization. J Matern Fetal Med 
1997;6:206–8 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
43. Gillbert RD. Control of fetal cardiac output during changes in blood volume. Am J Physiol 1980;238:H80–6 
44. Mari G, Moise KJ, Russell LD, Kirshon B, Stefos T, Carpenter RJ. Flow velocity waveforms of the vascular 
system in the anemic fetus before and after intravascular transfusion for severe red blood cell 
alloimunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:1060–4 

Chapter 7 
Doppler studies in pregnancies with maternal 
diabetes mellitus 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
Maternal diabetes mellitus is associated with a high risk of fetal death. In the past, before the introduction of insulin, 
the main cause of death was in association with maternal keto-acidosis, but now most fetal deaths are non-ketoacidotic 
and occur in association with fetal macrosomia. 
The major source of fetal glucose is the mother and there is a good correlation between maternal and fetal blood 
glucose concentrations 1. In pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus, the maternal hyperglycemia causes fetal 
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia 2,3. Furthermore, the fetal insulin to glucose ratio is increased because 
hyperglycemia and/or the other metabolic derangements associated with maternal diabetes mellitus act on the fetal 
pancreas to cause ..-cell hyperplasia and precocious pancreatic maturation 2. Fetal hyperinsulinemia causes 
macrosomia, either directly through its anabolic effect on nutrient uptake and utilization, or indirectly through related 
peptides such as insulin-like growth factors 4. 
Although good diabetic control in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces the incidence of macrosomia, the latter is 
not always preventable. In pregnant women with diabetes mellitus, despite stringent maternal glycemic control, the 
fluctuation in maternal glucose concentration is greater than in non-diabetics and it is possible that, during short-lived 
episodes of hyperglycemia, an already hyperplastic fetal pancreas will respond with a disproportionately high release 
of insulin. 
In diabetic pregnancies, analysis of blood samples obtained by cordocentesis has demonstrated significant acidemia 
and hyperlacticemia in the absence of hypoxemia 5-7. Fetal acidemia, which may offer an explanation for the 
unexplained stillbirths of diabetic pregnancies, is likely to be the consequence of increased metabolic rate. Salvesen et 
al. performed cordocentesis in diabetic pregnancies and reported a significant association between fetal plasma insulin 
concentration and the degree of fetal acidemia 2. In pregnant sheep, chronic hyperglycemia results in increased 
aerobic and anaerobic glucose metabolism, with consequent increased oxygen consumption, lactate production and 
fall in pH and pO2 8-13. Glucose oxidation and oxygen consumption are also increased by hyperinsulinemia, and this 
effect is independent of that caused by hyperglycemia 12. Hyperlacticemia occurs because the fetus has a reduced 
capacity for oxidative metabolism and low pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. Severe hyperglycemia is characterized by 
acidemia and hypoxemia, but minor degrees of hyperglycemia are associated with acidemia in the absence of 
hypoxemia 8. However, in the presence of mild fetal hypoxemia, minor degrees of fetal hyperglycemia do result in 
severe acidosis and even fetal death 13. 
The alternative explanation for fetal acidemia in maternal diabetes mellitus is impaired placental perfusion. 
Histological studies have reported decreased villous surface area, villous edema and thickening of the basement 
membrane 14. However, the finding that acidemia is not accompanied by hypoxemia suggests that the acidemia is 
unlikely to be due to impaired placental function; in pregnancies complicated by intrauterine growth restriction due to 
uteroplacental insufficiency, acidemia is accompanied by hypoxemia (see Chapter 4 ). 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE UMBILICAL AND UTERINE ARTERIES 
The aim of Doppler ultrasound studies of the umbilical and uterine arteries in diabetic pregnancies is to determine 
whether impedance to flow is related to maternal glycemic control and whether impedance is increased in patients 
with diabetic nephropathy and vasculopathy. This section also examines whether impedance in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries can provide useful prediction of subsequent development of preeclampsia and/or intrauterine 
growth restriction in the same way that it does in nondiabetic pregnancies. 

Olofsson et al. examined 40 diabetic pregnancies and reported that the volume blood flow in the fetal aorta and 
umbilical vein and the pulsatility index (PI) in the umbilical artery were higher in diabetic than in non-diabetic 
pregnancies 15. There was no significant association between these indices and the degree of diabetic control or fetal 
size, but the high umbilical artery PI and high aortic volume flow occurred in fetuses who later developed distress in 
labor. It was suggested that, in some diabetic pregnancies, there is increased placental vascular resistance with a 
compensatory increase in volume flow. A high umbilical artery PI cannot be considered characteristic of diabetic 
pregnancy, but fetal distress might be more common in diabetic pregnancy15. More recently, Ursem et al. examined 
16 women with well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus at 12–21 weeks of gestation and reported 
increased fetal heart rate variability and umbilical artery peak systolic velocity, but normal fetal heart rate and 
umbilical artery time-averaged velocity 16. It was suggested that fetal heart rate variability and umbilical artery peak 
systolic velocity may be markers for fetal cardiovascular homeostasis in pregnancies complicated by insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus 16. 
Bracero et al. performed Doppler studies of the umbilical artery during the third trimester of pregnancy in 43 women 
with diabetes mellitus 17. They found a significant association between impedance to flow and maternal serum 
glucose concentration. Furthermore, high impedance was associated with an increased number of stillbirths and 
neonatal morbidity. It was suggested that maternal hyperglycemia causes placental vasoconstriction by impairing 
prostacyclin production 17. In another study, Bracero et al. evaluated 207 singleton pregnancies complicated by 
maternal diabetes mellitus within 1 week of delivery. In 36% of cases, there was an adverse outcome (defined as 
delivery before 37 weeks, or fetal risk requiring Cesarean delivery, or fetal growth restriction, or neonatal 
hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia, or respiratory distress syndrome) 18. The relative risk of adverse 
outcome was 2.6 for increased impedance in the umbilical artery, which was higher than the risk of 1.7 for abnormal 
biophysical profile score or a non-reactive non-stress test18. Bracero et al. also measured impedance to flow in the 
left and right uterine arteries in 265 women with singleton pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus within 1 
week before delivery 19. The higher the difference in impedance between the two uterine arteries, the greater was the 
risk of adverse pregnancy outcome, but there was a considerable overlap in discordance between the good and 
adverse outcome groups. 
Landon et al. performed serial measurements of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 35 insulin-dependent 
diabetic women, during the second and third trimesters, and found no significant association between this index and 
maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin level 20. Women with vascular disease had a higher impedance in 
the umbilical artery compared to those with uncomplicated diabetes. Increased impedance in women with vascular 
disease was associated with subsequent development of intrauterine growth restriction and, in those with no vascular 
disease, with the development of pre-eclampsia. Similarly, Dicker et a. carried out Doppler examinations of the 
umbilical artery in 108 pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and found no significant association 
between impedance to flow and maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin levels 21. Increased umbilical 
artery impedance was associated with the subsequent development of pre-eclampsia (in women without 
vasculopathy) and development of intrauterine growth restriction in those with vasculopathy. 
Reece et al. examined 56 diabetic pregnancies and reported that the umbilical artery PI was higher in patients with 
diabetic vasculopathy than in non-diabetic controls or in diabetic patients without vasculopathy. Intrauterine growth 
restriction and neonatal metabolic complications were also significantly correlated with elevated umbilical artery PI 22. 
There was, however, no correlation between Doppler indices and maternal glucose values, although most were within 
a euglycemic range. 
Ishimatsu et al. performed Doppler studies of the umbilical artery during the third trimester of pregnancy in 16 
women with diabetes mellitus. They found no significant association between impedance to flow and maternal serum 
glucose or fructosamine levels 23. However, in two patients with serum glucose levels of over 300 mg/dl, impedance 
was increased and returned to the normal range when the serum glucose level decreased to below 200 mg/dl. 
Johnstone et al. measured impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 128 pregnancies complicated by diabetes 
mellitus 24. There was no significant association between impedance to flow and either short-term or long-term 
glycemic control. Although, in some cases that subsequently developed fetal distress, there was increased impedance, 
fetal compromise also occurred in association with normal impedance. 
Zimmermann et al. carried out serial measurements of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 53 women with 
insulin-dependent diabetes. Impedance was within the normal range and there was no significant association with 
maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin level or maternal vascular disease 25. This group also measured 
impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in 43 pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and 
found no significant differences from normalor significant associations with short-and long-term glycemic control, 

maternal vasculopathy, or diabetes-specific fetal morbidity 26. 
The effectiveness of screening for the complications of impaired placentation by uterine artery Doppler in diabetic 
pregnancies may be similar to that in non-diabetics 27. Thus, Haddad et al. measured impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries of 37 diabetic pregnancies and reported that increased impedance identified 45% of those that 
subsequently developed pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. Barth et al. measured impedance to 
flow in the uterine arcuate artery system beneath the placenta within 8 days of delivery in 47 patients with insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus and reported increased impedance in those cases where histological examination of the 
decidual arteries after delivery showed severe vasculopathy 28. The study confirmed a relationship between arcuate 
artery Doppler indices and downstream decidual vascular pathology. Kofinas et al. examined 31 pregnant women with 
gestational diabetes and 34 with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Impedance to flow in the umbilical and uterine 
arteries during the third trimester was not different between patients with good glycemic control and those with poor 
control 29. In contrast, impedance was significantly higher in patients with pre-eclampsia than in those without preeclampsia, 
regardless of glycemic control. It was concluded that Doppler investigation may be clinically useful only in 
diabetic pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia. 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE FETAL MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY AND AORTA 
Diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased risk of fetal death, and data from cordocentesis have demonstrated 
an association between maternal hyperglycemia and fetal acidemia. The aim of Doppler ultrasound studies of the fetal 
middle cerebral artery and aorta is to examine whether the compromised fetus of a diabetic pregnancy demonstrates 
the same features of circulatory redistribution as seen in fetal hypoxemia due to uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Salvesen et al. carried out a longitudinal Doppler study in 48 relatively well-controlled diabetic pregnancies 30. With 
the exception of three pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction, the 
uteroplacental and fetoplacental circulations were essentially normal. Thus, impedance to flow in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and the PI or mean velocity in the middle cerebral artery or descending thoracic aorta were not 
significantly different from normal. It is of particular interest that normal Doppler results in the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and the fetal middle cerebral artery and aorta were also observed in five of six patients with diabetic 
nephropathy 31. In all cases, iatrogenic delivery was carried out at 27–36 weeks because of worsening maternal 
proteinuric hypertension. Cordocentesis, performed within 24 hours before delivery, demonstrated these fetuses to be 
hypoxemic and acidemic. It was concluded that fetal acidemia in pregnancies complicated by diabetic nephropathy is 
not a consequence of impaired placental perfusion, and the degree of metabolic derangement may be obscured by the 
apparent normal growth of these fetuses and their failure to demonstrate blood flow redistribution. Another 
conclusion from this study is that uterine artery Doppler may be useful in distinguishing true pre-eclampsia (increased 
PI) from renal proteinuria and hypertension (normal PI). 
Ishimatsu et al. measured impedance to flow in the fetal middle cerebral artery in 43 pregnant women with well- 
Table 1: Doppler studies 
Author Doppler study 
Diabetes vs. 
non-diabetes 
Diabetic 
vasculopathy 
Diabetic 
control 
Olofsson et al., 198715 umbilical increased .. no correlation 
Bracero et al., 198617 umbilical increased .. good correlation 
Landon et al., 198920 umbilical .. increased no correlation 
Reece et al., 199422 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Ishimatsu et al., 199123 umbilical .. increased no correlation 
Johnstone et al., 199224 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Zimmermann et al., 199225 umbilical normal normal no correlation 
Kofinas et al., 199129 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Salvesen et al., 199330 umbilical normal normal no correlation 
Kofinas et al., 199129 uterine .. .. no correlation 
Salvesen et al., 199330 uterine normal normal no correlation 
Zimmermann et al., 199426 uterine normal normal no correlation 

controlled diabetes mellitus at 24–38 weeks of gestation 32. The PI was within the normal range and was not 
significantly associated with maternal serum glucose, fructosamine or glycosylated hemoglobin level. Reece et al. 
examined 30 pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus at 2-week intervals between 18 and 38 weeks 
of gestation 33. They found no significant association between impedance to flow in the fetal aorta and fetal outcome. 
They concluded that fetal aortic Doppler velocimetry cannot be used as a means of assessing impending fetal 
compromise in offspring of diabetic mothers. 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE FETAL HEART 
Infants of diabetic mothers are at increased risk of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This disease is characterized by a 
thickening of the interventricular septum and ventricular walls and by systolic and diastolic dysfunction, which may 
result in congestive heart failure. 
Figure 1: Real-time and M-mode tracing of a fetus of an insulin-dependent diabetic mother at 36 weeks of 
gestation. The interventricular wall septal thickness is increased (10 mm compared to the expected mean of 5 
mm for this gestation) 
Figure 2: Flow velocity waveforms across the tricuspid valve in a fetus of an insulin-dependent diabetic 
mother at 32 weeks of gestation. The E/A ratio is decreased (0.48 compared to expected mean of 0.77 for 
this gestation) 
Rizzo et al. examined 40 well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 20–38 weeks of gestation and 
reported a significant increase in fetal interventricular septal thickness (Figure 1) and an associated decrease in the 
ratio between the peak velocities during early passive ventricular filling and active atrial filling at the level of the 
atrioventricular valves 34. These findings, which were unrelated to maternal glycosylated hemoglobin levels, suggest 
that, even in well-controlled maternal diabetes mellitus, there is fetal interventricular septal hypertrophy that affects 
cardiac diastolic function. A longitudinal study of 14 well-controlled, insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 20–36 
weeks of gestation confirmed the presence of hypertrophy in the interventricular septum and the right and left 

ventricular walls, as well as abnormal development of cardiac function – decrease in the ratio between early and 
active ventricular filling at the level of both the mitral and tricuspid valves (Figure 2) 35. The cardiomegaly and 
cardiac dysfuncion increased with gestation but they were evident from as early as 20 weeks. Since the diabetic 
control in these pregnancies was good, it was suggested that fetal cardiomegaly may be the consequence of increased 
insulin sensitivity of the fetal myocardium. This hypothesis is supported by the data of Thorsson and Hintz, showing a 
reduction from fetus to adult in the number and affinity of insulin receptors 36. 
The lower ratio between early and active ventricular filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves in fetuses of 
diabetic mothers may be due to impaired development of ventricular compliance, possibly secondary to cardiac wall 
thickening. In addition, the ratio may be influenced by reduced preload, as a consequence of the polycythemia, and 
therefore increased blood viscosity in fetuses of diabetic mothers. Thus, in a Doppler study of 37 fetuses of insulin-
dependent diabetic mothers, immediately before an elective Cesarean section, the ratio between early and active 
ventricular filling was significantly and independently affected by both the interventricular wall thickness and fetal 
hematocrit 37. 
Weber et al. performed serial evaluations of cardiac growth and ventricular diastolic filling using M-mode and Doppler 
echocardiography at 20–40 weeks of gestation and at 48–72 hours after birth in 11 fetuses of non-diabetic mothers 
and nine fetuses of well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic mothers. Cardiac growth and birth weight in the two 
groups were similar 38. Ventricular diastolic filling increased with gestation in both groups but the increase was 
delayed in the diabetic group. Tsyvian et al. examined 15 third-trimester pregnancies complicated by insulin-
dependent maternal diabetes mellitus and reported a delay in fetal left ventricular filling, which may reflect changes in 
myocardial relaxation 39. Weiner et al. examined 31 well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 22–40 
weeks of gestation and reported that, after 34 weeks, in the fetuses of diabetic pregnancies, compared to normal 
pregnancies, there was a lower ratio between the peak velocities during early passive ventricular filling and active 
atrial filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves 40. 
Macklon et al. examined well-controlled diabetic pregnancies at 18–20 weeks of gestation and reported that the fetal 
intraventricular septal thickness was increased, but transvalvular peak flow velocities and the duration of ventricular 
ejection in the fetal heart were not significantly different from normal 41. It was concluded that, in fetuses of well-
controlled diabetic pregnancies, altered cardiac morphology is evident early in pregnancy, before any obvious 
alteration in cardiac function. Rizzo et al. examined 27 insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies from 12 weeks of 
gestation 42. In the fetuses of diabetic mothers, compared to normal pregnancies, there was a lower ratio between 
early and active ventricular filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves, a higher percentage of reverse flow 
during atrial contraction in the inferior vena cava, and a higher proportion of cases with pulsations in the umbilical 
vein. These findings, demonstrating impaired development of cardiac and venous blood flow patterns from as early as 
at 12 weeks of gestation, were more evident in pregnancies with poorer glycemic control but they were also found in 
the presence of good metabolic control. 
Peak velocities at the level of the aortic and pulmonary outflow tracts were significantly higher in fetuses of diabetic 
mothers than in normal fetuses 34. The most likely explanations for the increased peak velocities are increased 
cardiac contractility (also found in postnatal studies in infants of diabetic mothers) and increased intracardiac flow 
volume due to the relatively large size of such fetuses, since cardiac output is a function of fetal weight. These 
abnormalities in cardiac hemodynamics also impair the venous circulation. Rizzo et al. carried out a cross-sectional 
study of 62 third-trimester fetuses in insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies and reported that increased preload 
index in the inferior vena cava (in the absence of alterations in fetal peripheral vessels) was associated with a lower 
umbilical arterial blood pH and higher hematocrit at birth, as well as increased neonatal morbidity 43. These findings 
suggest that the mechanisms inducing fetal distress in diabetic pregnancies (where the development of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy plays a pivotal role in the genesis of fetal distress) are different from those in fetuses with 
intrauterine growth restriction, where the change in cardiac function is secondary to the alteration in peripheral 
resistance. 
In neonates from normal pregnancies, the ratio between early and active ventricular filling at the level of the 
atrioventricular valves increases during the first few days of postnatal life; the early wave is usually higher than the 
active one, resulting in a ratio between early and active ventricular filling that is higher than one. In newborns of 
diabetic mothers, there are no changes in this ratio during the first 5 days of life and its value remains lower than 
one44. These anomalies might explain the relatively high incidence of transitory tachypnea and pulmonary edema in 
neonates from diabetic pregnancies. The cardiac hypertrophy of fetuses of diabetic mothers resolves during the first 
year of postnatal life. However, it is possible that the cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction observed in intrauterine life 
may affect cardiac function in adult life. 

CONCLUSIONS 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries is not related to either 
short-term or long-term maternal glycemic control. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is normal, even in patients with 
nephropathy and vasculopathy. However, increased impedance, as in non-diabetic pregnancies, identifies a 
group at high risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is associated with the 
development of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. There is contradictory evidence 
concerning a possible increase in impedance in pregnancies with maternal vasculopathy. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, there is no evidence of redistribution in the fetal circulation with decreased PI 
in the middle cerebral artery and increased PI in the descending thoracic aorta. This is presumably because, 
in diabetes, there may be acute fluctuations in fetal blood pH, since the latter is associated with the 
maternal glucose concentration. Furthermore, unlike intrauterine growth restriction, in diabetes metabolic 
derangements in the fetus may lead to acidemia without hypoxemia. Therefore, the classic redistribution 
seen in fetal hypoxemia due to uteroplacental insufficiency may not occur even in severely compromised 
fetuses, and it is therefore important not to be misled by apparently normal fetal Doppler results. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, the fetus is at increased risk of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This disease is 
characterized by a thickening of the interventricular septum and cardiac dysfunction, which may be evident 
from as early as 12 weeks of gestation. 

REFERENCES 
1. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH. Blood glucose and oxygen tension in small for gestational age fetuses. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:385–9 
2. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Proudler A, Crook D, Nicolaides KH. Fetal pancreatic b-cell function in 
pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:1363–9 
3. Pedersen J. The Pregnant Diabetic and Her Newborn, 2nd edn. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1977:211– 
20 
4. Wang HS, Chard T. The role of insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-1 in 
the control of human fetal growth. J Endocrinol 1992;132:11–19 
5. Bradley RJ, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal acidosis and hyperlacticaemia diagnosed by cordocentesis in 
pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med 1991;8:464–8 
6. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal polycythemia and thrombocytopenia in pregnancies 
complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1287–92 
7. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal plasma erythropoietin in pregnancies complicated by 
maternal diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:88–94 
8. Robillard JE, Sessions C, Kennedy RL, Smith FG. Metabolic effect of constant hypertonic glucose infusion in 
well oxygenated fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;130:199–203 
9. Phillips AF, Dubin JW, Matty PJ, Raye JR. Arterial hypoxemia and hyperinsulinemia in the chronically 
hyperglycemic fetal lamb. Pediatr Res 1982;16:653–8 
10. Phillips AF, Porte PJ, Stabinsky S, Rosenkrantz TS, Raye JR. Effects of chronic fetal hyperglycemia upon 
oxygen consumption in the ovine uterus and conceptus. J Clin Invest 1984;74:279–86 
11. Phillips AF, Rosenkrantz TS, Porte PJ, Raye JR. The effect of chronic fetal hyperglycemia on substrate uptake 
by the ovine fetus and conceptus. Pediatr Res 1985;19:659–66 
12. HayWW, DiGiacomo JE, Meznarich HK, Zerbe G. Effects of glucose and insulin on fetal glucose oxidation and 
oxygen consumption. Am J Physiol 1989;256:E704–13 
13. Shelly HJ, Bassett JM, Milner RDG. Control of carbohydrate metabolism in the fetus and newborn. Br Med 
Bull 1975;31:37–43 
14. Fox H. Pathology of the placenta in maternal diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 1969;34:792–8 
15. Olofsson P, Lingman G, Marsal K, Sjoberg NO. Fetal blood flow in diabetic pregnancy. J Perinat Med 
1987;15:545–53 
16. Ursem NT, Clark EB, Keller BB, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal heart rate and umbilical artery velocity variability in 
pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:312– 
16 
17. Bracero L, Schulman H, Fleischer A, Farmakides G, Rochelson B. Umbilical artery velocimetry in diabetes and 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:654–8 
18. Bracero LA, Figueroa R, Byrne DW, Han HJ. Comparison of umbilical Doppler velocimetry, nonstress testing, 
and biophysical profile in pregnancies complicated by diabetes. J Ultrasound Med 1996;15:301–8 
19. Bracero LA, Evanco J, ByrneDW. Doppler velocimetry discordancy of the uterine arteries in pregnancies 
complicated by diabetes. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:387–93 
20. Landon MB, Gabbe SG, Bruner JP, Ludmir J. Doppler umbilical artery velocimetry in pregnancy complicated 
by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:961–5 
21. Dicker D, Goldman JA, Yeshaya A, Peleg D. Umbilical artery velocimetry in insulin dependent diabetes 
mellitus (IDDM) pregnancies. J Perinat Med 1990;18:391–5 
22. Reece EA, Hagay Z, Assimakopoulos E, Moroder W, Gabrielli S, DeGennaro N, Homko C, O’Connor T, 
Wiznitzer A. Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy and the assessment of umbilical artery waveforms using pulsed 
Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1994;13:73–80 

23. Ishimatsu J, Yoshimura O, Manabe A, Hotta M, Matsunaga T, Matsuzaki T, Tetsuou M, Hamada T. Umbilical 
artery blood flow velocity waveforms in pregnancy complicated by diabetes mellitus. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
1991;248:123–7 
24. Johnstone FD, Steel JM, Haddad NG, Hoskins PR, Greer IA, Chambers S. Doppler umbilical artery flow 
velocity waveforms in diabetic pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;99:135–40 
25. Zimmermann P, Kujansuu E, Tuimala R. Doppler velocimetry of the umbilical artery in pregnancies 
complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1992;47: 85–93 
26. Zimmermann P, Kujansuu E, Tuimala R. Doppler flow velocimetry of the uterine and uteroplacental 
circulation in pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Perinat Med 1994;22:137– 
47 
27. Haddad B, Uzan M, Tchobroutsky C, Uzan S, Papiernik-Berkhauer E. Predictive value of uterine Doppler 
waveform during pregnancies complicated by diabetes. Fetal Diagn Ther 1993;8:119–25 
28. BarthWHJr, Genest DR, Riley LE, Frigoletto FD Jr, Benacerraf BR, Greene MF. Uterine arcuate artery Doppler 
and decidual microvascular pathology in pregnancies complicated by type I diabetes mellitus. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:98–103 
29. Kofinas AD, Penry M, Swain M. Uteroplacental Doppler flow velocity waveform analysis correlatespoorly with 
glycemic control in diabetic pregnant women. Am J Perinatol 1991;8:273–7 
30. Salvesen DR, Higueras MT, Mansur CA, Freeman J, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Placental and fetal Doppler 
velocimetry in pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:645– 
52 
31. Salvesen DR, Higueras MT, Brudenell JM, Drury PL, Nicolaides KH. Doppler velocimetry and fetal heart rate 
studies in nephropathic diabetics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1297–303 
32. Ishimatsu J, Matsuzaki T, Yakushiji M, Hamada T. Blood flow velocity waveforms of the fetal middle cerebral 
artery in pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus. Kurume Med J 1995;42: 161–6 
33. Reece EA, Hagay Z, Moroder W, DeGennaro N, Homko C, Wiznitzer A. Is there a correlation between aortic 
Doppler velocimetric findings in diabetic pregnant women and fetal outcome? J Ultrasound Med 
1996;15:437–40 
34. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Cardiac function in fetuses of type I diabetic mothers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1991;164:837–43 
35. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Accelerated cardiac growth and abnormal cardiac flow in fetuses of type I 
diabetic mothers. Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:369–76 
36. Thorsson AV, Hintz RL. Insulin receptors in the newborn: Increase in receptor affinity and number. N Engl J 
Med 1977:297;908–12 
37. Rizzo G, Pietropolli A, Capponi A, Cacciatore C, Arduini D, Romanini C. Analysis of factors influencing 
ventricular filling patterns in fetuses of type I diabetic mothers. J Perinat Med 1994;22:149–57 
38. Weber HS, Botti JJ, Baylen BG. Sequential longitudinal evaluation of cardiac growth and ventricular diastolic 
filling in fetuses of well controlled diabetic mothers. Pediatr Cardiol 1994;15:184–9 
39. Tsyvian P, Malkin K, Artemieva O, Wladimiroff JW. Assessment of left ventricular filling in normally grown 
fetuses, growth-restricted fetuses and fetuses of diabetic mothers. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:33–8 
40. Weiner Z, Zloczower M, Lerner A, Zimmer E, Itskovitz-Eldor J. Cardiac compliance in fetuses of diabetic 
women. Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:948–51 
41. Macklon NS, Hop WC, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal cardiac function and septal thickness in diabetic pregnancy: a 
controlled observational and reproducibility study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105: 661–6 
42. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Capponi A, Romanini C. Cardiac and venous blood flow in fetuses of insulin-dependent 
diabetic mothers: evidence of abnormal hemodynamics in early gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1995;173:1775–81 
43. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Angelini E, Mazzoleni A. Romanini C. Inferior cava velocity waveformpredict neonatal 
complications in fetuses of insulin dependent diabetic mothers. In press 

.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
44. Mace S, Hirschfeld SS, Riggs T, Faranoff AA, Mecketz IR. Echocardiographic abnormalities in infants of 
diabetic mothers. J Pediatr 1979;95:1013–19 

Chapter 8 
Doppler studies in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
Preterm delivery occurs in less than 10% of pregnancies but accounts for more than 70% of all neonatal deaths. 
Approximately one-third of preterm deliveries are associated with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and, in a high 
proportion of such cases, the underlying cause may be ascending infection from the lower genital tract. Thus, positive 
amniotic fluid cultures, with organisms commonly found in the vagina, are present in about one-third of cases with 
preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and in one-third of these there is fetal bacteremia. 
In a study of 69 pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, the diagnosis of intrauterine infection was based on 
the results of culture of amniotic fluid and fetal blood obtained by amniocentesis and cordocentesis, respectively 1. In 
patients with fetal bacteremia, there was spontaneous delivery within 5 days of amniorrhexis, whereas, in those with 
negative fetal blood and amniotic fluid cultures, the interval between amniorrhexis and delivery was prolonged by up 
to 5 months and subsequent cultures of blood obtained from the umbilical cord at delivery or from the neonates were 
negative 1. These findings suggest that, first, infection is one of the causes rather than the consequence of 
amniorrhexis, and, second, in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, infection may be the cause of subsequent preterm labor 
and delivery. The likely mechanism for the link between infection and labor is infection-mediated release of cytokines 
which stimulate the production of prostaglandins that induce uterine contractions 2,3. 
In pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, there are essentially two causes of perinatal death: 
prematurity and pulmonary hypoplasia. In cases with intrauterine infection, delivery occurs within a few days and 
therefore survival depends on the gestation at amniorrhexis 1. Postnatal survival increases from less than 10% before 
24 weeks to more than 90% by 30 weeks. In those patients with no infection, pregnancy may be prolonged by 
several weeks and, in these cases, there is a risk of postnatal death due to pulmonary hypoplasia 4. The risk of death 
is inversely related to the gestation at amniorrhexis and decreases from approximately 50% for those with 
amniorrhexis before 20 weeks, to 20% for those with amniorrhexis at 20–24 weeks and to less than 5% for 
amniorrhexis after 24 weeks. Consequently, in the management of pregnancies complicated by amniorrhexis, the 
major issue is prediction of intrauterine infection and pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Fetal blood gases 
Cordocentesis in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis has demonstrated that the mean umbilical venous 
blood pO2 and pH are not significantly different from the appropriate normal mean for gestation, and there are no 
significant differences between those with positive or negative fetal blood and amniotic fluid cultures 5. These findings 
suggest that, in the presence of intrauterine infection, fetal oxygenation is not impaired. 
DOPPLER STUDIES 
Prediction of intrauterine infection 
The rationale for the use of Doppler in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis is that infection of the 
amniotic fluid and choriodecidua causes constriction of the umbilical cord and chorionic vessels and may consequently 
impair fetal perfusion 6-12. 
Doppler studies of the umbilical arterial circulation in pregnancies with chorioamnionitis have provided conflicting 
results, with some reporting an increase and others no change in impedance to flow. Thus, in two cross-sectional 
studies, involving a total of 35 patients with clinical chorioamnionitis, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries was 
always normal 13,14. In a longitudinal study of 22 patients with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and umbilical 
vasculitis, although there was an increase of impedance in the umbilical arteries 24 hours before delivery compared to 
previous measurements, impedance had remained within the normal range15. In another longitudinal study of uterine 

and umbilical arteries in 60 patients with amniorrhexis, including 12 who developed clinical chorioamnionitis, there 
was no significant increase in impedance, even in measurements taken within 24 hours before delivery 16. 
Carroll et al. performed Doppler studies immediately before cordocentesis and amniocentesis for bacteriological 
studies in 69 pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 5. The mean pulsatility indices in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and in the fetal middle cerebral arteries and thoracic aorta were not significantly different from the 
appropriate normal mean for gestation and there were no significant differences in these values between those with 
and without intrauterine infection 5. 
These findings suggest that chorioamnionitis is not associated with a major degree of vasoconstriction in the 
uteroplacental or fetoplacental circulation. Consequently, Doppler does not provide a clinically useful distinction 
between infected and noninfected cases. However, Doppler studies in pregnancies with suspected amniorrhexis may 
be useful in the differential diagnosis from oligohydramnios due to uteroplacental insufficiency and intrauterine growth 
restriction. In the latter, there is an increase in impedance to flow in the uterine and/or umbilical arteries with 
decreased pulsatility index in the fetal cerebral vessels and increased pulsatility index (PI) in the descending thoracic 
aorta (see Chapter 4 ). 
Prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia 
Amniorrhexis before 25 weeks of gestation is associated with the development of pulmonary hypoplasia and 
hypertension. Suggested mechanisms for the development of pulmonary hypoplasia include: 
(1) Extrinsic compression of the fetal lungs, which interferes with normal development; 
(2) Excessive loss of lung fluid, either due to extrinsic compression of the fetal thorax or decrease in intra-amniotic 
pressure and increase in the alveolar–amniotic pressure gradient 17; and 
(3) Cessation of fetal breathing movements, because, in animal studies, transection of the cervical spinal cord and 
consequent interruption of breathing movements result in pulmonary hypoplasia 18. 
Attempts at antenatal prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis have 
focused on ultrasonographic assessment of lung size, amniotic fluid volume and fetal breathing movements 19. 
Studies examining fetal thoracic circumference and lung size have reported favorable results in the prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia 20,21, whereas studies that attempted to quantify the degree of oligohydramnios or fetal 
breathing movements have generally reported poor prediction 19–23. 
Prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia has also been attempted by antenatal Doppler studies 24. Blood flow in the ductus 
arteriosus, as assessed by Doppler ultrasound, is altered by breathing movements. In a study of 12 cases of preterm 
prelabor amniorrhexis and severe oligohydramnios, the alteration in ductal blood flow by breathing movements was 
normal in seven cases with normal lungs, and reduced in all five cases with pulmonary hypoplasia 25. Doppler studies 
in fetuses with pulmonary hypoplasia, due to multicystic kidneys or obstructive uropathy, reported increased 
impedance to flow in the branches of the pulmonary artery, consistent with high peripheral pulmonary vascular 
resistance 26–29. 
Rizzo et al. meaured the PI in the peripheral pulmonary arteries in 20 pregnancies complicated by amniorrhexis 
before 24 weeks of gestation 30. In fetuses that subsequently developed pulmonary hypoplasia, the PI was increased 
from as early as 2 weeks after amniorrhexis (Figure 1). The PI in the peripheral pulmonary arteries was above the 
95th centile of the normal range in 62.5% of those that developed pulmonary hypoplasia 30. 
.... 

Figure 1: Flow velocity waveforms (left) from the fetal peripheral pulmonary artery at 28 weeks in a noncomplicated 
pregnancy. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis is associated with a high risk of preterm delivery, due to intrauterine 
infection, as well as neonatal death, due to pulmonary hypoplasia. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, intrauterine infection is not associated with altered fetal 
oxygenation or a major degree of vasoconstriction in the uteroplacental or fetoplacental circulation. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, Doppler assessment does not provide a clinically useful 
distinction between infected and non-infected cases. The pulsatility indices in the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and in the fetal middle cerebral arteries and thoracic aorta are not significantly different from 
normal and there are no significant differences between these values in those with and without intrauterine 
infection. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, Doppler assessment may be useful in the prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia. Thus, in fetuses that subsequently develop pulmonary hypoplasia, impedance in the 
peripheralpulmonary arteries is increased from as early as 2 weeks after amniorrhexis. 

REFERENCES 
1. Carroll SG, Ville Y, Greenough A, Gamsu H, Patel B, Philpott-Howard J, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabour 
amniorrhexis: intrauterine infection and interval between membrane rupture and delivery. Arch Dis Child 
1995;72:F43–6 
2. Gomez R, Romero R, Mazor M, Ghezzi F, David C, Yoon BH. The role of infection in preterm labour and 
delivery. In Elder MG, Lamont RF, Romero R, eds. Preterm Labour. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1997:85 
3. Carroll SG, Abbas A, Ville Y, Meher-Homjii H, Nicolaides KH. Concentration of fetal plasma and amniotic fluid 
interleukin-1 in pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. J Clin Pathol 1995;48:368–71 
4. Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of livebirths. Obstet Gynecol 
1995;86:18–25 
5. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the placental and fetal circulation in 
pregnancies with preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:184–8 
6. Howard RB, Hosokawa T, Maguire MH. Pressor and depressor actions of prostanoids in the intact human 
feto-placental vascular bed. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes Med 1986;21:323–30 
7. Mak KK-W, Gude NM,WaltersWAW, Boura ALA. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on the human umbilical-fetal 
placental vasculature. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1984;91:99–106 
8. Altura BM, Malaviya AD, Reich CF, Orkin LR. Effects of vasoactive agents on isolated human umbilical 
arteries and veins. Am J Physiol 1972;222:345–55 
9. Hyde S, Smotherman J, Moore J, Altshulter G. A model of bacterially induced umbilical vein spasm, relevant 
to fetal hypoperfusion. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:966–70 
10. Hellerqvist CG, Rojas J, Green RS, Sell S, Sundell H, Stahlman MT. Studies of group B, beta-hemolytic 
streptococcus. Isolation and partial characterization of an extracellular toxin. Pediatr Res 1981;15:892–8 
11. Sandberg K, Englehardt B, Hellerqvist C, Sundell H. Pulmonary response to group B streptococcal toxin in 
young lambs. J Appl Physiol 1987;63:2024–30 
12. Bjoro K, Stray-Pedersen. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on different segments of human umbilicoplacental 
vessels. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1986;22:1–6 
13. Brar HS, Medearis AL, Platt LD. Relationship of systolic/diastolic ratios from umbilical velocimetry to fetal 
heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:188–91 
14. Leo MV, Skurnick JH, Ganesh VV, Adhate A, Apuzzio JJ. Clinical chorioamnionitis is not predicted by umbilical 
artery doppler velocimetry in patients with premature rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:916– 
8 
15. Fleming AD, Salafia CM, Vintzileos AM, Rodis JF, Campbell WA, Bantham F. The relationships among 
umbilical artery velocimetry, fetal biophysical profile, and placental inflammation in preterm premature 
rupture of the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:38–41 
16. Abramowicz JS, Sherer DM,Warsof SL, Levv DL. Fetoplacental and uteroplacental Doppler blood flow velocity 
analysis in premature rupture of membranes. Am J Perinatol 1992;9:353–6 
17. Nicolini U, Fisk NM, Rodeck CH, Talbert DG, Wigglesworth JS. Low amniotic pressure in oligohydramnios – is 
this the cause of pulmonary hypoplasia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 1098–101 
18. Wigglesworth JS, Desai R. Effects on lung growth of cervical cord section in the rabbit fetus. Early Hum Dev 
1979;3:51–65 
19. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal activity and amniotic fluid volume in the 
prediction of intrauterine infection in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1427 .. – 
35 
20. Blott M, Greenough A, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. The ultrasonographic assessment of the fetal thorax and 
fetal breathing movements in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. Early Hum Dev 1990;21:143–51 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Roberts AB, Mitchell JM. Direct ultrasonographic measurement of fetal lung length in normal pregnancies 
and pregnancies complicated by prolonged rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1560–6 
22. Rotschild A, Ling EW, Puterman ML, Farquharson D. Neonatal outcome after prolonged preterm rupture of 
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:46–52 
23. Moessinger AC, Higgins A, Fox HE, Rey HR. Fetal breathing movements are not a reliable predictor of 
continued lung development in pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. Lancet 1987;ii:1297–9 
24. Wladimiroff JW. Predicting pulmonary hypoplasia: assessment of lung volume or lung function or both? 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:164–6 
25. Van Eyck J, van der Mooren K, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus arteriosus flow velocity modulation by fetal breathing 
movements as a measure of fetal lung development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163: 558–66 
26. Laudy JA, Gaillard JL, v d Anker JN, Tibboel D, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler ultrasound imaging: a new technique 
to detect lung hypoplasia before birth? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:189–92 
27. Mitchell JM, Roberts AB, Lee A. Doppler waveforms from the pulmonary arterial system in normal fetuses 
and those with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:167–72 
28. Oshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
29. Chaoui R, Kalache K., Tennestedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler velocimetry in fetuses with 
lung hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;84:179–185 
30. Rizzo G, Capponi A., Angelini E, Mazzoleni A, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from fetal 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in pregnancies with preterm premature rupture of membranes: relationship 
with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;in press 

Chapter 9 
Doppler studies in maternal autoimmune disease 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 
Systemic lupus erythematosus, which affects about one in 1000 adults, is an idiopathic multisystem chronic 
inflammatory disease, characterized by the presence of circulating autoantibodies directed against nuclear antigens. 
In pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus, the rate of fetal loss in the first trimester is similar to that in 
normal women (about 15%), but, in the second and third trimesters, the fetal loss rate is about 10%1,2. The 
mechanism for this increase in fetal loss is unclear but may be related to placental dysfunction. The most sensitive 
predictor of fetal death is the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies 3–5. 
About 25% of pregnancies in women with systemic lupus erythematosus are complicated by pre-eclampsia 3. The 
reason for this increased frequency of pre-eclampsia may be related to the underlying renal disease 6. Fetal growth 
restriction is found in about 20% of pregnancies 1. Distinguishing between an exacerbation of systemic lupus 
erythematosus involving active nephritis and pre-eclampsia is difficult, since they may both present with proteinuria, 
hypertension and evidence of multi-organ dysfunction. In the typical problem case, the patient develops hypertension 
and increasing proteinuria in the latter half of pregnancy. Elevated levels of anti-dsDNA and an active urinary 
sediment strongly suggest lupus. In severe and confusing cases, renal biopsy may be necessary to make the correct 
diagnosis. 
Neonatal lupus erythematosus, with a birth prevalence of about one in 20 000, is characterized by dermatological, 
cardiac or hematological abnormalities. The condition is due to maternal autoantibodies, particularly anti-Ro/SS-A and 
anti-SS-B/La, that cross the placenta 7. About half of the mothers who deliver an infant with neonatal lupus 
erythematosus have systemic lupus erythematosus or another autoimmune disease. The risk of a mother with anti-
SS-A/Ro and/or anti-SS-B/La having a fetus or neonate with neonatal lupus erythematosus is fairly low and among all 
mothers with systemic lupus erythematosus, the risk of neonatal lupus erythematosus is less than 5% 8. The cardiac 
lesions associated with the condition are congenital complete heart block and endocardial fibroelastosis. The usual 
presentation is a fixed fetal bradycardia of 60–80 beats per min presenting at 15–25 weeks of gestation; in some 
cases there is associated hydrops fetalis. The histological lesion is one of fibrosis and interruption of the conduction 
system, especially in the area of the atrioventricular node. Because the lesion is permanent, a pacemaker may be 
necessary for neonatal survival. After prenatal diagnosis of fetal heart block, administration of a glucocorticoid to the 
mother is associated with improvement in fetal cardiac function and limitation of further immunological damage to the 
fetal heart 9,10. 
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME 
Antiphospholipid syndrome is an autoimmune condition characterized by the production of moderate to high levels of 
antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant or anticardiolipin antibody) and at least one clinical feature (venous 
or arterial thrombosis, autoimmune thrombocytopenia and/or pregnancy loss). The risk of thrombosis in pregnancy in 
women with antiphospholipid syndrome is sufficiently substantial to warrant prophylactic treatment with heparin. 
Antiphospholipid syndrome is associated with early pregnancy loss; antiphospholipid antibodies are found in about 
10% of women with recurrent first-trimester pregnancy loss (compared to about 2.5% in controls) 11–15. About 50% 
of women with antiphospholipid syndrome develop pre-eclampsia, which may start from as early as 15 weeks, or 
worsening hypertension 16,17 and about 10% of women with severe earlyonset (before 34 weeks) pre-eclampsia have 
antiphospholipid antibodies. The rate of pre-eclampsia does not appear to be markedly diminished by treatment with 
either glucocorticoids with low-dose aspirin or heparin with low-dose aspirin. The syndrome is also associated with 
fetal growth impairment, which is found in about 30% of treated pregnancies 16,17. In women with antiphospholipid 
syndrome, treatment with thromboprophylactic doses of heparin and low-dose aspirin improves the chances of a 
successful pregnancy outcome 18-21 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
In pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus erythematosus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical 
arteries is associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. Thus, Kerslake et al. 
carried out serial Doppler studies in 56 pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus erythematosus 22. They 
reported that the absence of end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery was a good predictor of the need for 
subsequent delivery by Cesarean section, whereas the presence of end-diastolic frequencies was associated with 
normotensive pregnancy 22. Similarly, Farine et al. examined 56 pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus 
erythematosus and reported that absent or reversed enddiastolic frequencies, which were detected in 11% of the 
patients, were associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction 23. 
In systemic lupus erythematosus, it is uncertain if impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is increased. Thus,Weiner 
et al. carried out serial Doppler studies of the uterine and umbilical arteries in five patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus from week 10 to term 24. Impedance to flow in the uterine artery was within the normal range in all 
cases, whereas most values from the umbilical artery were above the 95th centile of the normal range. All five 
pregnancies resulted in healthy live births but one infant was growth-restricted; the highest impedance in the 
umbilical artery was observed in the case of growth restriction. Guzman et al. examined 27 pregnancies in women 
with systemic lupus erythematosus 25. In 18 pregnancies, there was normal impedance in both the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and they all had normal outcomes. In five pregnancies, there was normal impedance in the uterine 
arteries but increased impedance in the umbilical artery and, in this group, there were two cases of intrauterine 
growth restriction. In four pregnancies, there was increased impedance in both vessels; in all four, there was 
intrauterine growth restriction and three resulted in intrauterine or neonatal death. 
In antiphospholipid syndrome there is thrombosis of the uteroplacental vasculature and placental infarction. There is 
some evidence that, in pregnancies with antiphospholipid syndrome, increased impedance in the uterine arteries 
identifies those cases that subsequently develop pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. Thus, Caruso et al. 
examined 28 pregnancies in women with antiphospholipid syndrome and reported that increased impedance in the 
uterine arteries at 18–24 weeks of gestation provided useful prediction of both pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth 
restriction 26. In this respect, the findings of Doppler studies in predicting the outcome of pregnancies with the 
antiphospholipid syndrome may be similar to those with placental insufficiency due to impaired trophoblastic invasion 
of the maternal spiral arteries. However, Trudinger et al. suggested that, in the antiphospholipid syndrome, infarction 
of the placental vessels may be an acute phenomenon causing rapid deterioration in the fetal condition without 
impairment in growth, which would necessitate chronic placental insufficiency 27. They examined six pregnancies in 
women with antiphospholipid syndrome and reported increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in four of 
the cases, despite the absence of pre-eclampsia or intrauterine growth restriction. Further evidence emphasizing the 
difference in the implications of antiphospholipid syndrome from impaired trophoblastic invasion was provided by the 
studies of Carroll 28. He examined 28 pregnancies complicated by antiphospholipid syndrome and reported that, in 
five of the six cases associated with intrauterine growth restriction, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries was 
increased, whereas only two of these patients demonstrated abnormally elevated impedance in the uterine arteries. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Systemic lupus erythematosus is associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth 
restriction and perinatal death. 
.. In systemic lupus erythematosus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries is associated with 
increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In systemic lupus erythematosus, it is uncertain if impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is increased. 
.. Antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by thrombosis of the uteroplacental vasculature and placental 
infarction, and is associated with early pregnancy loss, pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In antiphospholipid syndrome, the development of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction is 
preceded by increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and possibly the uterine arteries. 

REFERENCES 
1. Carroll SG, Ville Y, Greenough A, Gamsu H, Patel B, Philpott-Howard J, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabour 
amniorrhexis: intrauterine infection and interval between membrane rupture and delivery. Arch Dis Child 
1995;72:F43–6 
2. Gomez R, Romero R, Mazor M, Ghezzi F, David C, Yoon BH. The role of infection in preterm labour and 
delivery. In Elder MG, Lamont RF, Romero R, eds. Preterm Labour. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1997:85 
3. Carroll SG, Abbas A, Ville Y, Meher-Homjii H, Nicolaides KH. Concentration of fetal plasma and amniotic fluid 
interleukin-1 in pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. J Clin Pathol 1995;48:368–71 
4. Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of livebirths. Obstet Gynecol 
1995;86:18–25 
5. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the placental and fetal circulation in 
pregnancies with preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:184–8 
6. Howard RB, Hosokawa T, Maguire MH. Pressor and depressor actions of prostanoids in the intact human 
feto-placental vascular bed. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes Med 1986;21:323–30 
7. Mak KK-W, Gude NM,WaltersWAW, Boura ALA. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on the human umbilical-fetal 
placental vasculature. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1984;91:99–106 
8. Altura BM, Malaviya AD, Reich CF, Orkin LR. Effects of vasoactive agents on isolated human umbilical 
arteries and veins. Am J Physiol 1972;222:345–55 
9. Hyde S, Smotherman J, Moore J, Altshulter G. A model of bacterially induced umbilical vein spasm, relevant 
to fetal hypoperfusion. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:966–70 
10. Hellerqvist CG, Rojas J, Green RS, Sell S, Sundell H, Stahlman MT. Studies of group B, beta-hemolytic 
streptococcus. Isolation and partial characterization of an extracellular toxin. Pediatr Res 1981;15:892–8 
11. Sandberg K, Englehardt B, Hellerqvist C, Sundell H. Pulmonary response to group B streptococcal toxin in 
young lambs. J Appl Physiol 1987;63:2024–30 
12. Bjoro K, Stray-Pedersen. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on different segments of human umbilicoplacental 
vessels. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1986;22:1–6 
13. Brar HS, Medearis AL, Platt LD. Relationship of systolic/diastolic ratios from umbilical velocimetry to fetal 
heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:188–91 
14. Leo MV, Skurnick JH, Ganesh VV, Adhate A, Apuzzio JJ. Clinical chorioamnionitis is not predicted by umbilical 
artery doppler velocimetry in patients with premature rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:916– 
8 
15. Fleming AD, Salafia CM, Vintzileos AM, Rodis JF, Campbell WA, Bantham F. The relationships among 
umbilical artery velocimetry, fetal biophysical profile, and placental inflammation in preterm premature 
rupture of the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:38–41 
16. Abramowicz JS, Sherer DM,Warsof SL, Levv DL. Fetoplacental and uteroplacental Doppler blood flow velocity 
analysis in premature rupture of membranes. Am J Perinatol 1992;9:353–6 
17. Nicolini U, Fisk NM, Rodeck CH, Talbert DG, Wigglesworth JS. Low amniotic pressure in oligohydramnios – is 
this the cause of pulmonary hypoplasia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 1098–101 
18. Wigglesworth JS, Desai R. Effects on lung growth of cervical cord section in the rabbit fetus. Early Hum Dev 
1979;3:51–65 
19. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal activity and amniotic fluid volume in the 
prediction of intrauterine infection in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1427 .. – 
35 
20. Blott M, Greenough A, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. The ultrasonographic assessment of the fetal thorax and 
fetal breathing movements in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. Early Hum Dev 1990;21:143–51 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Roberts AB, Mitchell JM. Direct ultrasonographic measurement of fetal lung length in normal pregnancies 
and pregnancies complicated by prolonged rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1560–6 
22. Rotschild A, Ling EW, Puterman ML, Farquharson D. Neonatal outcome after prolonged preterm rupture of 
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:46–52 
23. Moessinger AC, Higgins A, Fox HE, Rey HR. Fetal breathing movements are not a reliable predictor of 
continued lung development in pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. Lancet 1987;ii:1297–9 
24. Wladimiroff JW. Predicting pulmonary hypoplasia: assessment of lung volume or lung function or both? 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:164–6 
25. Van Eyck J, van der Mooren K, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus arteriosus flow velocity modulation by fetal breathing 
movements as a measure of fetal lung development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163: 558–66 
26. Laudy JA, Gaillard JL, v d Anker JN, Tibboel D, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler ultrasound imaging: a new technique 
to detect lung hypoplasia before birth? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:189–92 
27. Mitchell JM, Roberts AB, Lee A. Doppler waveforms from the pulmonary arterial system in normal fetuses 
and those with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:167–72 
28. Oshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
29. Chaoui R, Kalache K., Tennestedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler velocimetry in fetuses with 
lung hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;84:179–185 
30. Rizzo G, Capponi A., Angelini E, Mazzoleni A, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from fetal 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in pregnancies with preterm premature rupture of membranes: relationship 
with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;in press 

Chapter 10 
Doppler studies in post-term pregnancies 
POST-TERM PREGNANCY 
The prevalence of post-term pregnancy (those exceeding 294 days or 42 weeks of gestation) is about 10% when 
dating is based on the first day of the last menstrual period, but this is only about 5% when dating is by an early 
ultrasound scan. In about 30% of post-term pregnancies, the fetuses develop a postmaturity syndrome, characterized 
by growth restriction, dehydration, severe desquamation of the epidermis, bile-stained nails and amnion, advanced 
hardness of the skull, absence of the vernix caseosa and lanugo hair. 
Figure 1: Intrauterine death (black), neonatal death and post-neonatal death (white) per 1000 ongoing 
pregnancies at each gestation. Adapted by permission from Hilder et al.1 
Post-term pregnancy is associated with increased risk of both intrauterine and postnatal death. Hilder et al. examined 
171 527 births in the North East Thames Region in London and reported that the rate of stillbirth increased six-fold 
from 0.35 per 1000 ongoing pregnancies at 37 weeks of gestation to 2.12 per 1000 pregnancies at 43 weeks (Figure 
1). When neonatal and post-neonatal mortality rates are included, the overall risk of death increased from 0.7 per 
1000 ongoing pregnancies at 37 weeks to 5.8 per 1000 pregnancies at 43 weeks 1. 
There are no morphological features that could indicate an aging process of the term or post-term placenta, either by 
light or by electron microscopy; furthermore, placental DNA increases linearly with gestation beyond the 40th week of 
pregnancy 2. In contrast, the amniotic fluid volume decreases from about 37 weeks, and, during the post-dates 
period, it is estimated that there is a decrease in amniotic fluid volume of about 33% per week 3,4. This decrease in 
amniotic fluid volume, combined with the increased incidence of meconium staining of the amniotic fluid in post-term 
pregnancies, results in an increased risk of meconium aspiration syndrome. The risk of perinatal death is mainly in 
the small, postmature, growth-restricted fetus, and the main aim of antenatal monitoring is to identify the onset of 
uteroplacental insufficiency and the development of fetal hypoxia. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Post-term pregnancies are associated with the development of oligohydramnios and non-reactive fetal heart rate 
patterns. One possible explanation for the oligohydramnios is decreased fetal renal perfusion due to impaired fetal 
cardiac function. 
The alternative hypothesis for the reduction in renal perfusion and urinary output is redistribution in the fetal 
circulation, as in intrauterine growth restriction. Supportive evidence for impaired fetal renal perfusion as a cause of 
oligohydramnios in post-term pregnancies was provided by the study of Veille et al. who examined 50 pregnancies at 
or after 40 weeks of gestation. In the 17 with oligohydramnios (amniotic fluid index of less than 5 cm) impedance to 
flow in the fetal renal artery was significantly higher than in the 33 pregnancies with normal amniotic fluid 5. 
Several studies have examined the potential value of Doppler assessment in the prediction of adverse outcome 
(usually defined as fetal distress in labor) in post-term pregnancies and provided conflicting results (Table 1). All four 
studies examining uterine arteries reported no significant changes in pregnancies with adverse outcome. Impedance 
to flow in the umbilical arteries of pregnancies with adverse outcomes was normal in five studies, increased in three 
studies and decreased in one study. Impedance in the fetal cerebral circulation was reported as being decreased in 
three studies andnormal in two studies. 
Table 1: Studies examining the relation of impedance to flow in the uterine and/or umbilical arteries and fetal 
cerebral arteries in the prediction of adverse outcome in post-term pregnancies 
Author n Impedance to flow Adverse outcome 
Rightmire & Campbell, 198716 35 umbilical artery increased 
Brar et al., 198919 45 internal cerebral artery decreased 
Fischer et al., 199114 75 umbilical artery increased 
Anteby et al., 199417 78 umbilical artery increased 
Olofsson et al., 199712 44 umbilical artery decreased 
Anteby et al., 199417 78 middle cerebral artery decreased 
Devine et al., 199418 49 middle cerebral : umbilical artery decreased 
Rightmire & Campbell, 198716 35 uterine artery normal 
Farmakides et al., 198820 149 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Brar et al., 198919 45 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Stokes et al., 199121 70 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Bar-Hava et al., 199523 57 umbilical and middle cerebral arteries normal 
Zimmermann et al., 199522 153 umbilical, uterine & middle cerebral arteries normal 
Impaired fetal cardiac function 
There is evidence that the oligohydramnios and abnormal fetal heart rate pattern in post-term fetuses are caused by 
impaired fetal cardiac function. Thus, Weiner et al. examined 120 post-term pregnancies and reported that the 
pregnancies with oligohydramnios had a significantly lower peak velocity and velocity–time integral in the fetal aortic 
outflow tract and mitral valve. Post-term fetuses with reduced fetal heart rate variation had a significantly lower peak 
velocity and velocity–time integral in the aortic and pulmonic outflow tracts and mitral valve 6. In a further study, 
Weiner et al. examined 45 pregnancies at 41–43 weeks of gestation. In eight fetuses that subsequently developed an 
abnormal fetal heart rate pattern in labor, there was a decrease in peak velocity and velocity–time integral in the fetal 
aortic and pulmonic outflow tracts 7. It was suggested that, in prolonged pregnancies, cardiac function deteriorates in 
fetuses that subsequently develop an abnormal fetal heart rate pattern. Similarly, Horenstein et al. examined post-
term pregnancies and reported an inverse relationship between fetal ventricular function and amniotic fluid volume 8. 
Placental insufficiency and redistribution in the fetal circulation 
Battaglia et al. compared 16 pregnancies at 40 weeks with 16 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks. In the post-term 
pregnancies, the time-averaged maximum velocity of the fetal descending thoracic aorta and the ratio of the 

impedance in the middle cerebral artery to that in the umbilical artery were decreased 9. Furthermore, post-term 
pregnancies were associated with an increased incidence of oligohydramnios, increased plasma viscosity and 
coagulation parameters (decreased fibrinogen, antithrombin III and platelet number). It was concluded that post-
term pregnancy may mimic a mild ‘fetal growth restriction’ 9. 
Hitschold et al. examined 253 post-term pregnancies for the relation between impedance to flow in the umbilical 
artery and histological findings in the placenta 10. Disseminated retarded maturation of the villi was associated with 
high impedance in the umbilical artery and, in this group, there was a high rate of Cesarean section for fetal distress, 
low birth weight and high neonatal morbidity. Disseminated retarded maturation of the placenta was found in 66% of 
the cases with pathological umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms, whereas it occurred only in 6% of the cases with 
normal flow 10. 
Olofsson et al. examined 34 pregnancies that delivered after 43 weeks of gestation and reported that, at this 
gestation, compared to 40 weeks, the mean flow velocity and volume flow in the fetal aorta were lower, the flow 
velocity in the umbilical vein was higher, impedance to flow in the umbilical artery was lower and impedance to flow 
in the uterine artery was not different 11. It was suggested that these findings are compatible with physiological 
circulatory alterations enhancing continued fetal growth until the late post-term period. There were no signs of any 
general circulatory deterioration. In a subsequent study, these authors examined 44 pregnancies at 42–43 weeks of 
gestation. In cases that developed fetal distress in labor, the umbilical artery pulsatility index (PI) was significantly 
decreased and the fetal aortic volume flow significantly increased; uterine flow was not significantly different. It was 
suggested that, in post-term pregnancies, subclinical fetal hypoxia may trigger vasodilation of placental vessels (with 
consequent decrease in umbilical artery PI) and indicates an increase of cardiac output with consequent increased 
aortic volume flow 12. 
Another similarity between the growth-restricted and the post-term fetus was highlighted by the study of Arduini et 
al. who examined the changes in fetal blood flow velocity waveforms during maternal hyperoxygenation 13. They 
administered 60% humidified oxygen in 45 post-term pregnancies. During oxygen treatment, nine fetuses exhibited a 
temporary 20% increase in the impedance to flow in the internal carotid artery and, in this group, there was a higher 
incidence of emergency Cesarean delivery due to fetal distress and more neonatal complications than in the other 36 
fetuses that did not respond to maternal hyperoxygenation. It was concluded that an increase of at least 20% in the 
PI of the fetal internal carotid artery during maternal hyperoxygenation may be a useful marker of adverse outcome 
in post-term fetuses. 
Some studies reported that the pregnancies which subsequently developed fetal distress in labor were associated with 
antepartum evidence of increased impedance in the umbilical artery, decreased impedance in the fetal middle 
cerebral artery, and decreased blood flow velocity in the fetal aorta. Fischer et al. examined 75 pregnancies at more 
than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the umbilical artery was significantly higher in 
those with subsequent abnormal perinatal outcomes than in those with normal outcomes 14. Similarly, Hitschold et al. 
examined 130 pregnancies at 40–42 weeks of gestation and reported that, in the group with increased impedance in 
the umbilical artery, the rate of Cesarean section for fetal distress was 53%, compared to 3% in those with normal 
impedance 15. Rightmire and Campbell examined 35 pregnancies at more than 42 weeks of gestation and reported 
that impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries did not change with gestation, but impedance in the 
umbilical artery was higher in fetuses with a worse clinical outcome 16. Blood flow velocity in the fetal descending 
aorta decreased with gestation and velocity was lower in fetuses who passed meconium before delivery. It was 
suggested that fetal compromise in prolonged pregnancy is more a fetal–placental problem than a uteroplacental 
problem 16. Similarly, Anteby et al. examined 78 women at more than 41 weeks of gestation, who had normal non-
stress test and amniotic fluid volume 17. Pregnancies that subsequently developed signs of fetal distress during labor 
had increased impedance in the umbilical artery, decreased impedance in the fetal middle cerebral artery, and 
decreased time averaged velocity in the fetal aorta. It was concluded that, in uncomplicated post-term pregnancies, 
those with abnormal Doppler results are prone to need intervention following fetal distress in labor 17. 
Further evidence for centralization of the fetal circulation was provided by the study of Devine et al., who examined 
49 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that decreased fetal middle cerebral artery to 
umbilical artery impedance to flow ratio is an accurate method of predicting post-date-related adverse outcome (the 
occurrence of meconium aspiration syndrome, Cesarean delivery for fetal distress, or fetal acidosis)18. A middle 
cerebral artery to umbilical artery ratio of less than 1.05 predicted an adverse outcome, with a sensitivity of 80%, 
specificity of 95% and positive predictive value of 80%. In contrast, the sensitivities of oligohydramnios (amniotic 
fluid index of less than 5 cm), non-reactive fetal heart rate pattern, and a biophysical profile score equal to or less 
than 6, had sensitivities equal to or less than 40%18. Similarly, Brar et al. examined 45 pregnancies at more than 41 
weeks of gestation and reported that the incidence of fetal distress in labor was higher in patients with antepartum 
oligohydramnios (amniotic fluid index less than 5 cm) or non-reactive fetal heart rate pattern. In this group, 

compared to those with normal amniotic fluid and reactive fetal heart rate pattern, there was no significant difference 
in impedance to flow in the umbilical and uterine arteries, but impedance in the fetal internal cerebral artery was 
significantly lower 19. 
Normal placental and fetal Doppler 
Some studies suggested that the pathophysiology of placental insufficiency in post-term pregnancies differs from that 
observed in cases of fetal growth restriction at earlier gestational ages, because, in post-term pregnancies, both 
placental and fetal Doppler indices are normal. Thus, Farmakides et al. examined 149 pregnancies at more than 41 
weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries was not altered, even in 
the presence of other signs suggestive of fetal compromise20. Similarly, Stokes et al. examined 70 pregnancies at 
more than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the umbilical and uteroplacental arteries was 
not significantly different in pregnancies associated with fetal compromise and abnormal neonatal outcome from those 
with normal outcome 21. 
Zimmermann et al. examined 153 pregnancies at 41–43 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in 
the umbilical artery, uteroplacental arteries and fetal middle cerebral artery did not change significantly within this 
gestational range 22. The majority of Doppler measurements in pregnancies with subsequent asphyxia or otherwise 
complicated fetal outcome were within the 95% prediction interval for patients with normal fetal outcome. This study 
also reported that, in the prediction of asphyxia, the sensitivity for oligohydramnios and antepartum cardiotocography 
was less than 20%. 
Bar-Hava et al. examined 57 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks of gestation 23. They measured impedance to flow 
in the umbilical arteries and the fetal middle cerebral and renal arteries. In 15 pregnancies, there was 
oligohydramnios and, although in this group the mean birth weight was significantly lower than in the 42 pregnancies 
with normal amniotic fluid, there were no significant differences between the groups in the Doppler indices. It was 
concluded that, in post-term pregnancies, oligohydramnios is not associated with a major redistribution in the fetal 
circulation. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Post-term pregnancy is associated with increased risk of both intrauterine and postnatal death. 
.. In post-term pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is normal. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcomes, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries may be 
increased or normal. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, impedance to flow in the fetal middle cerebral arteries may 
be decreased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, blood flow velocity in the fetal descending aorta may be 
decreased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with oligohydramnios, impedance to flow in the fetal renal arteries may be 
increased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, there is decreased blood flow velocity in fetal aortic and 
pulmonic outflow tracts and across the mitral valve. 

REFERENCES 
1. Hilder L, Costeloe K, Thilaganathan B. Prolonged pregnancy: evaluating gestation-specific risks of fetal and 
infant mortality. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:169–73 
2. Fox H. Placental pathology. In Progress in Obstetrics and Gynaecology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1983;3 
3. Phelan JP, Platt LD, Yeh SY, Broussard P, Paul RH. The role of ultrasound assessment of amniotic fluid 
volume in the management of the postdate pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:304–8 
4. Beischer NA, Brown JB, Townsend L. Studies in prolonged pregnancy. 3. Amniocentesis in prolonged 
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1969;103:496–503 
5. Veille JC, PenryM, Mueller-Heubach E. Fetal renal pulsed Doppler waveform in prolonged pregnancies. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:882–4 
6. Weiner Z, Farmakides G, Schulman H, Casale A, Itskovitz-Eldor J. Central and peripheral haemodynamic 
changes in post-term fetuses: correlation with oligohydramnios and abnormal fetal heart rate pattern. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:541–6 
7. Weiner Z, Farmakides G, Barnhard Y, Bar-Hava I, Divon MY. Doppler study of the fetal cardiac function in 
prolonged pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:200–2 
8. Horenstein J, Brar H, DeVore G. Cardiovascular evaluation of the post-termfetus. Presented at the 34 Annual 
Meeting of the Society of Gynaecologic Investigation, Atlanta, GA, 1987 
9. Battaglia C, Artini PG, Ballestri M, Bonucchi D, Galli PA, Bencini S, Genazzani AP. 
Hemodynamic, ematological and hemorrheological .. .. .. evaluation of post-term pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand 1995;74:336–40 
10. Hitschold T, Weiss E, Berle P, Muntefering H. Histologic placenta findings in prolonged pregnancy: correlation 
of placental retarded maturation, fetal outcome and Doppler sonographic findings in the umbilical artery. Z 
Geburtshilfe Perinatol 1989;193:42–6 
11. Olofsson P, Saldeen P, Marsal K. Fetal and uteroplacental circulatory changes in pregnancies proceeding 
beyond 43 weeks. Early Hum Dev 1996;46:1–13 
12. Olofsson P, Saldeen P, Marsal K. Association between a low umbilical artery pulsatility index and fetal 
distress in labor in very prolonged pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1997;73:23–9 
13. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler assessment of fetal blood flow velocity waveforms 
during acute maternal oxygen administration as predictor of fetal outcome in post-term pregnancy. Am J 
Perinatol 1990;7:258–62 
14. Fischer RL, Kuhlman KA, Depp R, Wapner RJ. Doppler evaluation of umbilical and uterinearcuate arteries in 
the postdates pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:363–8 
15. Hitschold T, Weiss E, Berle P. Doppler sonography of the umbilical artery, mode of delivery and perinatal 
morbidity in prolonged pregnancy. Z Geburtshilfe Perinatol 1988;192:197–202 
16. Rightmire DA, Campbell S. Fetal and maternal Doppler blood flow parameters in postterm pregnancies. 
Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:891–4 
17. Anteby EY, Tadmor O, Revel A, Yagel S. Post-term pregnancies with normal cardiotocographs and amniotic 
fluid columns: the role of Doppler evaluation in predicting perinatal outcome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol 1994;54:93–8 
18. Devine PA, Bracero LA, Lysikiewicz A, Evans R, Womack S, Byrne DW. Middle cerebral to umbilical artery 
Doppler ratio in post-date pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:856–60 
19. Brar HS, Horenstein J, Medearis AL, Platt LD, Phelan JP, Paul RH. Cerebral, umbilical, and uterine resistance 
using Doppler velocimetry in postterm pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 1989;8: 187–91 
20. Farmakides G, Schulman H, Ducey J, Guzman E, Saladana L, Penny B, Winter D. Uterine and umbilical artery 
Doppler velocimetry in postterm pregnancy. J Reprod Med 1988;33:259–61 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Stokes HJ, Roberts RV, Newnham JP. Doppler flow velocity waveform analysis in postdate pregnancies. Aust 
N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1991;31:27–30 
22. Zimmermann P, Alback T, Koskinen J, Vaalamo P, Tuimala R, Ranta T. Doppler flow velocimetry of the 
umbilical artery, uteroplacental arteries and fetal middle cerebral artery in prolonged pregnancy. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:189–97 
23. Bar-Hava I, DivonMY, Sardo M, Barnhard Y Is oligohydramnios in posttermpregnancy associated with 
redistribution of fetal blood flow? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:519–22 

Chapter 11 
Doppler studies in twin pregnancy 
CHORIONICITY IN TWINS 
Twins account for about 1% of all pregnancies with two-thirds being dizygotic and one-third monozygotic. All dizygotic 
pregnancies are dichorionic. In monozygotic pregnancies, splitting of the single embryonic mass into two within 3 
days of fertilization, which occurs in one-third of cases, results in dichorionic twins. When embryonic splitting occurs 
after the 3rd day following fertilization, there are vascular communications within the two placental circulations 
(monochorionic). Embryonic splitting after the 9th day following fertilization results in monoamniotic monochorionic 
twins, and splitting after the 12th day results in conjoined twins. 
Determination of chorionicity can be performed reliably by ultrasound examination at 11–14 weeks of gestation 
(Figure 1); in dichorionic twins, there is an extension of placental tissue into the base of the intertwin membrane 
(lambda sign) 1,2. 
Figure 1: Ultrasound appearance of monochorionic (left) and dichorionic (right) twin pregnancies at 12 weeks 
of gestation. In both types, there appears to be a single placental mass but, in the dichorionic type, there is 
an extension of placental tissue into the base of the intertwin membrane, forming the lambda sign. 
PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS 
In dichorionic twins, the rate of at least one fetal loss between 10 and 24 weeks is about 2.5%, whereas, in 
monochorionic twins, the rate of fetal loss is about 12% 3. This increased loss in monochorionic pregnancies is likely 
to be the consequence of severe early-onset twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
The perinatal mortality rate in twins is around six times higher than in singletons, and is about three to four times 
higher in monochorionic compared to dichorionic twins, regardless of zygosity 4,5. This increased mortality is mainly 
due to prematurity related complications. In a singleton pregnancy, the chance of delivery between 24 and 32 weeks 
is 1–2%. In monochorionic twins, the incidence is about 9% and in dichorionic twins it is about 5% 3. In 
monochorionic twins, an additional complication to prematurity is twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
In twin pregnancies, the risk of delivering growth-restricted babies is about ten times higher than in singleton 
pregnancies 6. In a study of 467 twin pregnancies, the chance of growth restriction (birth weight below the 5th centile 
for gestation in singletons) of at least one of the fetuses was 34% for monochorionic and 23% for dichorionic twins 3. 
Furthermore, the chance of growth restriction of both twins was about four times as high in monochorionic (7.5%) 
compared to dichorionic (1.7%) pregnancies 3. In monochorionic twins, a disparity in size between the fetuses may 

be a consequence of the degree of imbalance in fetal nutrition as a result of chronic twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. In dichorionic twins, disparity in size may also be due to differences in fetal nutrition, but in this case such 
differences may be a consequence of discordancy in the effectiveness of trophoblastic invasion of the maternal spiral 
arteries and therefore placental function. 
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
In monochorionic twin pregnancies, there are placental vascular anastamoses which allow communication of the two 
fetoplacental circulations 7. In about 25% of pregnancies, imbalance in the net flow of blood across the placental 
vascular arteriovenous communications from one fetus, the donor, to the other, the recipient, results in twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome; in about half of these cases, there is severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome presenting as 
acute polyhydramnios in the second trimester. The pathognomonic features of severe twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome by ultrasonographic examination are the presence of a large bladder in the polyuric recipient fetus in the 
polyhydramniotic sac and ‘absent’ bladder in the anuric donor, that is found to be ‘stuck’ and immobile at the edge of 
the placenta or the uterine wall, where it is held fixed by the collapsed membranes of the anhydramniotic sac (Figure 
2) 8. 
Other sonographic findings that may prove to be of prognostic significance include the presence of a hypertrophic, 
dilated and dyskinetic heart, with absence or reversal of flow in the ductus venosus during atrial contraction (Figure 
3) 9. In the donor, the heart may be dilated, the bowel is hyperechogenic, and there is absent end-diastolic flow in 
the umbilical artery; these features are commonly seen in hypoxemic fetuses in pregnancies with severe 
uteroplacental insufficiency. In severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, survival with expectant management is less 
than 10% 8. 
Figure 2: Severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome at 20 weeks of gestation. In the polyuric recipient, there 
is a large bladder and polyhydramnios (left) and the anuric donor is held fixed to the placenta by the 
collapsed membranes of the anhydramniotic sac (right). 
Figure 3: Abnormal waveform of the ductus venosus with reversal of flow during atrial contraction in the 
recipient fetus of a pregnancy with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
The precise underlying mechanisms by which a select population of those monochorionic pregnancies with vascular 
communications go on to develop twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is not fully understood. However, it has been 
hypothesized that primary maldevelopment of the placenta of the donor twin may cause increased peripheral 
resistance in the placental circulation, which promotes shunting of blood to the recipient; the donor therefore suffers 
from both hypovolemia due to blood loss and hypoxia due to placental insufficiency8. The recipient fetus compensates 
for its expanded blood volume with polyuria 10, but, since protein and cellular components remain in its circulation, 
the consequent increase in colloid oncotic pressure draws water from the maternal compartment across the placenta. 

A vicious cycle of hypervolemia, polyuria, hyperosmolality is established, leading to high-output heart failure and 
polyhydramnios. 
Monoamniotic twins 
Splitting of the embryonic mass after day 9 of fertilization results in monoamniotic twins. In these cases, there is a 
single amniotic cavity with a single placenta and the two umbilical cords insert close to each other. In monoamniotic 
twins, found in about 1% of all twins or about 5% of monochorionic twins, the fetal loss rate is about 50–75%, due to 
fetal malformations, preterm delivery and complications arising from the close proximity of the two umbilical cords. 
Cord entanglement is generally thought to be the underlying mechanism for the majority of fetal losses. However, 
cord entanglement is found in most cases of monoamniotic twins and this is usually present from the first trimester of 
pregnancy 11–13. Therefore, a more likely cause of fetal death in monoamniotic twins, which occurs suddenly and 
unpredictably, is acute twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, rather than cord entanglement per se. The close insertion 
of the umbilical cords into the placenta is associated with large-caliber anastamoses between the two fetal 
circulations13,14. Consequently, an imbalance in the two circulations could not be sustained for prolonged periods of 
time (which is necessary for the development of the classic features of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome), but would 
rather have major hemodynamic effects, causing sudden fetal death. 
DOPPLER STUDIES IN TWINS 
Several Doppler studies in the 1980s and early 1990s have examined flow velocity waveforms in the umbilical arteries 
in twin pregnancies 15-24. These reported that increased impedance provided useful prediction of the subsequent 
development of fetal growth restriction and adverse perinatal outcome. Furthermore, in pregnancies discordant for 
growth restriction, there were large intertwin disparities in impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries of the co-twins. 
These findings are not surprising, since, in the absence of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the underlying 
pathophysiology for fetal growth restriction due to placental insufficiency in twins is the same as in singleton 
pregnancies. Giles et al. reported that the histopathological changes in the placentas from twin pregnancies 
complicated by the presence of abnormal umbilical Doppler results (reduction in the count of small arterial vessels in 
placental tertiary stem villi restricted to the placenta of the affected fetus) are similar to those found in singleton 
pregnancies 25. 
Neilson et al. reported that there were no significant differences between monochorionic and dichorionic pregnancies 
in either the pattern of umbilical artery flow velocity waveform or intertwin discordance in fetal growth 26. It was 
concluded that, in the absence of severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the vascular anastomoses that have 
been shown to be common in monochorionic placentas do not exert a strong influence on fetal growth or fetoplacental 
blood flow. 
Two randomized trials of Doppler ultrasound, which included twin pregnancies, have been reported 27,28. Although 
the number of twins in these studies was small (16 and 26, and 18 and 22 in the Doppler assessment and control 
groups, respectively), there was a combined odds ratio of 0.14 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.03–0.77) for the 
reduction in fetal death. 
Rizzo et al. reported that impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is lower in twin than in singleton pregnancies 29. 
The diagnostic efficacy of impedance in the uterine artery for predicting the development of gestational hypertension 
and/or pre-eclampsia was disappointingly low, compared to findings in singleton pregnancies (see Chapter 5). 
DOPPLER STUDIES IN TWIN-TO-TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME 
Placental vessels 
Hecher et al. examined the role of color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of the communicating placental 
vessels in 18 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and two with an acardiac twin 30. Color Doppler 
studies of the placental vasculature were performed before fetoscopy for laser coagulation of the communicating 
vessels. In six cases of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the placental attachment of the intertwin membrane could 
be visualized, and pulsatile arterial blood flow was observed from the donor to the recipient twin that disappeared 
after laser therapy. In both cases of acardiac twins, one communicating vessel with pulsatile and another vessel with 
non-pulsatile blood flow in the opposite direction could be identified. It was suggested that color Doppler imaging is 
unlikely to play a major role in assisting endoscopic laser separation of chorioangiopagus in patients with acute 
polyhydramnios, but it may prove to be useful in the early identification of pregnancies at risk of developing twin-to-

twin transfusion syndrome. 
Denbow et al. examined 45 monochorionic pregnancies for the presence of arterio–arterial anastomoses by color 
Doppler energy 31. Arterio–arterial anastomoses were present in 8% (1 of 12) that developed twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome, compared to 71% (20 of 28) of those that did not have twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. It was 
concluded that twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is associated with an absence of functional arterio–arterial 
anastomoses. 
Umbilical and fetal arterial Doppler 
Giles et al. examined 11 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (diagnosed retrospectively by the 
presence of monochorionic placentation and umbilical venous blood hemoglobin differences exceeding 5 g/dl at 
delivery) 32. There was no significant difference in the impedance to flow in the umbilical artery between donor and 
recipient fetuses. In contrast, Pretorius et al. examined eight cases of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and reported 
significant differences in umbilical arterial impedance to flow between the fetuses in all cases 33. However, Doppler 
studies could not differentiate donor from recipient or provide prognostic data regarding outcome. Yamada et al. 
examined 31 twin pregnancies, including six with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 34. In seven cases, the intertwin 
difference in umbilical arterial pulsatility index was above 0.5, and, in six of these, there was twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. Ohno et al. reported that, in five pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there was intertwin 
discordancy in umbilical arterial pulsatility index (PI) greater than 0.5 and, in all cases, the PI in the recipient was 
above the normal range 35. In contrast, in 28 pregnancies without twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there were no 
cases with increased impedance or discordancy greater than 0.5. 
Gaziano et al. assessed impedance to flow in the umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery in 33 monochorionic 
diamniotic twin pregnancies and 50 dichorionic pregnancies 36. Monochorionic twins demonstrated a significantly 
greater probability of blood flow redistribution (increased impedance in the umbilical artery and decreased impedance 
in the middle cerebral artery) than dichorionic twins of similar low birth weights. It was suggested that placental 
vascular connections and the attendant hemodynamic changes in the fetuses of monochorionic twins may account for 
this difference. 
Hecher et al. investigated the circulatory profile of the donor and recipient fetuses in pregnancies with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome manifested by acute polyhydramnios during the second trimester of pregnancy 37. Doppler 
investigations of the umbilical arteries and of the fetal descending thoracic aortas and middle cerebral arteries were 
performed in both fetuses of 27 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome at 18–25 weeks of gestation. 
Significant differences from normal values were increased umbilical artery PI and decreased aortic mean velocity in 
both donor and recipient fetuses, decreased middle cerebral artery PI in recipients and decreased middle cerebral 
artery mean velocity in donors. Increased umbilical artery PI in some donor and recipient fetuses may be the 
consequence of abnormal placental development and polyhydramnios-related compression, respectively. Doppler 
findings in the fetal circulation are compatible with hypovolemia in the donor and hypervolemia with congestive heart 
failure in the recipient. 
Cardiac and venous Doppler 
Ishimatsu et al. examined 40 twin pregnancies, including six with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, and reported 
that the syndrome was not associated with any distinctive findings in umbilical artery blood flow velocity 
waveforms38. However, cardiomegaly in five of the recipient fetuses and tricuspid regurgitation and biphasic umbilical 
vein waveforms in three recipient fetuses constituted characteristic features of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
Rizzo et al. compared Doppler results in 15 dichorionic twin pregnancies (in which the smaller twin subsequently 
developed antepartum fetal heart rate late decelerations) and ten pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome39. Doppler recordings were obtained from umbilical artery, descending aorta, and middle cerebral artery, 
and the PI was measured. Furthermore, peak velocity from cardiac outflow tract and the percentage of reverse flow in 
the inferior vena cava were calculated. For all these index values, the intertwin differences (delta value) were 
determined by subtracting the values obtained in the larger twin from those of the smaller twin. In the dichorionic 
pregnancies, there were significant changes of delta values for all the parameters tested. In particular, delta values of 
PI from the umbilical artery and descending aorta progressively increased, approaching the occurrence of late 
decelerations, whereas the delta value for the middle cerebral artery reached a nadir 2 weeks before delivery. 
Similarly, delta values of peak velocity from outflow tracts significantly decreased, whereas those of the percentage 
reverse flow in the inferior vena cava increased. In the pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there 
were no significant intertwin differences in PI in any of the vessels that were examined, but there was a significant 

increase in delta of the peak velocity from the outflow tract and a decrease in the percentage of reverse flow in the 
inferior vena cava. It was concluded that serial Doppler recordings may show hemodynamic changes in the fetal 
circulation of discordant twins. Different trends occur according to the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of 
the growth defect. 
Hecher et al. investigated the circulatory profile of the donor and recipient fetuses in 20 pregnancies with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome presenting with acute polyhydramnios at 17–27 weeks of gestation 9. Doppler investigations of 
the arterial vessels and ductus venosus, inferior vena cava, right hepatic vein, tricuspid and mitral ventricular inflow 
were performed in both fetuses. Mean values of most blood flow velocities on the venous side showed a significant 
decrease in both groups of fetuses, and a significant increase in mean values for indices describing waveform 
pulsatility was found in all three venous vessels in the group of recipients, whereas, in the donor group, this was only 
the case in the ductus venosus. Mean values of atrioventricular flow velocities showed a significant decrease in the 
donor group. The most significant findings on the arterial side were an increased mean umbilical artery PI and a 
decreased mean value for aortic blood flow velocity in both groups of fetuses. Five recipients and four donors had 
absence or reversal of blood flow during atrial contraction in the ductus venosus. All these fetuses showed pulsations 
in the umbilical vein (Figure 4). Tricuspid regurgitation was present in eight recipients (Figure 5). Absence or reversal 
of end-diastolic velocities in the umbilical artery was found in four donors. The circulation of the recipient showed the 
characteristics of congestive heart failure due to hypovolemia. The significant decrease of diastolic venous blood flow 
velocities is compatible with increased end-diastolic ventricular pressure. Alterations in the circulation of the donor are 
consistent with decreased venous return due to hypovolemia and increased cardiac afterload due to increased 
placental resistance. 
Zosmer et al. examined five pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and reported increased 
cardiothoracic ratio and tricuspid regurgitation in all recipient twins 40. High pulmonary artery velocities developed in 
three. One recipient twin died a week after delivery of endocardial fibroelastosis and infundibular pulmonary stenosis. 
Two others had balloon dilatation for pulmonary stenosis, one shortly after birth and one at 4 months. A further twin 
had apical thickening of the right ventricle at 6 months. The remaining recipient twin had normal echocardiographic 
findings at follow-up. 
Figure 4: Pulsations in the umbilical vein with reversal of flow at the end of diastole in the recipient fetus of a 
pregnancy with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 

Figure 5: Holosystolic tricuspid regurgitation in the recipient fetus of a pregnancy with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome 
Hecher et al. described the sequence of events in the development and subsequent spontaneous resolution of 
functional tricuspid valve atresia in the donor fetus in a case of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 41. Fetoscopic laser 
coagulation of the placental anastomoses was performed at 20 weeks of gestation. Subsequently, there was evidence 
of increased placental vascular resistance in the donor twin and major impairment of right ventricular function, with 
no forward flow through the tricuspid valve. During the next 4 weeks, however, there was spontaneous and complete 
recovery of ventricular function and resolution of the functional tricuspid valve atresia. These findings suggest that 
alterations in fetal hemodynamics may result in structural cardiac abnormality and may be the precursors of some 
forms of congenital heart disease. 
Lachapelle et al. examined whether index values of cardiac performance could discriminate between the twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome and placental insufficiency as the etiology of the polyhydramnios–oligo-hydramnios sequence in 
monochorionic diamniotic twins, by comparing findings in eight cases with placental insufficiency and five with twinto-
twin transfusion syndrome 42. Intertwin comparisons were made for the following cardiac parameters: 
cardiothoracic index, end-diastolic thickness of the ventricular walls and septum, aortic and pulmonary artery Doppler 
peak velocities, ejection and acceleration times, left ventricular shortening fraction, and combined cardiac output and 
output indexed to fetal weight. All five recipient twins had thickened ventricular walls. The left ventricular shortening 
fractions and outputs were significantly increased in the donor twin with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and 
normal in placental insufficiency. It was concluded that, in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the donor twin shows 
evidence of a hyperdynamic cardiac state. Intertwin comparison of cardiac parameters, especially the left ventricular 
shortening fraction, can be considered a useful tool in diagnosing the different etiologies of the polyhydramnios– 
oligohydraminos sequence. 
Fesslova et al. examined 17 pairs of monochorionic diamniotic twin fetuses with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
treated by decompressive amniocenteses 43. Serial Doppler echocardiographic sudies showed no specific cardiac 
involvement in the donor twins, either in utero or after birth. In contrast, all recipient twin fetuses showed variable 
degrees of biventricular hypertrophy and dilatation with tricuspid regurgitation. These features were evident 
postnatally but they resolved 1–6 months after birth. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. In twin pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is lower than in singleton pregnancies. 
.. In twin pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is not as predictive as in singleton 
pregnancies of the subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. 

.. In twin pregnancies, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries provides a useful prediction of the 
subsequent development of fetal growth restriction and adverse perinatal outcome. 
.. In twin pregnancies with fetal growth restriction due to placental insufficiency, the growth-restricted fetus 
demonstrates the same circulatory changes as observed in singleton pregnancies with the same 
complication. Thus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is usually associated with arterial 
redistribution in the fetal circulation, demonstrated by decreased PI in the middle cerebral artery and 
preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle. Deterioration in the fetal condition is 
associated with a breakdown of hemodynamic compensatory mechanisms, with a decline in cardiac output 
and the development of abnormal venous flow with increase in pulsatility of ductus venosus waveforms and 
loss of forward flow velocity during atrial contraction. 
.. In pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, placental vascular anastomoses can be identified by 
Doppler only in a minority of cases. In monochorionic twins with no twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the 
incidence of vascular anastomoses is much higher than in those with the syndrome. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there is increased umbilical artery PI in both 
the donor and recipient fetuses, which may be the consequence of abnormal placental development and 
polyhydramnios-related compression, respectively. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there is decreased middle cerebral artery PI 
in recipients and decreased middle cerebral artery mean velocity in donors. Additionally, there is decreased 
blood flow velocity and increased impedance to flow in the ductus venosus of both the donor and recipient 
fetuses. In donor fetuses, flow velocities across the atrioventricular valves are decreased. In a high 
proportion of recipient fetuses, there is tricuspid regurgitation. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, Doppler findings in the fetal circulation of 
the donor are consistent with decreased venous return due to hypovolemia and increased cardiac afterload 
due to increased placental resistance. In the recipient, there is evidence of hypervolemia with congestive 
heart failure; hypervolemia may cause compensatory cardiac hypertrophy, but eventually the pumping 
capabilities of the enlarged heart are exceeded and cardiac failure occurs. 

REFERENCES 
1. Bessis R, Papiernik E. Echographic imagery of amniotic membranes in twin pregnancies. In Gedda L, Parisi P, 
eds. Twin Research 3: Twin Biology and Multiple Pregnancy. New York: Alan R Liss, 1981:183–7 
2. SepulvedaW, Sebire NJ, Hughes K, Odibo A, Nicolaides KH. The lambda sign at 10–14 weeks of gestation as 
a predictor of chorionicity in twin pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:421–3 
3. Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Hughes K, Sepulveda W, Nicolaides KH. The hidden mortality of monochorionic twin 
pregnancies. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:1203–7 
4. Derom R, Vlietnick R, Derom C, ThieryM, Van Maele G, Van den Berghe H. Perinatal mortality in the East 
Flanders prospective twin survey. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 1991;41:25–6 
5. Machin G, Bamforth F, Innes M, Minichul K. Some perinatal characteristics of monozygotic twins who are 
dichorionic. Am J Med Genet 1995;55:71–6 
6. Luke B, Keith LG. The contribution of singletons, twins and triplets to low birth weight, infant mortality and 
handicap in the United States. J Reprod Med 1992;37:661–6 
7. Benirschke K. Twin placenta in perinatal mortality. N Y St J Med 1961;61:1499–508 
8. Saunders NJ, Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Therapeutic amniocentesis in twin–twin transfusion syndrome 
appearing in the second trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:820–4 
9. Hecher K, Ville Y, Snijders R, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the fetal circulation in twin–twin transfusion 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995 5:318–24 
10. Rosen D, Rabinowitz R, Beyth Y, Feijgin MD, Nicolaides KH. Fetal urine production in normal twins and in 
twins with acute polyhydramnios. Fetal Diagn Ther 1990;5:57–60 
11. Rodis JF, McIlveen PF, Egan JF, Borgida AF, Turner GW, Campbell WA. Monoamniotic twins: improved 
perinatal survival with accurate prenatal diagnosis and antenatal fetal surveillance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1997;177:1046–9 
12. Overton TG, Denbow ML, Duncan KR, Fisk NM. First-trimester cord entanglement in monoamniotic twins. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:140–2 
13. Arabin B, Laurini RN, Van Eyck J. Early prenatal diagnosis of cord entanglement in monoamniotic multiple 
pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:181–6 
14. Bajoria R. Abundant vascular anastamoses in monoamniotic versus diamniotic monochorionic placentas. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:788–93 
15. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity-time waveforms in twin pregnancies. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:490–7 
16. Farmakides G, Schulman H, Saldana LR, Bracero LA, Fleischer A, Rochelson B. Surveillance of twin 
pregnancy with umbilical arterial velocimetry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:789–92 
17. Gerson AG,Wallace DM, Bridgens NK, Ashmead GG,Weiner S, Bolognese RJ. Duplex Doppler ultrasound in 
the evaluation of growth in twin pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:419–23 
18. Nimrod C, Davies D, Harder J, Dempster C, Dodd G, McDicken N, Nicholson S. Doppler ultrasound prediction 
of fetal outcome in twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:402–6 
19. DivonMY, Girz BA, Sklar A, Guidetti DA, Langer O. Discordant twins – a prospective study of the diagnostic 
value of real-time ultrasonography combined with umbilical artery velocimetry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1989;161:757–60 
20. Hastie SJ, Danskin F, Neilson JP, Whittle MJ. Prediction of the small for gestational age twin fetus by Doppler 
umbilical artery waveform analysis. Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:730–3 
21. Gaziano EP, Knox GE, Bendel RP, Calvin S, Brandt D. Is pulsed Doppler velocimetry useful in the 
management of multiple-gestation pregnancies? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:1426–33 
22. Degani S, Gonen R, Shapiro I, Paltiely Y, Sharf M. Doppler flow velocity waveforms in fetal surveillance of 
twins: a prospective longitudinal study. J Ultrasound Med 1992;11:537–41 

23. Kurmanavicius J, Hebisch G, Huch R, Huch A. Umbilical artery blood flow velocity waveforms in twin 
pregnancies. J Perinat Med 1992;20:307–12 
24. Jensen OH. Doppler velocimetry in twin pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1992;45:9–12 
25. GilesW, Trudinger B, Cook C, Connelly A. Placental microvascular changes in twin pregnancies with 
abnormal umbilical artery waveforms. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:556–9 
26. Neilson JP, Danskin F, Hastie SJ. Monozygotic twin pregnancy: diagnostic and Doppler ultrasound studies. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1413–18 
27. Omtzigt AWJ. Clinical value of umbilical Doppler velocimetry; randomized controlled trial. Doctoral thesis, 
University of Utrecht, 1990 
28. Johnstone FD, Prescott R, Hoskins, Greer IA, McGlew T, Compton M. The effect of introduction of umbilical 
Doppler recordings to obstetric practice. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1993;100:733–41 
29. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Uterine artery Doppler velocity waveforms in twin pregnancies. Obstet 
Gynecol 1993;82:978–83 
30. Hecher K, VilleY, Nicolaides KH. Color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of communicating 
vessels in twin–twin transfusion syndrome and acardiac twins. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14: 37–40 
31. Denbow ML, Cox P, Talbert D, Fisk NM. Colour Doppler energy insonation of placental vasculature in 
monochorionic twins: absent arterio–arterial anastomoses in association with twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:760–5 
32. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM, Connelly AJ. Doppler umbilical artery studies in the twin–twin transfusion 
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:1097–9 
33. Pretorius DH, Manchester D, Barkin S, Parker S, Nelson TR. Doppler ultrasound of twin transfusion 
syndrome. J Ultrasound Med 1988;7:117–24 
34. Yamada A, Kasugai M, Ohno Y, Ishizuka T, Mizutani S, Tomoda Y. Antenatal diagnosis of twin–twin 
transfusion syndrome by Doppler ultrasound. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:1058–61 
35. Ohno Y, Ando H, Tanamura A, Kurauchi O, Mizutani S, Tomoda Y. The value of Doppler ultrasound in the 
diagnosis and management of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1994;255:37–42 
36. Gaziano E, Gaziano C, Brandt D. Doppler velocimetry determined redistribution of fetal blood flow: 
correlation with growth restriction in diamniotic monochorionic and dizygotic twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998;178:1359–67 
37. Hecher K, Ville Y, Nicolaides KH. Fetal arterial Doppler studies in twin–twin transfusion syndrome. J 
Ultrasound Med 1995;14:101–8 
38. Ishimatsu J, Yoshimura O, Manabe A, Matsuzaki T, Tanabe R, Hamada T. Ultrasonography and Doppler 
studies in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Asia Oceania J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;18: 325–31 
39. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Cardiac and extracardiac flows in discordant twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1994;170:1321–7 
40. Zosmer N, Bajoria R,Weiner E, Rigby M, Vaughan J, Fisk NM. Clinical and echographic features of in utero 
cardiac dysfunction in the recipient twin in twin–twin transfusion syndrome. Br Heart J 1994;72:74–9 
41. Hecher K, Sullivan ID, Nicolaides KH. Temporary iatrogenic fetal tricuspid valve atresia in a case of twin to 
twin transfusion syndrome. Br Heart J 1994;72:457–60 
42. Lachapelle MF, Leduc L, Cote JM, Grignon A, Fouron JC. Potential value of fetal echocardiography in the 
differential diagnosis of twin pregnancy with presence of polyhydramnios– oligohydramnios syndrome. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:388–94 
43. Fesslova V, Villa L, Nava S, Mosca F, Nicolini U. Fetal and neonatal echocardiographic findings in twin–twin 
transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:1056–62 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 12 
Color Doppler sonography in the assessment of the 
fetal heart 
by Rabih Chaoui 
INTRODUCTION 
Pulsed and color Doppler ultrasound improve the diagnostic accuracy of two-dimensional gray-scale imaging in the 
prenatal detection of abnormalities of the heart and great arteries. The two methods are complementary to each 
other, with color Doppler being used for general assessment of flow in the region of interest and pulsed Doppler for 
targeted examination of flow in a vessel or across a valve 1-10. 
In pulsed Doppler ultrasound, the examiner positions a sample volume over the region of interest to obtain flow 
velocity waveforms as a function of time. This makes it possible to quantify blood flow as peak or time-averaged 
mean velocities, which allow the calculation of ratios (such as the E/A ratio) or blood volume (such as stroke volume 
or cardiac output) after measurement of vessel diameter. Color Doppler, which is technically easier to perform, allows 
a rapid assessment of the hemodynamic situation, but gives only descriptive or semi-quantitative information on 
blood flow. Color Doppler should be an integral part of the routine examination of a fetal heart because this helps to 
shorten the scanning time, but also provides improved reliability in diagnosing or excluding abnormalities. 
EXAMINATION OF THE NORMAL HEART 
Examination of the fetal heart using color Doppler is achieved through similar planes as gray-scale imaging. Several 
planes, including the abdominal view, four-chamber view, five-chamber view, the short-axis and the three-vessel 
view need to be assessed to achieve spatial information on different cardiac chambers and vessels as well as their 
connections to each other 1,2,4. The difference from two-dimensional scanning is that, with color Doppler, the angle of 
insonation should be as small as possible for optimal visualization of flow. 
In the abdominal plane, the position of the aorta, inferior vena cava and the connection of the vein to the right atrium 
are examined. Pulsed Doppler sampling from the inferior vena cava, the ductus venosus or the hepatic veins can be 
achieved in longitudinal planes. 
The four-chamber view allows the detection of many severe cardiac defects. Using color Doppler in an apical (Figure 
1) or basal approach, the diastolic perfusion across the atrioventricular valves can be assessed; there is a 
characteristic separate perfusion of both inflow tracts during diastole (Figure 1). Using pulsed Doppler, there is a 
typical biphasic shape of the diastolic flow velocity waveform with an early peak diastolic velocity (E) and a second 
peak during atrial contraction (A-wave); E is smaller than A, and the E : A ratio increases during pregnancy toward 1, 
to be inversed after birth. In this plane, regurgitation across the atrioventricular valves, which is more frequent at the 
tricuspid valve, is easily detected during systole with color Doppler. Flow across the foramen ovale is visualized in a 
lateral approach of the four-chamber view. Color Doppler allows confirmation of the physiological right-to-left shunt 
and visualization of the pulmonary veins as they enter the left atrium. 
The transducer is then tilted to obtain the five-chamber view and then the short-axis view. Using color Doppler, flow 
during systole is visualized (Figure 2 and Figure 3). 

Figure 1: Four-chamber view in real-time (left) and color Doppler. During diastole, flow is visualized entering 
from both the right and left atria (RA, LA) into the right and left ventricles (RV, LV) and the flows are 
separated by the interatrial and interventricular septum. 
Figure 2: Five-chamber view in real-time (left) using color Doppler (right). The aorta, arising from the left 
ventricle, is seen and color shows the laminar flow across the aortic valve during systole. Compare with aortic 
stenosis (Figure 7) and overriding aorta (Figure 12). 
Figure 3: Five-chamber view in real-time (left) using color Doppler (right). The pulmonar vein, arising from 
the right ventricle. 
Figure 4: (a,b) Aortic Arch; (c) color doppler angio of the aortic arch 

Figure 5: (a,b) Ductal Arch; (c) color doppler of the ductal arch 
Figure 6: (a,b) Venous return (IVC & SVC); (c) color doppler angio of the venous return 
In these planes, the correct ventriculo–arterial connections (compare Figures 2 and 14), the non-aliased flow 
(compare Figures 2 and Figure 14) and the continuity of the interventricular septum with the aortic root are examined 
(compare Figures 2 and 12). With pulsed Doppler, a single peak flow velocity waveform for the aortic and pulmonary 
valves is demonstrated. The peak systolic velocity increases from 50 to 110 cm/s during the second half of pregnancy 
and is higher across the aortic than the pulmonary valve. Time to peak velocity in the aorta is longer than in the 
pulmonary trunk. 
The three-vessel view enables assessment of the aortic arch and the ductus arteriosus. In the third trimester, an 
aliased flow is found within the ductus as a sign of the onset of constriction. When the fetal position is optimal, the 
aortic arch and ductus arteriosus can be seen in a longitudinal plane, allowing visualization of neck vessels. 
Figure 7: Three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound of the crossing of the great vessels in a 28-week 
fetus. AOA, aortic arch; DA, ductus arteriosus; LPA, left pulmonary artery; TP, pulmonary trunk. 

Figure 8: Tricuspid atresia (*) and ventricular septal defect (VSD). Arrows show the direction of flow; due to 
the atresia of the tricuspid valve, blood entering the right atrium cannot enter directly into the right ventricle 
and it flows to the left atrium, left ventricle and across the VSD to the hypoplastic right ventricle (right). 
EXAMINATION OF THE ABNORMAL HEART 
Tricuspid atresia 
In this condition, there is absence of the connection between the right atrium and the right ventricle. In the fourchamber 
view, the right ventricle is hypoplastic or absent and color Doppler demonstrates the absence of flow from 
the right atrium to the right ventricle (Figure 3). Blood from the right atrium flows across the foramen ovale to the 
left atrium and from there during diastole to the left ventricle. This unilateral perfusion across the left ventricular 
inflow tract is typical for this lesion. In the presence of an associated ventricular septal defect, a left-to-right shunt 
into the small right ventricular cavity is found. The postnatal prognosis depends on the anatomy of the great vessels. 
The ventriculo–arterial connection can be concordant or discordant, and the pulmonary valve can be patent, stenotic 
or atretic; color Doppler helps in the reliable differentiation between these conditions. 
Figure 9: the right ventricle is hypoplastic or absent and color Doppler demonstrates the absence or 
minimum flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. 
.. 

Tricuspid dysplasia and Ebstein anomaly 
In tricuspid dysplasia, the valve leaflets are correctly inserted but they are thickened. By contrast, the valve leaflets in 
Ebstein anomaly are inserted abnormally so that they are more apical in the right ventricle and their ability to close is 
reduced. In both conditions there is tricuspid regurgitation which is generally associated with dilatation of the right 
atrium and, in extreme forms, with gross cardiomegaly (Figure 4) 11,12. Color Doppler is used to confirm tricuspid 
regurgitation and spectral Doppler (Figure 5) is used to measure the pressure gradient and duration of the 
regurgitation. Since both anomalies are associated with an obstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract 
(pulmonary stenosis or atresia), it is mandatory to analyze the perfusion in the pulmonary trunk. In severe 
obstruction, retrograde flow within the ductus arteriosus is found (see Figure 6). This, however, does not prove 
pulmonary atresia because a patent but stenotic pulmonary valve, due to tricuspid regurgitation, can show the same 
features as an atresia and thus leads to a false-positive result 12. 
Figure 10: The characteristic finding is that of a massively enlarged right atrium, a small right ventricle, and 
a small pulmonary artery. Doppler can be used to demonstrate regurgitation in the right atrium 
Pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum 
This diagnosis includes a group of heart defects with an atretic pulmonary valve and an intact ventricular septum. The 
size and shape of the right ventricle show a wide range, from hypoplastic to normal sized or even dilated. The latter 
form is identical to tricuspid dysplasia with pulmonary atresia. In both former types, the right ventricle shows no 
contractility and the tricuspid valve movements are reduced. Color Doppler in the four-chamber view shows absence 
or reduced tricuspid flow and, during systole, there may be tricuspid valve regurgitation. In the three-vessel view or 
the short-axis view, there is absence of antegrade perfusion across the pulmonary valve and retrograde flow through 
the ductus arteriosus (Figure 6). The pulmonary trunk in these conditions is narrower than the ascending aorta, but is 
not severely hypoplastic because of retrograde perfusion through the ductus arteriosus. In some hearts with 
pulmonary atresia, communications between the hypoplastic right ventricle and the coronary arteries may be present 
and are detectable by color Doppler ultrasound 13 in mid-gestation. Their presence is associated with worse neonatal 
outcome. 

Figure 11: Tricuspid valve dysplasia with severe tricuspid insufficiency and cardiomegaly. Retrograde flow 
from the right ventricle (RV) to the right atrium (RA) is seen in blue and turbulence is coded by green pixels. 
Figure 12: Severe tricuspid regurgitation. Pulsed wave Doppler (left) is not useful due to the aliasing 
phenomenon and the maximal velocities that can be assessed are 180 cm/s (arrow). The continuous wave 
transducer allows assessment of very high velocities; in this case 420 cm/s 
Figure 13: Hypoplastic right ventricle (arrow) in a fetus with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum 
(a). Color doppler of the 4 chamber view with asymmetric flow between the left heart and right heart. 
Pulmonary valve atresia can be diagnosed using color Doppler by visualizing the great vessels – aorta (Ao) 
and pulmonary trunk (TP) – in the upper thorax and demonstrating the retrograde flow from the descending 
aorta across the ductus arteriosus toward the pulmonary valve. 
.. 

Pulmonary stenosis 
In the isolated form of this lesion, there is narrowing of the semilunar valves. In severe cases, a hypokinetic and 
hypertrophied right ventricle can be found but most cases are not detected prenatally. On two-dimensional imaging, 
the diagnosis is suspected by the presence of poststenotic dilatation of the pulmonary trunk and reduction of 
pulmonary valve excursion. With color Doppler, the diagnosis is easy and is based on the demonstration of turbulent 
flow across the pulmonary valve. In severe cases, a retrograde flow can be found through the ductus arteriosus. 
Doppler flow velocity waveforms using a continuous wave transducer enable the demonstration of high velocities 
(more than 2 m/s), which are typical of stenosis. These findings, either in color or in pulsed Doppler, are only typical 
of the isolated form and are not commonly found in conditions associated with a ventricular septal defect, such as 
tetralogy of Fallot or double outlet right ventricle. Fetal pulmonary stenosis can be associated in the third trimester 
with tricuspid insufficiency, leading in some cases to right atrial dilatation 8. 
Aortic stenosis 
In general, the narrowing is found at the level of the aortic valve and a simple stenosis is rarely detected in the four-
chamber view. However, a critical aortic stenosis is associated with a dilated and hypokinetic left ventricle with an 
echogenic endocardium, as a sign of endocardial fibroelastosis. Simple aortic stenosis can be detected only by using 
color Doppler (Figure 7). Antegrade turbulent flow (aliasing) is a characteristic finding in the five-chamber view 
(Figure 7). Pulsed Doppler analysis shows high velocities (more than 2 m/s) and a characteristic aliasing pattern. 
Continuous wave Doppler is therefore necessary to confirm the diagnosis (Figure 7). In critical aortic stenosis, there is 
antegrade turbulent flow across the aortic valve, but peak systolic velocities can vary from more than 2 m/s to values 
within the normal range, as an expression of left ventricular dysfunction 9. Due to the high pressure in the left 
ventricle, both a mitral regurgitation and a left-to-right shunt at the level of the foramen ovale are found 8. In severe 
left ventricular dysfunction, a retrograde flow is seen within the aortic arch. 
Figure 14: Aortic stenosis with turbulent flow (green pixels), as seen in the five-chamber view (compare with 
normal findings in Figure 2). Continuous wave Doppler allows a quantification of the stenosis. 
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
In this condition, the aortic valve is generally atretic or severely stenotic and the left ventricle diminutive and noncontractile. 
The mitral valve is either atretic (Figure 8) or stenotic (Figure 9). Color Doppler demonstrates reduced or 
absent diastolic filling of the left ventricle 8. In the four-chamber view, there is unilateral perfusion of the right 
ventricle. Often, there is mild tricuspid regurgitation. Careful examination of the intra-atrial communication shows an 
abnormal left-to-right shunt. In hypoplastic left heart syndrome, there is retrograde perfusion of the neck vessels and 
coronary arteries which can also be used for the differential diagnosis 14,15. Using color Doppler, it is then possible to 
confirm the diagnosis by demonstrating, in the three-vessel view, the retrograde perfusion in the hypoplastic aortic 
arch 14,15 
. 

Figura 15: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome -the left ventricle diminutive, with color doppler there is an 
assimetric color perfusion of the chambers. 
Ventricular septal defect 
The defect can be either situated in the inlet, in the muscular part or, most commonly, in the perimembranous part of 
the ventricular septum. The defect can be suspected by two-dimensional ultrasound examination if it is larger than 3 
mm. Color Doppler can help to identify small muscular septal defects (Figure 10). Although right and left ventricular 
pressures are quite equal prenatally, a bidirectional shunt across the defect is present. The best approach to examine 
a septal defect with color Doppler is the perpendicular insonation of the interventricular septum (Figure 10). In cases 
of an obstruction of an outflow tract, there is an unidirectional shunt to the contralateral side; in a ventricular septal 
defect with aortic stenosis, there is a left-to-right shunt8. 
Figure 16: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. The left ventricle (LV) is absent (?) due to mitral atresia and 
aortic atresia. Color Doppler shows the one-sided perfusion from the right atrium into the right ventricle 
(RA,RV). Compare with the normal four-chamber view in Figure 1 and with another hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome in Figure 9. 

Figure 17: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. In comparison with the fetus in Figure 8, this fetus shows a 
hypoplastic hypokinetic left ventricle. This is due to the combination of aortic atresia and patent but dysplastic 
mitral valve. Color Doppler shows similar features as in Figure 8, with one-sided perfusion across the right 
ventricular inflow tract. 
Figure 18: Four-chamber view seen from the right side. With real-time scanning, the anatomy appears to be 
normal. The use of color Doppler demonstrates the presence of a muscular ventricular septal defect during 
the phase of a shunt (blue) between the right and left ventricles. 
Atrioventricular septal defect 
In this malformation, there is a combination of defects in the atrial and ventricular septum at the level of the 
atrioventricular connections. The septal valve leaflets are generally malformed and, in severe cases, they can be 
absent. In a complete atrioventricular septal defect, color Doppler produces a characteristic H-shape with biventricular 
diastolic flow across the right and the left inflow tracts and a communication at the level of the atrioventricular valves 
(Figure 11) 6. During systole, the dysplastic valves are not able to close properly, leading to tricuspid and mitral 
regurgitation (Figure 12). If the regurgitation is severe, cardiac failure and non-immune hydrops develop 16. 

Figure 19: Four-chamber view in a fetus with Down syndrome demonstrating a complete atrioventricular 
septal defect (AV canal). The defect (*) can be recognized during diastole when the valves are patent but is 
better assessed using color Doppler, which demonstrates the interatrial and interventricular connection during 
diastole (H-shape). Compare with the normal findings in Figure 1. 
Tetralogy of Fallot 
This cardiac defect is defined by the association of a ventricular septal defect, an overriding aorta, an infundibular 
pulmonary stenosis and a secondary hypertrophy of the right ventricle. Prenatally, the first three signs are present 
and they can be diagnosed. Using two-dimensional ultrasound, the ventricular septal defect and overriding aorta can 
be seen in the five-chamber view. With color Doppler, the Y-shape of systolic blood flow from both ventricles into the 
overriding aorta can be visualized (Figure 13) 6. However, an overriding vessel is not exclusive to tetralogy of Fallot, 
as it can be found in truncus arteriosus communis, in some forms of double outlet right ventricle or in pulmonary 
atresia with ventricular septal defect. It is, therefore, important to assess the anatomy and hemodynamics of the 
pulmonary trunk, when an overriding vessel is suspected. 
.... 
Figure 20: overriding aorta can be seen in the five-chamber view. With color Doppler, the Y-shape of systolic 
blood flow from both ventricles into the overriding aorta can be visualized (a). 

Figure 21: Five-chamber view in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), demonstrating the systolic perfusion 
from both the right and left ventricle (RV, LV) into the overriding aorta (Y-shape). 
Double outlet right ventricle 
This is a group of cardiac defects in which the aorta and pulmonary trunk originate from the right ventricle. The 
position of these vessels to each other is variable, but they usually have a parallel course. In most cases, the 
diagnosis is achieved using two-dimensional ultrasound, but this is often facilitated by applying color Doppler (Figure 
14). In hearts with double outlet right ventricle, obstructions of the pulmonary or aortic pathway can be present and 
are easily diagnosed by color Doppler. In patent atrioventricular valves, the left ventricle appears smaller than the 
right one and flow across the ventricular septal defect is found to be unidirectional from left to right. 
In double outlet right ventricle (DORV) most of the aorta and pulmonary valve arise completely or almost completely 
from the right ventricle. The relation between the two vessels may vary, ranging from a Fallot-like to a TGA-like 
situation (the Taussig-Bing anomaly). DORV is not a single malformation from a pathophysiological point of view. The 
term refers only to the position of the great vessels that is found in association with ventricular septal defects, 
tetralogy of Fallot, transposition, univentricular hearts. Pulmonary stenosis is very common in all types of DORV, but 
left outflow obstructions, from subaortic stenosis to coarctation and interruption of the aortic arch, can also be seen. 

Figure 22: Double outlet right ventricle (DORV) with both the aorta (AO) and pulmonary trunk (TP) arising 
from the right ventricle. Color Doppler demonstrates blood flow from the right ventricle into both vessels and 
the flow is not turbulent because there is no stenosis. 
Complete transposition of the great arteries 
In this defect, the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary trunk from the left ventricle. The diagnosis 
is suspected postnatally when the infant becomes cyanotic after closure of the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale. 
Prenatally, the four-chamber view appears normal. The malformation is recognized when both arteries are visualized 
simultaneously and they appear to be parallel to each other (Figure 15); color Doppler is particularly helpful in 
demonstrating this sign. Color Doppler is also useful in demonstrating pulmonary stenosis and ventricular septal 
defect, which are occasionally found in transposition of the great arteries. 
Figure 23a: (a) four chamber view with parallel outflow tracts from the base of the heart (b) left ventricule 
with the pulmonary the left heart view demonstrating that the vessel connected to the left ventricle has a 
posterior course and bifurcates into the two pulmonary arteries (c) the vessel connected to the right ventricle 
has a long upward course and gives rise to the brachio-cephalic vessels. 
Figure 23: Transposition of the great arteries demonstrating the abnormal connection of the right ventricle 
(RV) with the aorta (AO) and the left ventricle (LV) with the pulmonary trunk (TP). Both great arteries show a 
parallel course. 

Other heart defects 
Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of a wide range of fetal heart defects, including abnormal connections of 
systemic or pulmonary veins, truncus arteriosus communis, anomalies of the aortic arch, and assessment of 
intracardiac hemodynamics in cardiomyopathies or in cardiac tumors. 
Figure 24: Rhabdomyoma (which represents excessive growth of cardiac muscle) a single or multiple 
echogenic masses impinging upon the cardiac cavities. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF TRICUSPID REGURGITATION 
Regurgitation of the fetal atrioventricular valves is more common on the right side than on the left. Regurgitation of 
the tricuspid valve shows a wide range of severity, from harmless regurgitation of short duration 15 to severe 
insufficiency lasting throughout the whole of systole (holosystolic), leading to huge dilatation of the right atrium 
(Figure 4). In some conditions, gross dilatation of the right atrium can be the first sign detected on real-time 
imaging11 and targeted color Doppler demonstrates severe insufficiency to be the underlying cause. On many 
occasions, however, tricuspid regurgitation is detected accidently when performing either a routine examination with 
color Doppler or during a targeted fetal echocardiographic scan in suspected fetal disease. Tricuspid regurgitation of 
short duration in early systole is observed in 3–5% of all healthy fetuses at mid-gestation 17,18 and this is considered 
to be physiological. However, the detection of tricuspid regurgitation should stimulate a search for a possible 
underlying pathology (Table 1). 

.. 
Table 1: Differential diagnosis of fetal tricuspid regurgitation 
Pathogenesis Etiology 
Mild regurgitation physiological due to immature fetal lungs or myocardium. 
Found in 3-5% of all pregnancies at 18-24 weeks 
Heart defects with dysplasia 
of the tricuspid valve 
Ebstein anomaly 
tricuspid valve dysplasia 
Heart defects with facultative 
tricuspid regurgitation 
atrioventricular valve septal defect 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
coarctation of the aorta 
double outlet right ventricle 
Heart defects and diseases with 
right ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction 
pulmonary artesia 
pulmonary stenosis 
constriction of the ductus arteriosus (mild to severe tricuspid 
regurgitation) 
Volume overload (often with 
mitral regurgitation) 
fetal anemia, due to red cell isoimmunization, parvo-virus B19 
infection, fetomaternal hemorrhage 
peripheral arteriovenous fistula, due to vein of Galen aneurysm, 
sacrococcygeal teratoma, chorangioma 
severe tachycardia or bradycardia 
recipient fetus in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
heart defect with volume overload or pulmonary regurgitation 
(tatralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve) 
Impairment of myocardial 
contractility 
myocarditis, due to infection, systemic lupus erythematosus 
cardiomyopathy secondary to severe arrhythmia or volume overload, 
dilatative cardiomyopathy 
myocardial impairment in severe fetal growth restriction 
endocardial fibroelastosis of the right ventricle 

REFERENCES 
.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
1. DeVore GR, Horenstein J, Siassi B, Lawrence DP. Fetal echocardiography. VII. Doppler color flow mapping: a 
new technique for the diagnosis of congenital heart disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1054–64 
2. Gembruch U, Hansmann M, Redel D, Bald R. Fetal two-dimensional Doppler echocardiography (color flow 
mapping) and its place in prenatal diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 1989;9:535–47 
3. Kurjak A, Breyer B, Jurkovic D, Alfirevic Z, Miljan M. Color flow mapping in obstetrics. J Perinat Med 
1987;15:271–81 
4. Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Fetal color Doppler echocardiography. 1. General principles and normal findings 
(German). Ultraschall Med 1994;15:100–4 
5. Rice MJ, McDonald RW, Sahn DJ. Contributions of color Doppler to the evaluation of cardiovascular 
abnormalities in the fetus. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1993;14:277–85 
6. Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Fetal color Doppler echocardiography. 2. Abnormalities of the heart and great essels 
(German). Ultraschall Med 1994;15:105–11 
7. Copel JA, Morotti R, Hobbins JC, Kleinman CS. The antenatal diagnosis of congenital heart disease using 
fetal echocardiography: is color flow mapping necessary? Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:1–8 
8. DeVore G. The use of color Doppler imaging to examine the fetal heart. Normal and pathologic anatomy. In 
Jaffe R, Warsof SL, eds. Color Doppler Imaging in Obstetrics and Gynecology. McGraw-Hill, 1992:121–54 
9. Sharland G, Chita S, Allan L. The use of color Doppler in fetal echocardiography. Int J Cardiol 1990;28:229– 
36 
10. Chiba Y, Kanzaki T, Kobayashi H, Murakami M, Yutani C. Evaluation of fetal structural heart disase using 
color flow mapping. Ultrasound Med Biol 1990;16:221–9 
11. Chaoui R, Bollmann R, Goldner B, Heling KS, Tennstedt C. Fetal cardiomegaly: echocardiographic findings 
and outcome in 19 cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 1994;9:92–104 
12. Chaoui R, Goldner B, Heling K-S, Bollmann R. Intracardiac Doppler flow velocities in marked fetal 
cardiomegaly. J Matern Fetal Invest 1995;5:68–73 
13. Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Goldner B, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of ventriculo-coronary communications in 
a second-trimester fetus using transvaginal and transabdominal color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:194–7 
14. Gembruch U, Chatterjee M, Bald R, Redel D, Hansmann M. Prenatal diagnosis of aortic atresia by colour 
Doppler flow mapping. Prenat Diagn 1990;10:211–15 
15. Hata K, Hata T, Manabe A, Kitao M. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: color Doppler sonographic and 
magnetic resonance imaging features in utero. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1995;39:70–2 
16. Gembruch U, Knopfle G, Chatterjee M, Bald R, Redel DA, Fodisch HJ, Hansmann M. Prenatal diagnosis of 
atrioventricular canal malformations with up-to-date echocardiographic technology: report of 14 cases. Am 
Heart J 1991;121:1489–97 
17. Respondek ML, Kammermeier M, Ludomirsky A,Weil SR, Huhta JC. The prevalence and clinical significance 
of fetal tricuspid valve regurgitation with normal heart anatomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:1265–70 
18. Gembruch U, Smrcek JM. The prevalence and clinical significance of tricuspid valve regurgitation in normally 
grown fetuses and those with intrauterine growth retardation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:374–82 

Chapter 13 
Color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of fetal 
abnormalities 
by Rabih Chaoui 
INTRODUCTION 
Color Doppler plays a vital role in the diagnosis of fetal cardiac defects and in the assessment of the hemodynamic 
responses to fetal hypoxia and anemia. This chapter examines an additional role of color Doppler in the diagnosis of 
non-cardiac malformations. In the future, color Doppler may also be used in the three-dimensional reconstruction and 
visualization of fetal and placental vessels.1,2 
PLACENTAL AND UMBILICAL VESSELS 
The umbilical cord vessels can be followed from their placental insertion (Figure 1) to their attachment on the fetal 
abdominal wall and their extension into the fetal abdomen 3. Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of vasa previa 
(Figure 2), and targeted examination for this condition should always be undertaken in patients with velamentous 
insertion of the cord (Figure 1), succenturiate lobe, placenta previa, multiple gestation and amniotic bands 4-8. Color 
Doppler is also helpful in the detection of placenta accreta 9,10 and chorioangioma, which is an arteriovenous fistulous 
malformation within the placenta 11,12. 
Examination of the umbilical cord facilitates the detection of nuchal cord (Figure 3), false and true knots of the cord 
(Figure 3), hemangioma or angiomyxoma of the cord, hypoplastic umbilical artery, fusion of two arteries into one, 
and a single umbilical artery 13-21. In a transverse view of the lower abdomen, the two umbilical arteries (superior 
vesical arteries) are seen on either side of the bladder (Figure 4) and, using this plane, it is easier to diagnose a 
single umbilical artery than by examining a cross-section of the umbilical cord. 
Figure 1: The umbilical cord inserts into an anterior placenta but an umbilical vessel extends into the 
amniotic membranes (left). In this fetus with a posterior placenta, there is velamentous insertion of the 
umbilical cord (right). 

Figure 2: Transvaginal demonstration of a vasa previa. In this condition, transvaginal color Doppler 
sonography demonstrates the presence of fetal vessels within the membranes across the internal cervical os 
(right). The yellow arrows point to the vasa previa and the white arrows to the cervix. 
Figure 3: Three-fold nuchal cord (left). False knot of the umbilical cord (right). 
Figure 4: Transverse section of the fetal lower abdomen demonstrating the bladder and the umbilical arteries 
(a). In a fetus with Potter syndrome, there is no visible bladder (?) between the umbilical arteries (b). In this 
fetus, there is only a single umbilical artery (c). 

A varix or aneurysm of the intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein is recognized as a hypoechoic cyst and the 
diagnosis can be made by color Doppler (Figure 5). Color Doppler can also facilitate the diagnosis of an abnormal 
course of the umbilical vein, including a persistent right umbilical vein (Figures 6 and 7), and absence of the ductus 
venosus with direct connection of the umbilical vein to the right atrium (Figure 7), inferior vena cava or iliac vein2428. 
In two fetuses with Down syndrome, we detected a fistula between the hepatic artery and the ductus venosus 29. 
In monochorionic twins, color Doppler is useful in the identification of placental vascular communications in 
pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, in the detection of retrograde perfusion in twin reversed arterial 
perfusion (TRAP) sequence and in the diagnosis of cord entanglement in monoamniotic twins 30,31. 
Figure 5: Transverse section of the fetal lower abdomen demonstrating two cystic structures (a). Color 
Doppler demonstrates that one cyst is the bladder with both umbilical arteries and the other cyst is a varix of 
the umbilical vein (b). 
RENAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler examination of fetal renal vessels can facilitate the diagnosis of renal malformations. It is best to use a 
coronal view of the fetus, allowing visualization of the descending aorta with both the left and right renal arteries 
(Figure 8). Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of unilateral or bilateral renal agenesis (Figure 9), double arterial 
supply of a normal or a duplex kidney (Figure 8), horseshoe kidney (Figure 10) and pelvic kidney 32-38. 
Figure : Color Doppler examination of fetal renal vessels, a coronal view allowing the visualization of the 
descending aorta with both renal arteries (a), unilateral renal artery (b), absence of bilateral renal arteries (c) 
and absence of bilateral renal arteries + absence of iliac arteries (d). 

Figure 6: Persistence of a right umbilical vein (UV) -yellow arrow, which is seen to the right of the stomach 
(St.) 
Figure : Ductus venosus agenesis (from Jeanty, 1999) 

Figure 7: Longitudinal view of the fetal trunk and abdomen demonstrating the umbilical vein and ductus 
venosus in their course through the liver towards the heart. 
Figure 7: Example of type 3 ductal agenesis, with the umbilical vein joining directly to the inferior vena cava. 
(courtesy Olavarria, www.thefetus.net) 
Figure 8: Coronal view of the descending aorta demonstrating both renal arteries (left). Duplex kidney with 
arterial supply by two renal vessels (right). 

Figure 9: Presence of only the right renal artery in a fetus with agenesis of the left kidney (left). In a fetus 
with bilateral renal agenesis, there are no renal arteries arising from the aorta (right) 
Figure 10: Horseshoe kidney diagnosed by real-time ultrasound (left) is confirmed by color Doppler (right) 
INTRACRANIAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler is helpful in the diagnosis of intracranial arteriovenous fistulae, such as vein of Galen aneurym (Figure 
11) and in distinguishing this vascular malformation from an arachnoid cyst, porencephaly or hydrocephaly 39-42. 
Intracranial arteriovenous fistulae can be also found in other regions of the brain and do not always present as a 
hypoechoic cyst. In such cases, a fistula is suspected by the presence of the associated cardiomegaly and dilated neck 
veins, and the diagnosis is made by targeted examination of the brain with color Doppler. 
Some malformations of the fetal brain are often associated with an abnormal course of intracranial vessels and their 
visualization using color Doppler can be used for confirming the diagnosis. Agenesis or dysgenesis of the corpus 
callosum is associated with an abnormal looping of the pericallosal artery (Figure 12), and, in microcephaly and 
holoprosencephaly, the shape of the circle of Willis may be distorted (Figure 13) 43,44. 

Figure 11: Vein of Galen aneurysm as an intracerebral cystic structure in gray scale (left) and as a vascular 
malformation with color Doppler (right) 
Figure 12: Midsagittal view of the head demonstrating the anterior (pericallosal) cerebral artery in a normal 
fetus (left). In a fetus with agenesis of the corpus callosum, there is abnormal looping and ramification of the 
pericallosal artery (right) 
Figure 13: Circle of Willis in a normal fetus (left). In holoprosencephaly, the anterior artery is part of the 
malformation and the circle is not closed (right). 
INTRATHORACIC VESSELS 
Pulmonary arteries and veins can be seen in their course from the heart into the peripheral pulmonary segments, and 
Doppler measurements in these vessels may be useful in the detection of pulmonary hypoplasia 45-49. In suspected 
diaphragmatic hernia, visualization of liver vessels in the thorax can confirm the diagnosis and has prognostic 
value50,51 
. 

Color Doppler has also been found to be useful in the diagnosis of the very rare condition of unilateral lung 
agenesis52. In bronchopulmonary sequestration, the diagnosis can be made by the demonstration of the feeding 
artery arising directly from the descending aorta (Figure-14) 53,54. Some cardiac defects, such as pulmonary valve 
atresia with ventricular septum defect, are associated with multiple aorto-pulmonary collateral arteries which may 
complicate the neonatal course. 
Figure 14: Pulmonary sequestration (a) with the feeding artery arising directly from the descending aorta 
(b,c). Color Doppler demonstrates that a vessel that arises from the aorta and perfuses the left lung (d,e). 
INTRA-ABDOMINAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler has made it possible to visualize the celiac trunk with the hepatic, superior mesenteric, splenic, adrenal 
and other arteries. In general, the differential diagnosis of abdominal wall defects is easy by gray-scale imaging, but, 
in some cases, color Doppler may be necessary to demonstrate the attachment of the umbilical cord and to help 
distinguish between an omphalocele and a gastroschisis (Figure 15). 
Figure 15: Umbilical vein and ductus venosus in a fetus with exomphalos (left). Gastroschisis with 
demonstration of the descending aorta, the celiac trunk (ct) and the superior mesenteric artery extending into 
the exteriorized bowel (right) 

Figure 16: Fetus with left isomerism (polysplenia). A cross-section in the upper abdomen shows the stomach 
(ST) on the right side, no inferior vena cava and the dilated azygous vein near the aorta (left). In the 
longitudinal coronal view, different flow directions in the aorta and in the azygous vein are demonstrated by 
color Doppler (right). 
However, in these conditions, Doppler measurements in the superior mesenteric artery have not been found to be 
useful in predicting postnatal outcome 55. Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of hepatic hemangioma, aortic 
aneurysm, aneurysm of the umbilical vein (Figure 5), and infradiaphragmatic anomalous pulmonary venous 
drainage56-58. In fetuses with left isomerism (polysplenia), color Doppler can facilitate visualization of the dilated 
azygous vein near the descending aorta and confirmation of the absence of the inferior vena cava (Figure 16). 
FETAL TUMORS 
Fetal tumors are rare but, for optimal perinatal management, their differential diagnosis and precise description are 
desirable. In fetal goiter, color Doppler demonstrates high perfusion of the thyroid gland 59,60. Echogenic or cystic 
lesions in the upper part of the kidneys may represent a neuroblastoma, adrenal hemorrhage or congenital adrenal 
hypertrophy, and the differential diagnosis could be facilitated by visualization of the adrenal arteries by color 
Doppler61,62. Color Doppler is also useful in the distinction of sacrococcygeal teratoma, which is vascular (Figure 17), 
from other cystic lesions, such as meningocele or ectodermal cyst 63,64. A teratoma can also be found in other sites, 
like the abdomen, thorax or neck. Color Doppler can be used in diagnosing lymphangioma and hemangioma but, in 
these conditions, flow velocities are very low 65-67. 

Figure 17: Vessels within a sacrococcygeal teratoma demonstrated by color Doppler 
VISUALIZATION OF FLUID MOVEMENTS 
Color Dppler enables not only visualization of blood flow but also movement of fluid. During fetal breathing 
movements, flow can be observed at the level of the mouth, nose and trachea (Figure 18) 68-70. Color Doppler 
facilitates the diagnosis of cleft palate by demonstrating the movement of fluid between mouth and nose during 
breathing movements 71,72. In normal fetuses, there is movement of fluid in the trachea during breathing movements 
and the flow has been shown to be decreased in those fetuses with diaphragmatic hernia and lethal pulmonary 
hypoplasia, but not in those that survive 73. In laryngeal atresia, there is no fluid flow within the dilated trachea 74. 
In fetuses with duodenal stenosis or atresia, to-and-fro fluid movements can be observed within the stomach (Figure 
19), which presumably represent abnormal peristaltic movements. The appearance of this sign may precede the 
development of the double-bubble sign and polyhydramnios 75. Similarly, in fetuses with ureteric dilatation and 
peristalsis, color Doppler may be useful in the diagnosis of vesico-ureteric reflux. In fetuses with suspected genital 
abnormalities, visualization of urination by color Doppler may help to make the diagnosis of hypospadias. 
In fetuses treated with pleuro–amniotic or vesico–amniotic shunts, color Doppler may be useful in demonstrating 
patency of the shunts and continuing drainage of fluid from the fetus into the amniotic fluid. 
Figure 18: Breathing through the nose and mouth in a third-trimester fetus (left). Visualization of the trachea 
in color Doppler also demonstrates flow. Pulsed Doppler examination allows the demonstration of fluid flow 
movements during expiration and inspiration (right) 

Figure 19: Duodenal atresia with the double-bubble sign of dilated stomach and proximal duodenum (left). 
Peristalsis and antiperistalsis waves are associated with to-and-fro fluid movements (red and blue) 
demonstrated by color Doppler (middle and right). 
Figure 20: Breathing through the nose in a third-trimester fetus with unilateral cleft lip and palate. Image 
intact lip and palate (a), cleft lip and palate (b) note the flow at the same time inside nostrils and mouth. (c) 
3D surface mode unilateral cleft lip and palate. 
.. 

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS 
There are essentially three causes of absence or severe reduction in amniotic fluid at mid-pregnancy: premature 
rupture of the membranes, bilateral renal agenesis or dysplasia, and severe hypoxia with intrauterine growth 
restriction. Color Doppler is useful in distinguishing between oligohydramnios and anhydramnios, where all the 
translucent areas in the amniotic cavity are filled with loops of umbilical cord. In hypoxic growth restriction, the fetal 
measurements are small for gestation, the fetal heart looks dilated and the bowel is echogenic. Doppler demonstrates 
the presence of two renal arteries and absent or reversed end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical arteries. In renal 
agenesis or dysplasia, umbilical artery Doppler is normal, but no renal vessels are seen (Figure 9) and no bladder 
filling is observed between the intra-abdominal umbilical arteries (Figure 4). In premature rupture of the membranes, 
there are normal renal vessels, normal umbilical flow and normal filling of the bladder. 

REFERENCES 
1. Chaoui R, Kalache K, Bollmann R. Three-dimensional color power angiography in the assessment of fetal 
vascular anatomy under normal and abnormal conditions. In Kupesic S, Kurjak A, eds. Three-Dimensional 
Power Doppler in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 2000:150–8 
2. Chaoui R, Kalache K. Three-dimensional color power imaging: principles and first experience in prenatal 
diagnosis. In Merz E, ed. 3D Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams 
and Wilkins, 1998:135–42 
3. Di Salvo DN, Benson CB, Laing FC, Brown DL, Frates MC, Doubilet PM. Sonographic evaluation of the 
placental cord insertion site. Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:1295–8 
4. Raga F, Ballester MJ, Osborne NG, Bonilla Musoles F. Role of color flow Doppler ultrasonography in 
diagnosing velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord and vasa previa. A report of two cases. J Reprod Med 
1995;40:804–8 
5. Arts H, van Eyck J. Antenatal diagnosis of vasa previa by transvaginal color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:276–8 
6. Daly Jones E, Hollingsworth J, SepulvedaW. Vasa praevia: second trimester diagnosis using colour flow 
imaging. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:284–6 
7. Meyer WJ, Blumenthal L, Cadkin A, Gauthier DW, Rotmensch S. Vasa previa: prenatal diagnosis with 
transvaginal color Doppler flow imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:1627–9 
8. Oyelese KO, Schwarzler P, Coates S, Sanusi FA, Hamid R, Campbell S. A strategy for reducing the mortality 
rate from vasa previa using transvaginal sonography with color Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:434–8 
9. Chou MM, Ho ESC, Lu F, Lee YH. Prenatal diagnosis of placenta previa/accreta with color Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:293–6 
10. Lerner JP, Deane S, Timor-Tritsch IE. Characterization of placenta accreta using transvaginal sonography 
and color Doppler imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:198–201 
11. Zoppini C, Acaia B, Lucci G, Pugni L, Tassis B, Nicolini U. Varying clinical course of large placental 
chorioangiomas. Report of 3 cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12:61–4 
12. D’Ercole C, Cravello L, Boubli L, Labit C, Millet V, Potier A, Blanc B. Large chorioangioma associated with 
hydrops fetalis: prenatal diagnosis and management. Fetal Diagn Ther 1996;11:357–60 
13. Pilu G, Falco P, Guazzarini M, Sandri F, Bovicelli L. Sonographic demonstration of nuchal cord and abnormal 
umbilical artery waveform heralding fetal distress. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12: 125–7 
14. Jauniaux E, Mawissa C, Peellaerts C, Rodesch F. Nuchal cord in normal third-trimester pregnancy: a color 
Doppler imaging study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:417–19 
15. Sepulveda W, Shennan AH, Bower S, Nicolaidis P, Fisk NM. True knot of the umbilical cord: a difficult 
prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:106–8 
16. Gembruch U, Baschat AA. True knot of the umbilical cord: transient constrictive effect to umbilical venous 
blood flow demonstrated by Doppler sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8: 53–6 
17. Tennstedt C, Chaoui R, Bollmann R, Dietel M. Angiomyxoma of the umbilical cord in one twin with cystic 
degeneration of Wharton’s jelly. A case report. Pathol Res Pract 1998;194:55–8 
18. SepulvedaW, Flack NJ, Bower S, Fisk NM. The value of color Doppler ultrasound in the prenatal diagnosis of 
hypoplastic umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:143–6 
19. Persutte WH, Hobbins J. Single umbilical artery: a clinical enigma in modern prenatal diagnosis. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;6:216–29 
20. Abuhamad AZ, ShafferW, Mari G, Copel JA, Hobbins JC, Evans AT. Single umbilical artery: does it matter 
which artery is missing? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:728–32 

21. Jauniaux E. The single artery umbilical cord: it is worth screening for antenatally? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1995;5:75–6 
22. SepulvedaW, Mackenna A, Sanchez J, Corral E, Carstens E. Fetal prognosis in varix of the intrafetal umbilical 
vein. J Ultrasound Med 1998;17:171–5 
23. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Prenatal diagnosis of an intra-abdominal ectasia of the umbilical vein with color Doppler 
ultrasonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:55–7 
24. Hill LM, Mills A, Peterson C, Boyles D. Persistent right umbilical vein: sonographic detection and subsequent 
neonatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:923–5 
25. Chaoui R, Göldner B, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of two cases with absence of the ductus venosus 
associated with an atypical course of the umbilical vein: implications for the possible role of the ductus 
venosus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:179 
26. Ariyuki Y, Hata T, Manabe A, Hata K, Kitao M. Antenatal diagnosis of persistent right umbilical vein. J Clin 
Ultrasound 1995;23:324–6 
27. Moore L, Toi A, Chitayat D. Abnormalities of the intra-abdominal fetal umbilical vein: reports of four cases 
and a review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:21–5 
28. Hartung J, Chaoui R, Kalache K, Heling KS, Bollmann R. Abnormalities of the fetal umbilical vein: prenatal 
diagnosis and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:52 
29. Hartung J, Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of an intrahepatic arteriovenous fistula 
associated with Down syndrome: a report of two cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;15:in press 
30. Hecher K, Ville Y, Nicolaides KH. Color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of communicating 
vessels in twin–twin transfusion syndrome and acardiac twins. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14:37–40 
31. Schwarzler P, Ville Y, Moscoso G, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R, Chaoui R. Diagnosis of twin reversed arterial 
perfusion sequence in the first trimester by transvaginal color Doppler ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;13:143–6 
32. Mackenzie FM, Kingston GO, Oppenheimer L. The early prenatal diagnosis of bilateral renal agenesis using 
transvaginal sonography and color Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1994;13:49–51 
33. SepulvedaW, Stagiannis KD, Flack NJ, Fisk NM. Accuracy of prenatal diagnosis of renal agenesis with color 
flow imaging in severe second-trimester oligohydramnios. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:1788–92 
34. DeVore GR. The value of color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of renal agenesis. J Ultrasound Med 
1995;14:443–9 
35. Sepulveda W, Romero R, Pryde PG, Wolfe HM, Addis JR, Cotton DB. Prenatal diagnosis of sirenomelus with 
color Doppler ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1377–9 
36. King KL, Kofinas AD, Simon NV, Clay D. Antenatal ultrasound diagnosis of fetal horseshoe kidney. J 
Ultrasound Med 1991;10:643–4 
37. Hill LM, Grzybek P, Mills A, HoggeWA. Antenatal diagnosis of fetal pelvic kidney. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;83:333–6 
38. Meizner I, Yitzhak M, Levi A, Barki Y, Barnhard Y, Glezerman M. Fetal pelvic kidney: a challenge in prenatal 
diagnosis? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:391–3 
39. Dan U, Shalev E, Greif M,Weiner E. Prenatal diagnosis of fetal brain arteriovenous malformation: the use of 
color Doppler imaging. J Clin Ultrasound 1992;20:149–51 
40. Paladini D, Palmieri S, D’Angelo A, Martinelli P. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of cerebral arteriovenous 
fistula. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:678–81 
41. SepulvedaW, Platt CC, Fisk NM. Prenatal diagnosis of cerebral arteriovenous malformation using color 
Doppler ultrasonography: case report and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;6:282–6 
42. Heling KS, Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of a Galen vein aneurysm using color Doppler and 3D 
power Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;15:in press 

43. Guzman ER, Walters C, Sharma S, Tierney R, Palermo A, Vintzileos AM. Two-dimensional gray-scale imaging 
and color Doppler in the detection of the corpus callosum and pericallosal artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;14:53 
44. Pilu G, Falco P, Milano V, Perolo A, Bovicelli L. Prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly assisted by vaginal 
sonography and power Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:357–60 
45. Rasanen J, Huhta JC,Weiner S,Wood DC, Ludomirski A. Fetal branch pulmonary arterial vascular impedance 
during the second half of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1441–9 
46. Chaoui R, Taddei F, Rizzo G, Bast C, Lenz F, Bollmann R. Doppler echocardiography of the main stems of the 
pulmonary arteries in the normal human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 173–9 
47. Roth P, Agnani G, Arbez Gindre F, Pauchard JY, Burguet A, Schaal JP, Maillet R. Use of energy color Doppler 
in visualizing fetal pulmonary vascularization to predict the absence of severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Gynecol Obstet Invest 1998;46:153–7 
48. Chaoui R, Kalache K, Tennstedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler in fetuses with lung 
hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999:84:179–85 
49. Yoshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T. Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
50. Sherer DM, Eglinton GS, Goncalves LF, Lewis KM, Queenan JT. Prenatal color and pulsed Doppler 
sonographic documentation of intrathoracic umbilical vein and ductus venosus, confirming extensive hepatic 
herniation in left congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Am J Perinatol 1996;13: 159–62 
51. Botash RJ, Spirt BA. Color Doppler imaging aids in the prenatal diagnosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:359–61 
52. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Paris S, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of right lung agenesis using color Doppler and 
magnetic resonance imaging. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12:360–2 
53. Morin L, Crombleholme TM, Louis F, D’Alton ME. Bronchopulmonary sequestration: prenatal diagnosis with 
clinicopathologic correlation. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 1994;6:479–81 
54. Smulian JC, Guzman ER, Ranzini AC, Benito CW, Vintzileos AM. Color and duplex Doppler sonographic 
investigation of in utero spontaneous regression of pulmonary sequestration. J Ultrasound Med 
1996;15:789–92 
55. Abuhamad AZ, Mari G, Cortina RM, CroitoruDP, Evans AT. Superior mesenteric artery Doppler velocimetry 
and ultrasonographic assessment of fetal bowel in gastroschisis: a prospective longitudinal study. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:985–90 
56. Mejides AA, Adra AM, O’Sullivan MJ, Nicholas MC. Prenatal diagnosis and therapy for a fetal hepatic vascular 
malformation. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:850–3 
57. Abuhamad AZ, Lewis D, Inati MN, Johnson DR, Copel JA. The use of color flow Doppler in the diagnosis of 
the fetal hepatic hemangioma. J Ultrasound Med 1993;4:223–6 
58. DiSessa TG, Emerson DS, Felker RE, Brown DL, Cartier MS, Becker JA. Anomalous systemic and pulmonary 
venous pathways diagnosed in utero by ultrasound. J Ultrasound Med 1990;9:311–17 
59. Soliman S, McGrath F, Brennan B, Glazebrook K. Color Doppler imaging of the thyroid gland in a fetus with 
congenital goiter: a case report. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:21–3 
60. Luton D, Fried D, Sibony O, Vuillard E, Tebeka B, Boissinot C, Leger J, Polak M, Oury JF, Blot P. Assessment 
of fetal thyroid function by colored Doppler echography. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12: 24–7 
61. Schwarzler P, Bernard JP, Senat MV, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of fetal adrenal masses: differentiation 
between hemorrhage and solid tumor by color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;13:351–5 
62. Goldstein I, Gomez K, Copel JA. The real-time and color Doppler appearance of adrenal neuroblastoma in a 
third-trimester fetus. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:854–6 
63. Sherer DM, Fromberg RA, RindfuszDW, Harris BH, Sanz LE. Color Doppler aided prenatal diagnosis of a type 
1 cystic sacrococcygeal teratoma simulating a meningomyelocele. Am J Perinatol 1997;14:13–15 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
64. Bloechle M, Bollmann R,Wit J, Buttenberg S, Kursawe R, Guski H. Neuroectodermal cyst may be a rare 
differential diagnosis of fetal sacrococcygeal teratoma: first case report of a prenatally observed 
neuroectodermal cyst. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:64–7 
65. Bulas DI, Johnson D, Allen JF, Kapur S. Fetal hemangioma – sonographic and color flow Doppler findings. J 
Ultrasound Med 1992;11:499–501 
66. Goncalves LF, Pereira ET, Parente LM, Vitorello DA, Barbosa UC, Saab Neto JA. Cutaneous hemangioma of 
the thigh: prenatal diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:128–30 
67. Raman S, Ramanujam T, Lim CT. Prenatal diagnosis of an extensive haemangioma of the fetal leg: a case 
report. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 1996; 22:375–8 
68. Bruner JP, Coggins T. Assessment of fetal breathing movements using three different ultrasound modalities. 
J Clin Ultrasound 1995;23:551–3 
69. Suzuki M, Saito H, Yanaihara T. Assessment of fetal nasal fluid flow by two-dimensional color Doppler 
ultrasonography during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Med 1999;8:159–63 
70. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Doppler assessment of tracheal and nasal fluid flow during fetal 
breathing movements: preliminary observations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:257–61 
71. Aubry M-C, Aubry J-P. Prenatal diagnosis of cleft palate: contribution of color Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:221–4 
72. Monni G, Ibba RM, Olla G, Cao A, Crisponi G. Color Doppler ultrasound and prenatal diagnosis of cleft palate. 
J Clin Ultrasound 1995;23:189–91 
73. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Hartung J, Wernecke KD, Bollmann R. Doppler assessment of tracheal fluid flow 
during fetal breathing movements in cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:27–32 
74. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of laryngeal atresia in two cases of 
congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS). Prenat Diagn 1997;17:577–81 
75. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Arduini D, Romanini C. Prenatal diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux by color and 
pulsed Doppler ultrasonography in a case of congenital pyloric atresia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995; 
6:290–2 

