Contents
Introduction 
1 Standard views for examination of the fetus 
2 Central nervous system 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Neural tube defects 
Hydrocephalus and ventriculomegaly 
Holoprosencephaly 
Agenesis of the corpus collosum 
Dandy-Walker complex 
Microcephaly 
Megalencephaly 
Destructive cerebral lesions 
Arachnoid cysts 
Choroid plexus cysts 
Vein of Galen aneurysm 
3 Face 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Orbital defects 
Facial cleft 
Micrognathia 
4 Cardiovascular system 
Introduction to congenital heart disease 
Assessment of the fetal heart 
Atrial septal defects 
Ventricular septal defects 
Atrioventricular septal defects 
Univentricular heart 
Aortic stenosis 
Coarctation and tubular hypoplasia of the aorta 
Interrupted aortic arch 
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
Pulmonary stenosis and pulmonary atresia 
Ebstein's anomaly and tricuspid valve dysplasia 
Conotruncal malformations 
Transposition of the great arteries 
Tetralogy of Fallot 
Double-outlet right ventricle 
Truncus arteriosus communis 
Cardiosplenic syndromes 
Echogenic foci 
Cardiac dysrhythmias: premature contractions 
Cardiac dysrhythmias: tachyarrhythmias 
Cardiac dysrhythmias: complete atrioventricular block 

Pulmonary abnormalities 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation 
Diaphragmatic hernia 
Pleural effusions 
Sequestration of the lungs 
6 Anterior abdominal wall 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Exomphalos 
Gastroschisis 
Body stalk anaomaly 
Bladder exstrophy and cloacal exstrophy 
7 Gastrointestinal tract 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Esopageal atresia 
Duodenal atresia 
Intestinal obstruction 
Hirschsprung's disease 
Meconium peritonitis 
Hepatosplenomegaly 
Hepatic calcifications 
Abdominal cysts 
8 Kidneys and urinary tract 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Renal agenesis 
Infantile polycystic kidney disease (Potter type I) 
Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease (Potter type II) 
Potter type III renal dysplasia 
Obstructive uropathies 
9 Skeleton 
Normal sonographic anatomy 
Skeletal anomalies 
Osteochondrodysplasias 
Limb deficiency or congenital amputations 
Split hand and foot syndrome 
Clubhands 
Polydactyly 
Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 
10 Features of chromosomal defects 
Phenotypic expression 
Risk for chromosomal defects 

11 
Fetal tumors 
Introduction 
Intracranial tumors 
Tumors of the face and neck 
Tumors of the thorax 
Tumors of the abdomen and retroperitoneum 
Tumors of the extremities 
Tumors of the skin 
Sacrococcygeal teratoma 
12 
Hydrops fetalis 
13 
Small for gestational age 
14 Abnormalities of the amniotic fluid volume 
Oligohydramnios/Anhydramnios
Polyhydramnios
Appendix I Risk of major trisomies in relation to maternal age and gestation 
Appendix II Antenatal sonographic findings in skeletal dysplasias 
Appendix III Fetal biometry at 14-40 weeks of gestation 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions from Roberto Romero to the chapter on the 
skeleton, from Rosalinde Snijders to the chapter on the features of chromosomal defects and from Israel 
Meizner to the chapter on fetal tumors. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Introduction
Ultrasound is the main diagnostic tool in the prenatal detection of congenital abnormalities. It allows 
examination of the external and internal anatomy of the fetus and the detection of not only major defects 
but also of subtle markers of chromosomal abnormalities and genetic syndromes. Although some women 
are at high risk of fetal abnormalities, either because of a family history or due to exposure to teratogens 
such as infection and various drugs, the vast majority of fetal abnormalities occur in the low-risk group. 
Consequently, ultrasound examination should be offered routinely to all pregnant women. The scan, which 
is usually performed at 18–23 weeks of pregnancy, should be carried out to a high standard and should 
include systematic examination of the fetus for the detection of both major and minor defects. 
The Fetal Medicine Foundation, under the auspices of the International Society of Ultrasound in Obstetrics 
and Gynecology and the International Society of Perinatal Medicine, has introduced a process of training 
and certification to help establish high standards of scanning on an international basis. The Certificate of 
Competence in the 18–23-week scan is awarded to those sonographers that can perform the scan to a 
high standard and can demonstrate a good knowledge of a wide spectrum of fetal abnormalities. 
This book, which summarizes the prevalence, etiology, prenatal sonographic features and prognosis for 
both common and rare fetal abnormalities, provides the basis of learning for the theoretical component of 
the Certificate of Competence in the 18–23-week scan. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter1 
Standardviewsforexaminationofthefetus 
Skull 
Examination of integrity and normal shape, and measurement of biparietal diameter and head circumference. 
Brain 
Examination of cerebral ventricles, choroid plexuses, mid-brain, posterior fossa (cerebellum and cisterna magna), and 
measurement of the anterior and posterior horns of the lateral ventricles. 
BPD Plane -Transverse view (left). Transverse Cerebellar Diameter Plane -Transverse view (right) 
Sagittal View (Transvaginal Scan): demonstrating transvaginal + color Doppler: pericallosal artery 

Face 
Examination of the profile, orbits and upper lip. 
Neck 
Measurement of nuchal fold thickness. 
Spine 
Examination both longitudinally and transversely. 
Heart 
Examination of rate and rhythm, four-chamber view, and outflow tracts. 

Thorax
Examination of the shape of the thorax, the lungs and diaphragm. 
Abdomen 
Examination of the stomach, liver, kidneys, bladder, abdominal wall and umbilicus, and measurement of abdominal 
circumference. 
Limbs 
Examination of the femur, tibia and fibula, humerus, radius and ulna, hands and feet (including shape and 
echogenicity of long bones and movement of joints), and measurement of femur length. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter2 
Central nervous system 
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY 
The fetal brain undergoes major developmental changes throughout pregnancy. At 7 weeks of gestation, a sonolucent 
area is seen in the cephalic pole, presumably representing the fluid-filled rhombencephalic vesicle. At 9 weeks, 
demonstration of the convoluted pattern of the three primary cerebral vesicles is feasible. From 11 weeks, the 
brightly echogenic choroid plexuses filling the large lateral ventricles are the most prominent intracranial structures. 
In the early second trimester, the lateral ventricles and choroid plexuses decrease in size relative to the brain mass. 
Examination of the fetal brain can essentially be carried out by two transverse planes, commonly referred to as the 
transventricular and the transcerebellar plane. 
The transventricular plane, obtained by a transverse scan at the level of the cavum septum pellucidum will 
demonstrate the lateral borders of the anterior (or frontal) horns, the medial and lateral borders of the posterior 
horns (or atria) of the lateral ventricles, the choroid plexuses and the Sylvian fissures. 

The transventricular view is used for measurement of the biparietal diameter (BPD), head circumference (HC), and 
width of the ventricles. 
The transcerebellar (or suboccipitobregmatic) view allows examination of the mid-brain and posterior fossa; this view 
is used for measurement of the transverse cerebellar diameter (TCD) and cisterna magna (CM). 
Additional scanning planes along different orientations may be required from time to time to better define subtle 
details of intracranial anatomy in selected cases. Reverberation artifacts usually obscure the cerebral hemisphere 
close to the transducer. Visualization of both cerebral hemispheres would require sagittal and coronal planes that are 
often difficult to obtain and may require vaginal sonography. 

Transvaginal Scan + Color Doppler (Sagittal plane) Vascularization of Brain (arrow -Pericallosal Artery) 
Luckily unilateral cerebral lesions are rare and are often associated with a shift in the midline echo. Therefore, we 
adhere to the approach that in standard examination only one hemisphere is seen, and symmetry is assumed unless 
otherwise proven. 
A sagittal and/or coronal view of the entire fetal spine should be obtained in each case. In the sagittal plane the 
normal spine has a 'double railway' appearance and it is possible to appreciate the intact soft tissues above it. In the 
coronal plane, the three ossification centers of the vertebra form three regular lines that tether down into the sacrum. 
These views are used to assess the integrity of the vertebrae (to rule out spina bifida) and the presence and 
regularity of the whole spine (to rule out sacral agenesis and scoliosis). 
Whether a systematic examination of each neural arch from the cervical to the sacral region in the transverse plane is 
necessary is debatable. This is certainly required for patients at high-risk of neural tube defects. In low-risk patients, 
intact cerebral anatomy rules out more than 90% of cases of spina bifida and we believe that the longitudinal / 
coronal scan may suffice. 
NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS 
These include anencephaly, spina bifida and encephalocele. In anencephaly there is absence of the cranial 
vault (acrania) with secondary degeneration of the brain. Encephaloceles are cranial defects, usually occipital, with 
herniated fluid-filled or brain-filled cysts. In spina bifida the neural arch, usually in the lumbosacral region, is 
incomplete with secondary damage to the exposed nerves. 
Prevalence 
This is subject to large geographical and temporal variations; in the UK the prevalence is about 5 per 1,000 births. 
Anencephaly and spina bifida, with an approximately equal prevalence, account for 95% of the cases and 
encephalocele for the remaining 5%. 
Etiology 
Chromosomal abnormalities, single mutant genes, and maternal diabetes mellitus or ingestion of teratogens, such as 
antiepileptic drugs, are implicated in about 10% of the cases. However, the precise etiology for the majority of these 
defects is unknown. When a parent or previous sibling has had a neural tube defect, the risk of recurrence is 5-10%. 

Periconceptual supplementation of the maternal diet with folate reduces by about half the risk of developing these 
defects. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of anencephaly during the second trimester of pregnancy is based on the demonstration of absent 
cranial vault and cerebral hemispheres. However, the facial bones, brain stem and portions of the occipital bones and 
mid-brain are usually present. Associated spinal lesions are found in up to 50% of cases. In the first trimester the 
diagnosis can be made after 11 weeks, when ossification of the skull normally occurs. Ultrasound reports have 
demonstrated that there is progression from acrania to exencephaly and finally anencephaly. Not everyone agrees 
however, since acrania are defects of the mesenchymal layer and there is no evidence in the literature of recurrence 
rate. In the first trimester the pathognomonic feature is acrania, the brain being either entirely normal or at varying 
degrees of distortion and disruption. 
Anencephaly (3D view) 
Diagnosis of spina bifida requires the systematic examination of each neural arch from the cervical to the sacral 
region both transversely and longitudinally. In the transverse scan the normal neural arch appears as a closed circle 
with an intact skin covering, whereas in spina bifida the arch is 'U'-shaped and there is an associated bulging 
meningocele (thin-walled cyst) or myelomeningocoele. The extent of the defect and any associated kyphoscoliosis are 
best assessed in the longitudinal scan. 

The diagnosis of spina bifida has been greatly enhanced by the recognition of associated abnormalities in the skull 
and brain. These abnormalities are secondary to the Arnold-Chiari malformation and include frontal bone scalloping 
(lemon sign), and obliteration of the cisterna magna with either an "absent" cerebellum or abnormal anterior 
curvature of the cerebellar hemispheres (banana sign). 
These easily recognizable alterations in skull and brain morphology are often more readily attainable than detailed 
spinal views. A variable degree of ventricular enlargement is present in virtually all cases of open spina bifida at birth, 
but in only about 70% of cases in the mid-trimester. 
Encephaloceles are recognized as cranial defects with herniated fluid-filled or brain-filled cysts. They are most 
commonly found in an occipital location (75% of the cases) but alternative sites include the frontoethmoidal and 
parietal regions. 

Prognosis 
Anencephaly is fatal at or within hours of birth. In encephalocele the prognosis is inversely related to the amount of 
herniated cerebral tissue; overall the neonatal mortality is about 40% and more that 80% of survivors are 
intellectually and neurologically handicapped. In spina bifida the surviving infants are often severely handicapped, 
with paralysis in the lower limbs and double incontinence; despite the associated hydrocephalus requiring surgery, 
intelligence may be normal. 
Fetaltherapy 
There is some experimental evidence that in utero closure of spina bifida may reduce the risk of handicap because the 
amniotic fluid in the third trimester is thought to be neurotoxic. 
HYDROCEPHALUS AND VENTRICULOMEGALY 
In hydrocephalus there is pathological increase in the size of the cerebral ventricles. 
Prevalence 
Hydrocephalus is found in about 2 per 1,000 births. Ventriculomegaly (lateral ventricle diameter of 10 mm or more) is 
found in 1% of pregnancies at the 18-23 week scan. Therefore the majority of fetuses with ventriculomegaly do not 
develop hydrocephalus. 
Etiology 
This may result from chromosomal and genetic abnormalities, intrauterine hemorrhage or congenital infection, 
although many cases have as yet no clear-cut etiology. 
Diagnosis 
Fetal hydrocephalus is diagnosed sonographically, by the demonstration of abnormally dilated lateral cerebral 
ventricles. Certainly before 24 weeks and particularly in cases of associated spina bifida, the head circumference may 
be small rather than large for gestation. A transverse scan of the fetal head at the level of the cavum septum 
pellucidum will demonstrate the dilated lateral ventricles, defined by a diameter of 10 mm or more. The choroid 
plexuses, which normally fill the lateral ventricles are surrounded by fluid. A distinction is usually made between mild, 
or borderline, ventriculomegaly (diameter of the posterior horn 10-15 mm) and overt ventriculomegaly or 
hydrocephalus (diameter greater than 15 mm). 
Prognosis 
Fetal or perinatal death and neurodevelopment in survivors are strongly related to the presence of other 
malformations and chromosomal defects. Although mild, also referred to as borderline, ventriculomegaly is generally 
associated with a good prognosis, affected fetuses form the group with the highest incidence of chromosomal 
abnormalities (often trisomy 21). In addition in a few cases with apparently isolated mild ventriculomegaly there may 
be an underlying cerebral maldevelopment (such as lissencephaly) or destructive lesion (such as periventricular 
leukomalacia). Recent evidence suggests that in about 10% of cases there is mild to moderate neurodevelopmental 

delay. 
Fetaltherapy
There is some experimental evidence that in utero cerebrospinal fluid diversion may be beneficial. However, attempts 
in the 1980’s to treat hydrocephalic fetuses by ventriculo-amniotic shunting have now been abandoned because of 
poor results mainly because of inappropriate selection of patients. It is possible that intrauterine drainage may be 
beneficial if all intra-and extra-cerebral malformations and chromosomal defects are excluded, and if serial 
ultrasound scans demonstrate progressive ventriculomegaly. 
HOLOPROSENCEPHALY 
This is a spectrum of cerebral abnormalities resulting from incomplete cleavage of the forebrain. There are three 
types according to the degree of forebrain cleavage. The alobar type, which is the most severe, is characterized by a 
monoventricular cavity and fusion of the thalami. In the semilobar type there is partial segmentation of the ventricles 
and cerebral hemispheres posteriorly with incomplete fusion of the thalami. In lobar holoprosencephaly there is 
normal separation of the ventricles and thalami but absence of the septum pellucidum. The first two types are often 
accompanied by microcephaly and facial abnormalities. 
Prevalence 
Holoprosencephaly is found in about 1 per 10,000 births. 
Etiology 
Although in many cases the cause is a chromosomal abnormality (usually trisomy 13) or a genetic disorder with an 
autosomal dominant or recessive mode of transmission, in many cases the etiology is unknown. For sporadic, non-
chromosomal holoprosencephaly, the empirical recurrence risk is 6%. 
Diagnosis 
In the standard transverse view of the fetal head for measurement of the biparietal diameter there is a single dilated 
midline ventricle replacing the two lateral ventricles or partial segmentation of the ventricles. The alobar and 
semilobar types are often associated with facial defects, such as hypotelorism or cyclopia, facial cleft and nasal 
hypoplasia or proboscis 
Prognosis 
Alobar and semilobar holoprosencephaly are lethal. Lobar holoprosencephaly is associated with mental retardation. 
AGENESIS OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM 
The corpus callosum is a bundle of fibers that connects the two cerebral hemispheres. It develops at 12-18 weeks of 
gestation. Agenesis of the corpus callosum may be either complete or partial (usually affecting the posterior part). 
Prevalence 
Agenesis of the corpus callosum is found in about 5 per 1,000 births. 

Etiology
Agenesis of the corpus callosum may be due to maldevelopment or secondary to a destructive lesion. It is commonly 
associated with chromosomal abnormalities (usually trisomies 18, 13 and 8) and more than 100 genetic syndromes. 
Diagnosis 
The corpus callosum is not visible in the standard transverse views of the brain but agenesis of the corpus callosum 
may be suspected by the absence of the cavum septum pellucidum and the ‘teardrop’ configuration of the lateral 
ventricles (enlargement of the posterior horns). Agenesis of the corpus callosum is demonstrated in the mid-coronal 
and mid-sagittal views, which may require vaginal sonography. 
Prognosis 
This depends on the underlying cause. In about 90% of those with apparently isolated agenesis of the corpus 
callosum development is normal. 
DANDY-WALKER COMPLEX 
The Dandy-Walker complex refers to a spectrum of abnormalities of the cerebellar vermis, cystic dilation of the fourth 
ventricle and enlargement of the cisterna magna. The condition is classified into (a) Dandy-Walker malformation 
(complete or partial agenesis of the cerebellar vermis and enlarged posterior fossa), (b) Dandy-Walker variant (partial 
agenesis of the cerebellar vermis without enlargement of the posterior fossa), and (c) mega-cisterna magna (normal 
vermis and fourth ventricle). 
Prevalence 
Dandy-Walker malformation is found in about 1 per 30,000 births. 
Etiology 
The Dandy-Walker complex is a non-specific end-point of chromosomal abnormalities (usually trisomy 18 or 13 and 
triploidy), more than 50 genetic syndromes, congenital infection or teratogens such as warfarin, but it can also be an 
isolated finding. 
Diagnosis 
Ultrasonographically, the contents of the posterior fossa are visualized through a transverse suboccipito-bregmatic 
section of the fetal head. In the Dandy-Walker malformation there is cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle with 
partial or complete agenesis of the vermis; in more than 50% of the cases there is associated hydrocephalus and 
other extracranial defects. Enlarged cisterna magna is diagnosed if the vertical distance from the vermis to the inner 
border of the skull is more than 10 mm. 

Prenatal diagnosis of isolated partial agenesis of the vermis is difficult and a false diagnosis can be made prior to 18 
weeks gestation, when the formation of the vermis is incomplete and anytime in gestation if the angle of insonation is 
too steep. 
Prognosis 
Dandy-Walker malformation is associated with a high postnatal mortality (about 20%) and a high incidence (more 
than 50%) of impaired intellectual and neurological development. Experience with apparently isolated partial agenesis 
of the vermis or enlarged cisterna magna is limited and the prognosis for these conditions is uncertain. 
MICROCEPHALY 
Microcephaly means small head and brain. 
Prevalence 
Microcephaly is found in about 1 per 1,000 births. 
Etiology 
This may result from chromosomal and genetic abnormalities, fetal hypoxia, congenital infection, and exposure to 
radiation or other teratogens, such maternal anticoagulation with warfarin. It is commonly found in the presence of 
other brain abnormalities, such as encephalocele or holoprosencephaly. 
Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made by the demonstration of brain abnormalities, such as holoprosencephaly. In cases with 
apparently isolated microcephaly it is necessary to demonstrate progressive decrease in the head to abdomen 
circumference ratio to below the 1st centile with advancing gestation. Such diagnosis may not be apparent before the 

third trimester. In microcephaly there is a typical disproportion between the size of the skull and the face. The brain is 
small, with the cerebral hemispheres affected to a greater extent than the midbrain and posterior fossa. 
Prognosis 
This depends on the underlying cause, but in more than 50% of cases there is severe mental retardation. 
MEGALENCEPHALY 
Megalencephaly means large head and brain. 
Prevalence 
Megalencephaly is a very rare abnormality. 
Etiology 
This is usually familial with no adverse consequence. However, it may also be the consequence of genetic syndromes, 
such as Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, achondroplasia, neurofibromatosis, and tuberous sclerosis. Unilateral 
megalencephaly is a sporadic condition. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis is made by the demonstration of a head to abdomen circumference ratio above the 99th centile without 
evidence of hydrocephalus or intracranial masses. Unilateral megalencephaly is characterized by macrocrania, a shift 
in the midline echo, borderline enlargement of the lateral ventricle and atypical gyri of the affected hemisphere. 

Prognosis 
Isolated megalencephaly is usually an asymptomatic condition. Unilateral megalencephaly is associated with severe 
mental retardation and untreatable seizures. 
DESTRUCTIVE CEREBRAL LESIONS 
These lesions include hydranencephaly, porencephaly and schizencephaly. In hydranencephaly there is absence of the 
cerebral hemispheres with preservation of the mid-brain and cerebellum. In porencephaly there are cystic cavities 
within the brain that usually communicate with the ventricular system, the subarachnoid space or both. 
Schizencephaly is associated with clefts in the fetal brain connecting the lateral ventricles with the subarachnoid 
space. 
Prevalence 
Destructive cerebral lesions are found in about 1 per 10,000 births. 
Etiology 
Hydranencephaly is a sporadic abnormality that may result from widespread vascular occlusion in the distribution of 
the internal carotid arteries, prolonged severe hydrocephalus, or an overwhelming infection such as toxoplasmosis or 
cytomegalovirus. Porencephaly may be caused by infarction of the cerebral arteries or hemorrhage into the brain 
parenchyma. Schizencephaly may be a primary disorder of brain development or it may be due to bilateral occlusion 
of the middle cerebral arteries. 
Diagnosis 
Complete absence of echoes from the anterior and middle fossae distinguishes hydranencephaly from severe 
hydrocephalus in which a thin rim of remaining cortex and the midline echo can always be identified. In porencephaly 
there is one or more cystic areas in the cerebral cortex, which usually communicates with the ventricle; the 
differential diagnosis is from intracranial cysts (arachnoid, glioependymal), that are usually found either within the 
scissurae or in the mid-line and compress the brain. In schizencephaly there are bilateral clefts extending from the 

lateral ventricles to the subarachnoid space, and is usually associated with absence of the cavum septum pellucidum. 
Prognosis
Hydranencephaly is usually incompatible with survival beyond early infancy. The prognosis in porencephaly is related 
to the size and location of the lesion and although there is increased risk of impaired neurodevelopment in some 
cases development is normal. Schizencephaly is associated with severe neurodevelopmental delay and seizures. 
ARACHNOID CYST 
Arachnoid cysts are fluid-filled cysts contained within the arachnoid space 
Prevalence 
Arachnoid cysts are extremely rare 
Etiology 
Unknown; infectious process has been hypothesized but it is unlikely that this may explain the congenital cysts 
Diagnosis 
Arachnoid cysts appear on antenatal ultrasound as sonolucent lesions with a thin regular outline, that do not contain 
blood flow, do not communicate with the lateral ventricles and anyhow are not associated with loss of brain tissue. 
They occur most frequently in the area of the cerebral fissure and in the midline. Large cysts may cause significant 
mass effect and the distinction from porencephaly may be difficult. Interhemispheric cysts associated with agenesis of 
the corpus callosum most likely are not arachnoid cysts, but rather glioependymal cysts. 
Arachnoid cyst (axial Plane) and Circle of Willis 
MRI showing the relation with the cerebral penducles 

Prognosis
Large cysts may cause intracranial hypertension and require neurosurgical treatment. However, a normal intellectual 
development in the range of 80-90% is reported by most series. Spontaneous remission has been described both in 
the postnatal as well as in the antenatal period. Glioependymal cysts, that should be suspected in those cases with 
associated agenesis of the corpus callosum probably reflect a greater degree of derangement in the development of 
the brain and this may be reflected in a worse outcome. 
CHOROID PLEXUS CYSTS 
These cysts, which are usually bilateral, are in the choroid plexuses of the lateral cerebral ventricles. 
Prevalence 
Choroid plexus cysts are found in about 2% of fetuses at 20 weeks of gestation but in more than 90% of cases they 
resolve by 26 weeks. 
Etiology 
The choroid plexus is easily visualized from 10 weeks of gestation when it occupies almost the entire hemisphere. 
Thereafter and until 26 weeks, there is a rapid decrease in both the size of the choroid plexus and of the lateral 
cerebral ventricle in relation to the hemisphere. Choroid plexus cysts contain cerebrospinal fluid and cellular debris. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis is made by the presence of single or multiple cystic areas (greater than 2 mm in diameter) in one or 
both choroid plexuses. 
Prognosis 
They are usually of no pathological significance, but they are associated with an increased risk for trisomy 18 and 
possibly trisomy 21. In the absence of other markers of trisomy 18 the maternal age-related risk is increased by a 
factor of 1.5. 
VEIN OF GALEN ANEURYSM 
This is a mid-line aneurismal dilation of the vein of Galen due to an arteriovenous malformation with major 
hemodynamic disturbances. 
Prevalence 
Vein of Galen aneurysm is a very rare abnormality. 
Etiology 
Vein of Galen aneurysm is a sporadic abnormality. 

Diagnosis
The diagnosis is made by the demonstration of a supratentorial mid-line translucent elongated cyst. Color Doppler 
demonstrates active arteriovenous flow within the cyst. There may be associated evidence of high-output heart 
failure. 
Prognosis 
In the neonatal period about 50% of the infants present with heart failure and the rest are asymptomatic. In later life 
hydrocephalus and intracranial hemorrhage may develop. Good results can be achieved by catheterization and 
embolization of the malformation. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter3 
Face 
NORMALSONOGRAPHICANATOMY 
The forehead, orbits, nose, lips and ears can be consistently identified from 12 weeks of gestation. Sagittal, 
transverse and coronal planes are all useful for the evaluation of normal and abnormal anatomy. A mid-sagittal plane 
allows visualization of the fetal profile, whereas the ears are visualized in parasagittal scans tangential to the 
calvarium. The coronal planes are probably the most important ones in the evaluation of the integrity of facial 
anatomy. Orbits, eyelids, nose, and lips are well visualized. The tip of the nose, the alae nasi, and the columna are 
seen above the upper lip. The nostrils typically appear as two little anechoic areas. 
A series of transverse scans from the top of the head moving caudally allows examination of the forehead, nasal 
bridge, orbits, nose, upper lip and anterior palate, the tongue within the oral cavity, lower lip and mandible. The 
presence and size of the eyes are assessed subjectively. As a rule of thumb, each orbital diameter is equal in size to 
the interorbital diameter. In cases of suspected defects measurement of the internal and external orbital diameters 
may be necessary. 

ORBITALDEFECTS
Hypertelorism(Euryopia) 
In early development the eyes are placed laterally in the primitive face in a fashion similar to that of lower animals 
with panoramic vision. As gestation progresses, they migrate toward the mid-line, creating favorable conditions for 
the development of stereoscopic vision. Hypertelorism is an increased interorbital distance and this can be either an 
isolated finding or associated with many clinical syndromes or malformations. The most common syndromes with 
hypertelorism are the median cleft syndrome (hypertelorism, median cleft lip with or without a median cleft of the 
hard palate and nose, and cranium bifidum occultum), craniosynostoses (including Apert, Crouzon, and Carpenter 
syndromes), agenesis of the corpus callosum and anterior encephaloceles. Hypertelorism per se results only in 
cosmetic problems and possible impairment of stereoscopic binocular vision. For severe cases, a number of operative 
procedures, such as canthoplasty, orbitoplasty, surgical positioning of the eyebrows, and rhinoplasty, have been 
proposed. The median cleft face syndrome is usually associated with normal intelligence and life span. However, there 
is a high likelihood of mental retardation when either extracephalic anomalies or an extreme degree of hypertelorism 
is found. The severity of the cosmetic disturbance should not be underestimated, because this syndrome may be 
associated with extremely grotesque features. 
Hypotelorism(stenopia) 
Hypotelorism (decreased interorbital distance) is almost always found in association with other severe anomalies, 
such as holoprosencephaly, trigonocephaly, microcephaly, Meckel syndrome, and chromosomal abnormalities. The 
prognosis, which depends on the associated anomalies, is usually very poor. 
Microphthalmia/anophthalmia 
Microphthalmia is defined as a decreased size of the eyeball and anophthalmia refers to the absence of the eye; 
however, the term anophthalmia should be reserved for the pathologist, who must demonstrate not only absence of 
the eye but also of optic nerves, chiasma, and tracts. Microphthalmia / anophthalmia, which is either unilateral or 
bilateral, is usually associated with with one of about 25 genetic syndromes. In Goldenhar syndrome (found in about 
1 per 5,000 births) there is unilateral anophthalmia, together with ear and facial abnormalities. Prenatal diagnosis is 
based on the demonstration of decreased ocular diameter and careful examination of the intraorbital anatomy is 
indicated to identify lens, pupil, and optic nerve. Congenital microphthalmia is frequently associated with visual 
disorders and with other anomalies. 

FACIALCLEFT 
This term refers to a wide spectrum of clefting defects (unilateral, bilateral and less commonly mid-line) usually 
involving the upper lip, the palate, or both. Cleft palate without cleft lip is a distinct disorder. Facial clefts encompass 
a broad spectrum of severity, ranging from minimal defects, such as a bifid uvula, linear indentation of the lip, or 
submucous cleft of the soft palate, to large deep defects of the facial bones and soft tissues. The typical cleft lip will 
appear as a linear defect extending from one side of the lip into the nostril. Cleft palate associated with cleft lip may 
extend through the alveolar ridge and hard palate, reaching the floor of the nasal cavity or even the floor of the orbit. 
Isolated cleft palate may include defects of the hard palate, the soft palate, or both. Both cleft lip and palate are 
unilateral in about 75% of cases and the left side is more often involved than the right side. 
Prevalence 
Facial clefting is found in about 1 per 800 births. In about 50% of cases both the lip and palate are defective, in 25% 
only the lip and in 25% only the palate is involved. 

Etiology 
The face is formed by the fusion of four outgrowths of mesenchyme (frontonasal, mandibular and paired maxillary 
swellings) and facial clefting is caused by failure of fusion of these swellings. Cleft lip with or without cleft palate is 
usually (more than 80% of cases) an isolated condition, but in 20% of cases it is associated with one of more than 
100 genetic syndromes. Isolated cleft palate is a different condition and it is more commonly associated with any one 
of more than 200 genetic syndromes. All forms of inheritance have been described, including autosomal dominant, 
autosomal recessive, X-linked dominant and X-linked recessive. Associated anomalies are found in about 50% of 
patients with isolated cleft palate and in about 15% of those with cleft lip and palate. Chromosomal abnormalities 
(mainly trisomy 13 and 18) are found in 1-2% of cases and exposure to teratogens (such as antiepileptic drugs) in 
about 5% of cases. Recurrences are type specific; if the index case has cleft lip and palate there is no increased risk 
for isolated cleft palate, and vice versa. Median cleft lip, which accounts for about 0.5% of all cases of cleft lip, is is 
usually associated with holoprosencephaly or the oral-facial-digital syndrome. 
Diagnosis 
The sonographic diagnosis of cleft and palate depends on demonstration of a groove extending from one of the 
nostrils inside the lip and possibly the alveolar ridge. Both transverse and coronal planes can be used. 
A transverse scan is required to distinguish isolated cleft lip from cleft lip/palate. 

BilateralCleftLipandPalate-3Dview(yellowarrow"flap") 
Median cleft lip is usually associated with other facial anomalies (hypertelorism with median cleft face syndrome, 
hypotelorism with holoprosencephaly). 
The diagnosis of isolated cleft palate is difficult and in cases at risk for Mendelian syndromes fetoscopy may be 
necessary. 
Prognosis 
Minimal defects, such as linear indentations of the lips or submucosal cleft of the soft palate, may not require surgical 
correction. Larger defects cause cosmetic, swallowing, and respiratory problems. Recent advances in surgical 
technique have produced good cosmetic and functional results. However, prognosis depends primarily on the 
presence and type of associated anomalies. 
MICROGNATHIA 
Micrognathia is characterized by mandibular hypoplasia causing a receding chin. 
Prevalence 
Micrognathia is found in about 1 per 1,000 births. 

Etiology 
Micrognathia is usually associated with genetic syndromes (such as Treacher-Collins, Robin and Robert syndromes), 
chromosomal abnormalities (mainly trisomy 18 and triploidy) and teratogenic drugs (such as methotrexate). The 
Robin anomalad (severe micrognathia, glossoptosis and a posterior cleft palate or an arched palate) may be a 
sporadic isolated finding (in about 40% of cases) or it may be associated with other anomalies or with recognized 
genetic and non-genetic syndromes. Otocephaly is a rare, lethal, sporadic abnormality characterized by severe 
hypoplasia of the mandible (agnathia) and severe midline defects, including holoprosencephaly, anterior 
encephalocele, cyclopia, aglossia, microstomia, and mid-facial location of the ears (‘ear-head’). 
Diagnosis 
Micrognathia is a subjective finding in the midsagittal view of the face and is characterized by a prominent upper lip 
and receding chin. The diagnosis can be confirmed by the demonstration of a short mandible. Severe micrognathia is 
associated with polyhydramnios possibly because of the glossoptosis preventing swallowing. 
Prognosis 
This depends on the presence of associated anomalies. Severe micrognathia can be a neonatal emergency due to 
airway obstruction by the tongue in the small oral cavity. If prenatal diagnosis is made a pediatrician should be 
present in the delivery room and be prepared to intubate the infant. Otocephaly is lethal. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 4 
Cardiovascular system 
INTRODUCTION TO CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 
Abnormalities of the heart and great arteries are the most common congenital abnormalities. In general, about half 
are either lethal or require surgery and half are asymptomatic. The first two groups are referred to as major. 
Prevalence 
Cardiovascular abnormalities are found in 5-10 per 1,000 live births and in about 30 per 1,000 stillbirths. 
Etiology 
The etiology of heart defects is heterogeneous and probably depends on the interplay of multiple genetic and 
environmental factors, including maternal diabetes mellitus or collagen disease, exposure to drugs such as lithium, 
and viral infections such as rubella. Specific mutant gene defects and chromosomal abnormalities account for less 
than 5% of the patients. Heart defects are found in more than 90% of fetuses with trisomy 18 or 13, 50% of trisomy 
21, and 40% of those with Turner syndrome, deletions or partial trisomies involving a variety of chromosomes. 
Recurrence 
When a previous sibling has had a congenital heart defect, in the absence of a known genetic syndrome, the risk of 
recurrence is about 2%, and with two affected siblings the risk is 10%. When the father is affected, the risk for the 
offspring is about 2% and if the mother is affected the risk is about 10%. 
Reliability of prenatal diagnosis 
Echocardiography has been successfully applied to the prenatal assessment of the fetal cardiac function and structure, 
and has led to the diagnosis of most cardiac abnormalities. Studies from specialist centers report the diagnosis of 
about 90% of defects. However, the majority of such studies refer to the prenatal diagnosis of moderate to major 
defects in high-risk populations. 
Screening for cardiac abnormalities 
The main challenge in prenatal diagnosis is to identify the high-risk group for referral to specialist centers. The 
indications include congenital cardiac defects in one of the parents or previous pregnancies, maternal diabetes 
mellitus or ingestion of teratogenic drugs. However, more than 90% of fetuses with cardiac defects are from families 
without such risk factors. A higher sensitivity is achieved by examination of the four-chamber view of the heart at the 
routine 20-week scan; screening studies have reported the detection of about 30% of major cardiac defects. Recent 
evidence suggests that a higher sensitivity (more than 50%) can be achieved by referral for specialist 
echocardiography of patients with increased nuchal translucency at 10-14 weeks. 
ASSESSMENT OF THE FETAL HEART 
Real-time 2-dimensional evaluation 
The heart can be observed in an infinity of planes, but a few sections are the basis on which most of the diagnoses 
are made. These planes include the four-chamber, left and right chambers and great vessel views. Although it is 
convenient to refer to these standardized views for descriptive purposes, in practice it may be difficult to reproduce 
these exact sections, and the operator should be familiar with small variations of these planes. 

Complex cardiac anomalies are frequently associated with an abnormal disposition of the heart and extra-cardiac 
viscera. Fetal echocardiography should always include an assessment of topographic anatomy of the abdomen and 
chest. The left and right sides are assessed by determining the relative position of the head and spine. The visceral 
situs is then assessed by demonstrating the relative position of the stomach, hepatic vessels, abdominal aorta and 
inferior vena cava. 
The examination of the fetal heart begins with the assessment of the disposition of abdominal and thoracic organs, as 
an abnormal disposition is frequently associated with complex cardiac anomalies. A transverse section of the upper 
abdomen, the same used for the measurement of the abdominal circumference, allows to identify the position of the 
liver, stomach and great abdominal vessels. A transverse section of the thorax reveals the four-chamber view of the 
fetal heart. The heart occupies approximately one third of the thorax. The heart is not mid-line but shifted to the left 
side of the chest, with the apex pointing to the left. The axis of the interventricular septum is about 45º to 20º to the 
left of the anteroposterior axis of the fetus. 
Theexaminationofthefetalheartbeginswiththeassessmentofthedispositionofabdominalandthoracic 
organs 
In the four chamber view the normal ventricles, atria, atrio-ventricular valves, ventricular and atrial septae, foramen 
ovale flap, and pulmonary venous connections can be identified. The thickness of the interventricular septum and of 
the free ventricular walls is the same. The interatrial septum is open at the level of the foramen ovale. The foramen 
ovale flap is visible in the left atrium, beating toward the left side. The insertion of the tricuspid valve along the 
interventricular septum is more apical than the insertion of the mitral valve. The confluence of the pulmonary veins 
into the left atrium serves to identify it as such. Probably, about 90% of ultrasonographically detectable fetal cardiac 
defects demonstrate some abnormalities in this view. 

Normal CardiacAxis 
Evaluation of the cardiac outflow tracts can be difficult, and at present it is not considered a part of the standard 
examination of fetal anatomy. However, we believe that it is important to attempt such an examination because this 
improves the detection of many abnormalities of the heart and great arteries. The outflow tracts and great arteries 
can be demonstrated by slight angulations of the transducer from the four-chamber view. By turning the transducer 
while keeping the left ventricle and the aorta in the same plane, one can obtain the left heart views, while the right 
heart views are obtained by moving the transducer cranially and tilting slightly in the direction of the left shoulder. 
The left heart views demonstrate the left ventricle and aortic outflow tract. The anterior wall of the aorta is in 
continuity with the interventricular septum. 
The right heart views demonstrate the right ventricle and the right ventricular outflow tract. The main pulmonary 
artery originates from the anterior ventricle and trifurcates into a large vessel, the ductus going into the descending 
aorta, and two small vessels, the pulmonary arteries 
There are two arches in the fetus (aortic arch and curve of the ductus) and they should be distinguished. The 
brachiocephalic vessels originate from the aortic arch, while no vessels emanate from the ductus. Furthermore, the 
curve of the aortic arch is gentler than that of the ductus, which is slightly more angular. The cavae can be seen in a 
longitudinal view as they both enter the right atrium. 

M-Mode 
Heart rate and rhythm are assessed subjectively. M-mode, which is not used routinely, is useful for the evaluation of 
abnormal cases. In M-mode ultrasound, one line of information only is continuously displayed: instead of a two-
dimensional scan of the heart, a recording of the variations of echoes along a single line is produced. Thus, M-mode is 
of little help in the analysis of the morphology of the heart but is useful in assessing motions and rhythms. One 
simply “drops” an M-mode line over one atrial and ventricular wall and is able to quantify cardiac frequency, and to 
infer the atrioventricular sequence of contractions. 
Pulsed wave and color Doppler
Color Doppler overlays a representation of flow velocity over a conventional gray scale image. This allows a rapid 
recognition of the flow pattern. Color Doppler is useful to assess normal anatomy and physiology, valvular 
regurgitation or stenosis, shunting and the orientation of flows. Pulsed wave Doppler is used to analyze the spectral 
shift (to assess the resistance in a vessel), to obtain flow velocities (how the resistance affects the flow), and flow 
predictions (to estimate the perfusion). Pulsed Doppler ultrasound, in combination with two-dimensional and M-mode 
sonography, has proved useful in the evaluation of both fetal dysrhythmias and structural anomalies. Pulsed Doppler 
can be useful in the detection and assessment of severity of valvar abnormalities (stenosis, insufficiency). Analysis of 
atrioventricular inflows, hepatic veins and inferior vena cava can also be used to assess cardiac rhythm. 

ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECTS 
Most atrial septal defects involve either the septum primum (the portion of the atrial septum below the foramen 
ovale) or the septum secundum (the portion above the foramen ovale). Primum atrial septal defect is the simplest 
form of the atrioventricular septal defects (see below). Secundum atrial septal defect, which are the most common, 
are usually isolated, but may be related to other cardiac lesions (such as mitral, pulmonary, tricuspid or aortic 
atresia) and are occasionally found as part of syndromes (including Holt-Oram syndrome in which there is hypo-
aplasia of the thumb and radius, triphalangeal thumb, abrachia, and phocomelia). 
Prevalence 
Secundum atrial septal defects, which represent about 10% of congenital heart defects, are found in about 1 per 
3,000 births. 
Diagnosis 
Although the in utero identification of secundum atrial septal defect has been reported, the diagnosis remains difficult 
because of the physiological presence of the foramen ovale and only unusually large defects can be recognized with 
certainty. 
Prognosis 
Atrial septal septal defects are not a cause of impairment of cardiac function in utero, as a large right-to-left shunt at 
the level of the atria is a physiological condition in the fetus. Most affected infants are asymptomatic even in the 
neonatal period. 
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS 
Defects in the ventricular septum are either isolated (about 50%) or they are part of a complex heart defect. They are 
classified into perimembranous, inlet, trabecular or outlet defects depending on their location on the septum. 

Perimembranous defects (80%) involve the membranous septum below the aortic valve, but also extend to variable 
degrees into the adjacent portion of the septum. The inlet defects are on the inflow tract of the right ventricle and 
thus affect the implantation of the septal chordae of the tricuspid valve. The trabecular defects occur in the muscular 
portion of the septum, and the outlet defects are in the infundibular portion of the right ventricle. 
Prevalence 
Ventricular septal defects, which represent 30% of all congenital heart defects, are found in about 2 per 1,000 births. 
Diagnosis 
Echocardiographic diagnosis depends on the demonstration of a dropout of echoes in the ventricular septum. Since 
most ventricular septal defects are perimembranous and subaortic, a detailed view of the left outflow tract is the best 
picture to image them. While evaluating the ventricular septum in search of defects, multiple views should be used. 
Overall, small isolated ventricular septal defects are difficult to detect prenatally, and both false positive and false 
negative diagnoses have been made. 
VentricularSeptalDefects 
In dubious cases, Color Doppler may be useful, in that many ventricular septal defects are associated with a 
demonstrable left to right shunt. 

Prognosis 
Ventricular septal defects are not associated with hemodynamic compromise in utero because the right and left 
ventricular pressures are very similar and the degree of shunting should be minimal. More than 90% of small defects 
close spontaneously within the first year of life. Large defects present with congestive heart failure at 2-8 weeks of 
life and require medical treatment (digoxin and diuretics). Rarely very large defects, associated with massive left to 
right shunt, can be associated with congestive heart failure soon after birth. If medical treatment fails surgical closure 
is undertaken; survival from surgery is more than 90% and survivors have a normal life expectancy and normal 
exercise tolerance. 
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECTS 
The ontogenesis of the apical portion of the atrial septum, of the basal portion of the interventricular septum and of 
the atrioventricular valves depends on development of mesenchymal masses (endocardial cushions). Abnormal 
development of these structures is commonly referred to as endocardial cushion defects, atrioventricular canal or 
atrioventricular septal defects. In the complete form, persistent common atrioventricular canal, the tricuspid and 
mitral valve are fused in a large single atrioventricular valve that opens above and bridges the two ventricles. In the 
complete form of atrioventricular canal, the common atrioventricular valve may be incompetent, and systolic blood 
regurgitation from the ventricles to the atria may give rise to congestive heart failure. 
Prevalence 
Atrioventricular septal defects, which represent about 7% of all congenital heart defects, are found in about 1 per 
3,000 births. 

Diagnosis 
Antenatal echocardiographic diagnosis of complete atrioventricular septal defects is usually easy. An obvious 
deficiency of the central core structures of the heart is present. Color Doppler ultrasound can be useful, in that it 
facilitates the visualization of the central opening of the single atrioventricular valve. The atria may be dilated as a 
consequence of atrioventricular insufficiency. In such cases, Color and pulsed Doppler ultrasound allow one to identify 
the regurgitant jet. 
The incomplete forms are more difficult to recognize. The main clue is the absence of the atrial septum below the 
level of the foramen ovalis. Another useful hint is the demonstration that the tricuspid and mitral valves attach at the 
same level at the crest of the septum. This apical displacement of the mitral valve elongates the left ventricular 
outflow tract. The atrial septal defect is of the ostium primum type (since the septum secundum is not affected) and 
thus is close to the crest of the interventricular septum. 
Prognosis 
Atrioventricular septal defects will usually be encountered either in fetuses with chromosomal aberrations (50% of 
cases are associated with aneuploidy, 60% being trisomy 21, 25% trisomy 18) or in fetuses with cardiosplenic 
syndromes. In the former cases, an atrioventricular septal defect is frequently found in association with extra-cardiac 
anomalies. In the latter cases, multiple cardiac anomalies and abnormal disposition of the abdominal organs are 
almost the rule. 
Atrioventricular septal defects do not impair the fetal circulation per se. However, the presence of atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency may lead to intrauterine heart failure. The prognosis of atrioventricular septal defects is poor when 
detected in utero, probably because of the high frequency of associated anomalies in antenatal series. About 50% of 
untreated infants die within the first year of life from heart failure, arrhythmias and pulmonary hypertention due to 
right-to-left shunting (Eisenmenger syndrome). Survival after surgical closure (which is usually carried out in the sixth 
month of life) is more than 90% but in about 10% of patients a second operation for atrioventricular valve repair or 
replacement is necessary. Long-term prognosis is good. 

UNIVENTRICULAR HEART 
This term defines a group of anomalies characterized by the presence of an atrioventricular junction that is entirely 
connected to only one chamber in the ventricular mass. Therefore, univentricular heart includes both those cases in 
which two atrial chambers are connected, by either two distinct atrioventricular valves or by a common one, to a main 
ventricular chamber (double-inlet single ventricle) as well as those cases in which, because of the absence of one 
atrioventricular connection (tricuspid or mitral atresia), one of the ventricular chambers is either rudimentary or 
absent. 
Prevalence 
Univentricular heart is rare; it represents about 1.5% of all congenital cardiac defects. 
Diagnosis 
In double-inlet single ventricle, two separate atrioventricular valves are seen opening into a single ventricular cavity 
without evidence of the interventricular septum. In mitral / tricuspid atresia, there is only one atrioventricular valve 
connected to a main ventricular chamber. A small rudimentary ventricular chamber lacking of atrioventricular 
connection is a frequent but not constant finding. Demonstration of two patent great arteries arising from the 
ventricle allows a differential diagnosis from hypoplastic ventricles (hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pulmonary 
atresia with intact ventricular septum). 
Prognosis 
Surgical treatment (the Fontan procedure) involves separation of the systemic circulations by anastomosing the 
superior and inferior vena cava directly to the pulmonary artery. The survivors from this procedure often have long-
term complications including arrhythmias, thrombus formation and protein-losing enteropathy. The 5-year survival is 
about 70%. 
AORTIC STENOSIS 
Aortic stenosis is commonly divided in supravalvar, valvar and subaortic forms. Supravalvar aortic stenosis can be 
due to one of three anatomic defects: a membrane (usually placed above the sinuses of Valsalva), a localized 
narrowing of the ascending aorta (hourglass deformity) or a diffuse narrowing involving the aortic arch and branching 
arteries (tubular variety). The valvar form of aortic stenosis can be due to dysplastic, thickened aortic cusps or fusion 
of the commissure between the cusps. The subaortic forms include a fixed type, representing the consequence of a 
fibrous or fibromuscular obstruction, and a dynamic type, which is due to a thickened ventricular septum obstructing 
the outflow tract of the left ventricle. The latter is also known as asymmetric septal hypertrophy or idiopathic 
hypertrophic subaortic stenosis. A transient form of dynamic obstruction of the left outflow tract is seen in infants of 
diabetic mothers, and is probably the consequence of fetal hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. 
Prevalence 
Aortic stenosis, which represents 3% of all congenital heart defects, is found in about 1 per 7,000 births. 

Diagnosis 
Most cases of mild to moderate aortic stenosis are probably not amenable to early prenatal diagnosis. Severe valvar 
aortic stenosis of the fetus is usually associated with a hypertrophic left ventricle. Less frequently, a dilated and 
poorly contracting left ventricle is found. 
Within the ascending aorta (that can be small or enlarged) pulsed Doppler demonstrates increased peak velocity 
(usually in excess of 1 m/sec). At the Color Doppler examination, high velocity and turbulence results in aliasing, with 
a mosaic of colors. 
Severe aortic stenosis may result in atrioventricular valve insufficiency and intrauterine heart failure. Asymmetric 
septal hypertrophy and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of fetuses of diabetic mothers resulting in subaortic stenosis has 
been occasionally diagnosed by demonstrating an unusual thickness of the ventricular septum. We are not aware of 
cases of supravalvular aortic stenosis detected in utero. 
Prognosis 
Depending upon the severity of the aortic stenosis, the association of left ventricular pressure overload and 
subendocardial ischemia, due to decrease in coronary perfusion, may lead to intrauterine impairment of cardiac 
function. Subvalvular and subaortic forms are not generally manifested in the neonatal period. Conversely, the valvar 
type can be a cause of congestive heart failure in the newborn and fetus as well. Although there is concern that cases 
seen in early gestation may progress in severity, the lesion usually remains stable. The neonatal outcome depends on 
the severity of obstruction. If the left ventricular function is adequate balloon valvuloplasty is carried out in the 
neonatal period and in about 50% of cases surgery is necessary within the first 10 years of life because of aortic 
insufficiency or residual stenosis. If left ventricular function is inadequate a Norwood-type of repair is necessary (see 
hypoplastic left heart). 

Fetal therapy 
Antenatal transventricular balloon valvuloplasty has been attempted in a handful of cases but the results are 
uncertain. 
COARCTATION AND TUBULAR HYPOPLASIA OF THE AORTA 
Coarctation is a localized narrowing of the juxtaductal arch, most commonly between the left subclavian artery and 
the ductus. Cardiac anomalies are present in 90% of the cases and include aortic stenosis and insufficiency, 
ventricular septal defect, atrial septal defect, transposition of the great arteries, truncus and double outlet right 
ventricle. Non-cardiac anomalies include diaphragmatic hernia, Turner syndrome but not Noonan syndrome. 
Diagnosis 
Coarctation may be a postnatal event, and this limits prenatal diagnosis in many cases. It should be suspected when 
the right ventricle is enlarged (right ventricle to left ventricle ratio of more than 1.3). Narrowing of the isthmus, or the 
presence of a shelf are often difficult to demonstrate because in the fetus aortic arch and ductal arch are close and 
are difficult to distinguish. In most cases, coarctation can only be suspected in utero and a certain diagnosis must be 
delayed until after birth. 
Prognosis 
Critical coarctation is fatal in the neonatal period after closure of the ductus and therefore prostaglandin therapy is 
necessary to maintain a patent ductus. Surgery (which involves excision of the narrowed segment and end-to-end 
anastomosis) is associated with a mortality of about 10% and the incidence of restenosis in survivors (requiring 
further surgical repair) is about 15%. 
INTERRUPTED AORTIC ARCH 
The interruption of the aortic arch can be complete or there may be an atretic fibrous segment between the arch and 
the descending aorta. It may be isolated or associated with intracardiac lesions that cause obstruction to the blood 
flow from the left heart (aortic stenosis, aortic atresia, malaligned ventricular septal defects). Associated extracardiac 
anomalies are frequent and include DiGeorge syndrome (association of thymic aplasia, type B interruption and 
hypoplastic mandible), holoprosencephaly, cleft lip/palate, esophageal atresia, duplicated stomach, diaphragmatic 
hernia, horseshoe kidneys, bilateral renal agenesis, oligodactyly, claw hand and syrenomelia. 
Diagnosis 
Interrupted aortic arch should always be considered when intracardiac lesions diverting blood flow from the left to the 
right heart are encountered (aortic stenosis and atresia in particular). Isolated interruption of the aortic arch is often 
encountered with enlargement of the right ventricle (right ventricle to left ventricle ratio of more than 1.3). As the 
sonographic access to the arch is difficult, the diagnosis is not always possible. The characteristic finding of an 
ascending aorta more vertical than usually, and the impossibility to demonstrate a connection with the descending 
aorta suggest the diagnosis. 

Prognosis 
The median age at death for unoperated infants is four days. The initial treatment is the same as for any anomalies in 
which the perfusion is ductus dependent: prostaglandin E1. Recent reports suggest an overall late survival of more 
than 70% after surgery. 
HYPOPLASTIC LEFT HEART SYNDROME 
This is a spectrum of anomalies characterized by a very small left ventricle with mitral and/or aortic atresia or 
hypoplasia. Blood flow to the head and neck vessels and coronary artery is supplied in a retrograde manner via the 
ductus arteriosus. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal echocardiographic diagnosis of the syndrome depends on the demonstration of a diminutive left ventricle and 
ascending aorta. In most cases, the ultrasound appearance is self-explanatory, and the diagnosis an easy one. There 
is however a broad spectrum of hypoplasia of the left ventricle and in some cases the ventricular cavity is almost 
normal in size. As the four-chamber view is almost normal, we anticipate that these cases will be certainly missed in 
most routine surveys of fetal anatomy. At a closer scrutiny, however, the movement of the mitral valve appears 
severely impaired to non-existent, ventricular contractility is obviously decreased, and the ventricle often displays an 
internal echogenic lining that is probably due to endocardial fibroelastosis. 

The definitive diagnosis of the syndrome depends on the demonstration of hypoplasia of the ascending aorta and 
atresia of the aortic valve. Color flow mapping is an extremely useful adjunct to the real-time examination, in that it 
allows the demonstration of absent to severely decreased mitral valve flow and of retrograde blood flow within the 
ascending aorta and aortic arch. 
Prognosis 
Hypoplastic left heart is well tolerated in utero. The patency of the ductus arteriosus allows adequate perfusion of the 
head and neck vessels. Intrauterine growth may be normal, and the onset of symptoms most frequently occurs after 
birth. The prognosis for infants with hypoplastic left heart syndrome is extremely poor and this lesion is responsible 
for 25 % of cardiac deaths in the first week of life. Almost all affected infants die within six weeks if they are not 
treated. In the neonatal period prostaglandin therapy is given to maintain ductal patency but still congestive heart 
failure develops within 24 hours of life. Options for surgery include cardiac transplantation in the neonatal period 
(with an 80% 5-year survival) and the three-staged Norwood repair. Stage 1 involves anastomosis of the pulmonary 
artery to the aortic arch for systemic outflow, placement of systemic-to-pulmonary arterial shunt to provide 
pulmonary blood flow, and arterial septectomy to ensure unobstructed pulmonary venous return; the mortality from 
the procedure is about 30%. Stage 2 (which is usually carried out in the sixth month of life) involves anastomosis of 
the superior vena cava to the pulmonary arteries. The overall 2-year survival with the Norwood repair is about 50% 
but more than 50% of survivors have neurodevelopmental delay. 
PULMONARY STENOSIS AND PULMONARY ATRESIA 
Prevalence 
Pulmonary stenosis is found in about 1 per 2,000 births. Pulmonary atresia is rare, and is found in less than 1 per 
10,000 births. 

Diagnosis 
The most common form of pulmonary stenosis is the valvar type, due to the fusion of the pulmonary leaflets. 
Hemodynamic is altered proportionally to the degree of the stenosis. The work of the right ventricle is increased, as 
well as the pressure, leading to hypertrophy of the ventricular walls. The same considerations formulated for the 
prenatal diagnosis of aortic stenosis are valid for pulmonic stenosis as well. A handful of cases recognized in utero 
have been reported in the literature thus far, mostly severe types with enlargement of the right ventricle and/or post-
stenotic enlargement or hypoplasia of the pulmonary artery. 
Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum (PA:IVS) in infants is usually associated with an hypoplastic right 
ventricle. However, cases with enlarged right ventricle and atrium have been described with unusual frequency in 
prenatal series. Although these series are small, it is possible that the discrepancy with the pediatric literature is due 
to the very high perinatal loss rate that is found in "dilated" cases. Enlargement of the ventricle and atrium is 
probably the consequence of tricuspid insufficiency. Prenatal diagnosis of PA:IVS relies on the demonstration of a 
small pulmonary artery with an atretic pulmonary valve. The considerations previously formulated for the diagnosis of 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome apply to PA:IVS as well. 

Prognosis 
Patients with mild stenosis are asymptomatic and there is no need for intervention. Patients with severe stenosis, 
right ventricular overload may result in congestive heart failure and require balloon valvuloplasty in the neonatal 
period with excellent survival and normal long-term prognosis. Fetuses with pulmonary atresia and an enlarged right 
heart have a very high degree of perinatal mortality. Infants with right ventricular hypoplasia require biventricular 
surgical repair and the mortality is about 40%. 
EBSTEIN’S ANOMALY AND TRICUSPID VALVE DYSPLASIA 
Ebstein's anomaly results from a faulty implantation of the tricuspid valve. The posterior and septal leaflets are 
elongated and tethered below their normal level of attachment on the annulus or displaced apically, away from the 
annulus, down to the junction between the inlet and trabecular portion of the right ventricle. The anterior leaflet is 
normally inserted but deformed. The resulting configuration is that of a considerably enlarged right atrium at the 
expense of the right ventricle. The portion of the right ventricle that is ceded to the right atrium is called the atrialized 
inlet of the right ventricle. It has a thin wall that may even be membranous and is commonly dilated. The tricuspid 
valve is usually both incompetent and stenotic. Associated anomalies include atrial septal defect, pulmonary atresia, 
ventricular septal defect, and supraventricular tachycardia. Ebstein's may be associated with trisomy 13, 21, Turner, 
Cornelia de Lange and Marfan syndromes. Maternal ingestion of lithium has also been incriminated as a causal factor. 
Diagnosis 
The characteristic finding is that of a massively enlarged right atrium, a small right ventricle, and a small pulmonary 
artery. Doppler can be used to demonstrate regurgitation in the right atrium. About 25% of the cases have 
supraventricular tachycardia (from re-entrant impulse), atrial fibrillation or atrial flutter. Differential diagnosis from 
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum and a regurgitant tricuspid valve or isolated tricuspid valve 
insufficiency is difficult and may be impossible antenatally. 
Prognosis 
Although the disease has a variable severity with some cases discovered only late in life, Ebstein's anomalies detected 
prenatally have a dismal prognosis, with essentially all patients dying. This probably reflects that the prenatal variety 
is more severe than the one detected in children or adults. 

CONOTRUNCAL MALFORMATIONS 
Conotruncal malformations are a heterogeneous group of defects that involve two different segments of the heart: 
the conotruncus and the ventricles. Conotruncal anomalies are relatively frequent. They account for 20-30% of all 
cardiac anomalies and are the leading cause of symptomatic cyanotic heart disease in the first year of life. Prenatal 
diagnosis is of interest for several reasons. Given the parallel model of fetal circulation, conotruncal anomalies are 
well tolerated in utero. The clinical presentation occurs usually hours to days after delivery, and is often severe, 
representing a true emergency and leading to considerable morbidity and mortality. Yet, these malformations have a 
good prognosis when promptly treated. Two ventricles of adequate size and two great vessels are commonly present 
giving the premise for biventricular surgical correction. The outcome is indeed much more favorable than with most of 
the other cardiac defects that are detected antenatally. The first reports on prenatal echocardiography of conotruncal 
malformations date back from the beginning of the ‘80s. Nevertheless, despite improvement in the technology of 
diagnostic ultrasound, the recognition of these anomalies remains difficult. The four-chamber view is frequently 
unremarkable in these cases. A specific diagnosis requires meticulous scanning and at times may represent a 
challenge even for experienced sonologists. Referral centers with special expertise in fetal echocardiography have 
indeed reported both false positive and false negative diagnoses. There is a typical association between conotruncal 
anomalies and 22q11 deletion, a condition associated with long term implications, including immune deficits, 
neurological development and speech, that may not be apparent in neonatal life. 
TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES 
Transposition of the great arteries is an abnormality in which the aorta arises entirely or in large part from the right 
ventricle and the pulmonary artery arises from the left ventricle. Associated cardiac lesions are present in about 50% 
of cases, including ventricular septal defects (which can occur anywhere in the ventricular septum), pulmonary 
stenosis, unbalanced ventricular size ("complex transpositions"), anomalies of the mitral valve, which can be 
straddling or overriding. There are three types of complete transposition: those with intact ventricular septum with or 
without pulmonary stenosis, those with ventricular septal defects and those with ventricular septal defect and 
pulmonary stenosis. 
Prevalence 
Transposition of the great arteries is found in about 1 per 5,000 births. 
Diagnosis 
Complete transposition is probably one of the most difficult cardiac lesions to recognize in utero. In most cases the 
four-chamber view is normal, and the cardiac cavities and the vessels have normal appearance. A clue to the 
diagnosis is the demonstration that the two great vessels do not cross but arise parallel from the base of the heart. 
The most useful echocardiographic view however is the left heart view demonstrating that the vessel connected to the 
left ventricle has a posterior course and bifurcates into the two pulmonary arteries. Conversely, the vessel connected 
to the right ventricle has a long upward course and gives rise to the brachio-cephalic vessels. 

Difficulties may arise in the case of huge malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding of the posterior 
semilunar root. This combination makes the differentiation with double outlet right ventricle very difficult. Corrected 
transposition is characterized by a double discordance, at the atrio-ventricular and ventriculo-arterial level. The left 
atrium is connected to the right ventricle, which is in turn connected to the ascending aorta. Conversely, the right 
atrium is connected with the right ventricle, which is in turn connected to the ascending aorta. The derangement of 
the conduction tissue secondary to malalignment of the atrial and ventricular septa may result in dysrhythmias, 
namely complete atrioventricular block. For diagnostic purposes, the identification of the peculiar difference of 
ventricular morphology (moderator band, papillary muscles, insertion of the atrioventricular valves) has a prominent 
role. Demonstration that the pulmonary veins are connected to an atrium which is in turn connected with a ventricle 
that has the moderator band at the apex is an important clue, that is furthermore potentially identifiable even in a 
simple four-chamber view. Diagnosis requires meticulous scanning to carefully assess all cardiac connections, by 
using the same views described for the complete form. The presence of atrioventricular block increases the index of 
suspicion. 
Prognosis 
As anticipated from the parallel model of fetal circulation, complete transposition is uneventful in utero. After birth, 
survival depends on the amount and size of the mixing of the two otherwise independent circulations. Patients with 
transposition and an intact ventricular septum present shortly after birth with cyanosis and deteriorate rapidly. When 
a large ventricular septal defect is present, cyanosis can be mild. Clinical presentation may be delayed up to 2-4 
weeks, and usually occurs with signs of congestive heart failure. When severe stenosis of the pulmonary artery is 
associated with a ventricular septal defect, symptoms are similar to patients with tetralogy of Fallot. The time and 
mode of clinical presentation with corrected transposition depend upon the concomitant cardiac defects. 
Surgery (which involves arterial switch to establish anatomic and physiological correction) is usually carried out within 
the first two weeks of life. Operative mortality is about 10% and 10-year follow-up studies report normal function but 
there is uncertainty if in the long term such patients are at increased risk of atherosclerotic coronary disease. In cases 
with pulmonary stenosis and ventricular septal defect balloon atrial septostomy may be necessary to ensure adequate 
oxygenation until definitive repair when the patient is older. 
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT 
The essential features of this malformation are: (a) malalignment ventricular septal defect with anterior displacement 
of the infundibular septum associated with subpulmonary narrowing and overriding aortic root and (b) demonstrable 
continuity between the right outflow tract and the pulmonary trunk. In about 20% of cases this continuity is lacking 
leading to atresia of the pulmonary valve, a condition that is commonly referred to as pulmonary atresia with 
ventricular septal defect. Tetralogy of Fallot can be associated with other specific cardiac malformations, defining 
peculiar entities. These include atrioventricular septal defects (found in 4% of cases), and absence of the pulmonary 
valve, (found in less than 2% of cases). Hypertrophy of the right ventricle, one of the classic elements of the tetrad, 
is always absent in the fetus, and only develops after birth. 
Prevalence 
Tetralogy of Fallot is found in about 1 per 3,000 births. 

Diagnosis 
Echocardiographic diagnosis of tetralogy of Fallot relies on the demonstration of a ventricular septal defect in the 
outlet portion of the septum and an overriding aorta. There is an inverse relationship between the size of the 
ascending aorta and pulmonary artery, with a disproportion that is often striking. A large aortic root is indeed an 
important diagnostic clue. 
Doppler studies provide valuable information. The finding of increased peak velocities in the pulmonary artery 
corroborates the diagnosis of Tetralogy of Fallot by suggesting obstruction to blood flow in the right outflow tract. 
Conversely, demonstration with color and/or pulsed Doppler that, in the pulmonary artery, there is either no forward 
flow or reverse flow allows a diagnosis of pulmonary atresia. Diagnostic problems arise at the extremes of the 
spectrum of tetralogy of Fallot. In cases with minor forms of right outflow obstruction and aortic overriding 
differentiation from a simple ventricular septal defect can be difficult. In those cases in which the pulmonary artery is 
not imaged, a differential diagnosis between pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect and truncus arteriosus 
communis is similarly difficult. The sonographer should also be alerted to a frequent artifact that resembles overriding 
of the aorta. Incorrect orientation of the transducer may demonstrate apparent septo-aortic discontinuity in a normal 
fetus. The mechanism of the artifact is probably related to the angle of incidence of the sound beam. Careful 
visualization of the left outflow tract with different insonation angles, as well as the use of color Doppler and the 
research of the other elements of the tetralogy, should virtually eliminate this problem. Abnormal enlargement of the 
right ventricle, main pulmonary trunk and artery, suggests absence of pulmonary valve. Evaluation of other variables, 
such as multiple ventricular septal defects and coronary anomalies, would be valuable for a better prediction of 
surgical timing and operative prognosis. Unfortunately, these findings cannot be recognized for certain by prenatal 
echocardiography. 
Prognosis 
Cardiac failure is never seen in fetal life as well as postnatally. Even in cases of tight pulmonary stenosis or atresia, 
the wide ventricular septal defect provides adequate combined ventricular output, while the pulmonary vascular bed 
is supplied in a retrograde manner by the ductus. The only exception to this rule is represented by cases with an 
absent pulmonary valve that may result in massive regurgitation to the right ventricle and atrium. When severe 
pulmonic stenosis is present, cyanosis tends to develop immediately after birth. With lesser degrees of obstruction to 
pulmonary blood flow the onset of cyanosis may not appear until later in the first year of life. When there is 
pulmonary atresia, rapid and severe deterioration follows ductal constriction. Survival after complete surgical repair 
(which is usually carried out in the third month of life) is more than 90% and about 80% of survivors have normal 
exercise tolerance. 
DOUBLE-OUTLET RIGHT VENTRICLE 
In double-outlet right ventricle (DORV) most of the aorta and pulmonary valve arise completely or almost completely 
from the right ventricle. The relation between the two vessels may vary, ranging from a Fallot-like to a TGA-like 
situation (the Taussig-Bing anomaly). DORV is not a single malformation from a pathophysiological point of view. The 
term refers only to the position of the great vessels that is found in association with ventricular septal defects, 
tetralogy of Fallot, transposition, univentricular hearts. Pulmonary stenosis is very common in all types of DORV, but 
left outflow obstructions, from subaortic stenosis to coarctation and interruption of the aortic arch, can also be seen. 

Prevalence 
Double-outlet right ventricle is found in less than 1 per 10,000 births. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis of DORV can be reliably made in the fetus but differentiation from other conotruncal anomalies can 
be very difficult, especially with Tetralogy of Fallot and transposition of the great arteries with ventricular septal 
defect. The main echocardiographic features include (a) alignment of the two vessels totally or predominantly from 
the right ventricle and (b) presence in most cases of bilateral coni (subaortic and subpulmonary). 
Prognosis 
The hemodynamic are dependent upon the anatomic type of DORV and the associated anomalies. Since the fetal 
heart works as a common chamber where the blood is mixed and pumped, DORV is not associated with intrauterine 
heart failure. However DORV, in contrast to other conotruncal malformations, is commonly associated with 
extracardiac anomalies and/or chromosomal defects. The early operative mortality is about 10%. 
TRUNCUS ARTERIOSUS COMMUNIS 
Truncus arteriosus is characterized by a single arterial vessel that originates from the heart, overrides the ventricular 
septum and supplies the systemic, pulmonary and coronary circulations. The single arterial trunk is larger than the 
normal aortic root and is predominantly connected with the right ventricle in about 40% of cases, with the left 
ventricle in 20%, and is equally shared in 40%. The truncal valve may have one, two or three cusps and is rarely 
normal. It can be stenotic or, more frequently, insufficient. A malalignment ventricular septal defect, usually wide, is 
an essential part of the malformation. There are three types based on the morphology of the pulmonary artery. In 
type 1, the pulmonary arteries arise from the truncus within a short distance from the valve, as a main pulmonary 
trunk, which then bifurcates. In type 2, there is no main pulmonary trunk. In type 3, only one pulmonary artery 
(usually the right) originates from the truncus, while the other is supplied by a systemic collateral vessel from the 
descending aorta. Eventually, type 4 is characterized by an interruption of the aortic arch. Similar to tetralogy of 
Fallot, and unlike the other conotruncal malformations, truncus is frequently (about 30%) associated with 
extracardiac malformations. 

Prevalence 
Truncus arteriosus is found in about 1 per 10,000 births. 
Diagnosis 
Truncus arteriosus can be reliably detected with fetal echocardiography. The main diagnostic criteria are: 
(a) a single semilunar valve overrides the ventricular septal defect 
(b) there is direct continuity between one or two pulmonary arteries and the single arterial trunk. 
The semilunar valve is often thickened and moves abnormally. Doppler ultrasound is of value to assess incompetence 
of the truncal valve. A peculiar problem found in prenatal echocardiography is the demonstration of the absence of 
pulmonary outflow tract and the concomitant failure to image the pulmonary arteries. In this situations a 
differentiation between truncus and pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect may be impossible. 
Prognosis 
Similar to the other conotruncal anomalies truncus arteriosus is not associated with alteration of fetal hemodynamics. 
Truncus arteriosus is frequently a neonatal emergency. These patients have usually unobstructed pulmonary blood 
flow and show signs of progressive congestive heart failure with the postnatal fall in pulmonary resistance. Many 
patients will present with cardiac failure in the fist 1 or 2 weeks of life. Surgical repair (usually before the sixth month 
of life) involves closure of the ventricular septal defect and creation of a conduit connection between the right 
ventricle and the pulmonary arteries. Survival from surgery is about 90% but the patients require repeated surgery 
for replacement of the conduit. 
CARDIOSPLENIC SYNDROMES 
In cardiosplenic syndromes, also referred to as heterotaxy, the fetus is made of either two left or two right sides. 
Other terms commonly used include left or right isomerism, asplenia and polysplenia. Unpaired organs (liver, stomach 
and spleen) may be absent, midline or duplicated. Because of left atrial isomerism (thus absence of right atrium 
which is the normal location for the pacemaker) and abnormal atrioventricular junctions, atrioventricular blocks are 
very common. Cardiosplenic syndromes are typically associated with abnormal situs, that is abnormal disposition of 

abdominal and/or thoracic organs. 
Prevalence 
Cardiosplenic syndromes, which represent about 2% of all congenital heart defects, are found in about 1 in 10,000 
births. 
POLYSPLENIA 
In polysplenia, the fetus has two left sides (one in normal position and the other as a mirror image); this is called left 
isomerism. Multiple small spleens (usually too small to be detected by antenatal ultrasound) are found posterior to 
the stomach. The liver is midline and symmetric. But the stomach and aorta can be on opposite sides. Cardiac 
anomalies are almost invariably present, including anomalous pulmonary venous return, atrioventricular canal, and 
obstructive lesions of the aortic valve. One typical and peculiar finding is the interruption of the inferior vena cava, 
with the lower portion of the body drained by the azygos vein. 
Evaluation of the disposition of the abdominal organs is of special value for the sonographic diagnosis of fetal 
cardiosplenic syndromes. In normal fetuses, a transverse section of the abdomen demonstrates the aorta on the left 
side and the inferior vena cava on the right; the stomach is to left and the portal sinus of the liver bends to the right, 
towards the gallbladder. In polysplenia, a typical finding is interruption of the inferior vena cava with azygous 
continuation (there is failure to visualize the inferior vena cava and a large venous vessel, the azygos vein, runs to 
the left and close to the spine and ascends into the upper thorax). Symmetry of the liver can be sonographically 
recognized in utero by the abnormal course of the portal circulation that does not display a clearly defined portal sinus 
bending to the right. 
The heterogeneous cardiac anomalies found in association with polysplenia are usually easily seen, but a detailed 
diagnosis often poses a challenge; in particular, assessment of connection between the pulmonary veins and the 
atrium (an element that has a major prognostic influence) can be extremely difficult. Associated anomalies include 
absence of the gallbladder, malrotation of the guts, duodenal atresia and hydrops. 

ASPLENIA 
In asplenia, the fetus has two right sides (right isomerism). As in polysplenia, evaluation of the disposition of the 
abdominal organs is a major clue to the diagnosis. The liver is generally midline and the stomach right-or left-sided. 
The aorta and cava are on the same side (either left or right) of the spine. The spleen cannot be seen and the 
stomach is found in close contact with the thoracic wall. Cardiac malformations are severe, with a tendency towards a 
single structure replacing normal paired structures: single atrium, single atrioventricular valve, single ventricle and 
single great vessel, and are usually easily demonstrated. 
Diagnosis 
Cardiosplenic syndromes may be inferred by the abnormal disposition of the abdominal organs. The presence of 
complex cardiac abnormalities is almost the rule. 
Prognosis 
The outcome depends on the amount of cardiac anomalies, but it tends to be poor. Atrioventricular insufficiency and 
severe fetal bradycardia due to atrioventricular block may lead to intrauterine heart failure. 
ECHOGENIC FOCI 
Prevalence 
Echogenic foci in the heart are found in about 4% of pregnancies and in 12% of fetuses with trisomy 21. 
Etiology 
Histological studies have shown these foci to be due to mineralization within a papillary muscle. 
Diagnosis 
Echogenic foci are detected in the four-chamber view of the heart. In about 95% of cases they are located in the left 
ventricle and in 5% in the right ventricle; in 98% they are unilateral and 2% bilateral. Ventricular function is normal 
and the atrioventricular valves are competent. 
Four-chamberview.Notethewhitearrowpointingtheechogenicfociintheleftventricule. 
Prognosis 
Echogenic foci are usually of no pathological significance and in more than 90% of cases they resolve by the third 
trimester or during pregnancy. However they are sometimes associated with cardiac defects and chromosomal 
abnormalities. For isolated hyperechogenic foci the risk for trisomy 21 may be three-times the background maternal 
age and gestation related risk. 

CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS: PREMATURE CONTRACTIONS 
Ectopic heart beats are common but they are abnormal only when they occur at a frequency of more than 1 in 10 
beats. Premature contractions may be of atrial (much more common) or ventricular origin. Immaturity of the 
conducting system may be the origin. The diagnosis is made by passing an M-mode cursor through one atrium and 
one ventricle. Premature atrial contractions are spaced closer to the previous contraction than normally and may be 
transmitted to the ventricle or blocked. 
Premature ventricular contractions present in the same way but are not accompanied by an atrial contraction. 
Premature ventricular contractions are often followed by a compensatory pause due to the refractory state of the 
conduction system; the next conducted impulse arrives at twice the normal interval, and the continuity of the rhythm 
is not broken. Premature atrial contractions are usually followed by a non-compensatory pause; when the regular 
rhythm resumes, it is not synchronous with the rhythm before the extrasystole. The distance between the contraction 
that preceded the premature contraction and the one following it is not twice the distance between two normal 
contractions but a little shorter. Another approach to the sonographic diagnosis is to evaluate the waveforms obtained 
from the atrioventricular valves, hepatic vessels or inferior vena cava, which demonstrate pulsations corresponding to 
atrial and ventricular contractions. 
Premature contractions are benign, tend to disappear spontaneously in utero, and only rarely persist after birth. It 
has been suggested that in some cases there may be progression to tachyarrhythmia, but the risk if any is certainly 
very small. 
CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS: TACHYARRHYTHMIAS 
Tachyarrhythmias are classified according to the origin and the number of beats per minute. In the majority of cases 
the abnormal electrical impulse originates from the atria. Atrial tachyarrhythmia includes supraventricular 
tachycardia, atrial flutter and atrial fibrillation. Since atrial rhythms greater than 240 bpm are usually associated with 
varying degrees of atrioventricular block, the ventricular rate is usually reduced to 60 to 160 bpm. Ventricular 
tachycardia has been occasionally encountered during fetal life. Supraventricular tachycardia is the most common 
form of tachyarrhythmia, and the ventricular response is 1:1. It is characterized by a heart rate of 200-300 bpm. 
Supraventricular tachycardia may be due to an autonomous focus, in which case the rhythm is monotonous, or to a 
re-entry mechanism, in which case sudden conversion from an abnormal to a normal rhythm can be seen. Cardiac 
malformations are rare. 

Atrial flutter is associated with a heart rate 300-400 bpm. The ventricular response is equal to or less than 2:1. 
Occasionally, atrioventricular block of high degree with ventricular bradycardia are seen. Structural anomalies are 
more common than in supraventricular tachycardia and include Ebstein's anomaly and pulmonic stenosis. 
Atrial fibrillation is characterized by an atrial rate greater than 400 bpm and completely irregular ventricular 
rhythm, with constant variation of the distance between systole. The atrial contractions are usually too small to be 
detected by M-mode. A combination of different atrial arrhythmias may coexist in the same fetus. 
Ventricular tachycardias are rare, and have typically a ventricular frequency of 200 bpm or less. Associated 
anomalies include atrial septal defect, atrial septal aneurysm, mitral anomalies, endocardial cushion defect, 
endocardial fibroelastosis, Ebstein's anomaly, cardiac tumors (rhabdomyoma), anomalies of the conduction system, 
Coxsackie B infection and cardiomyopathy. Tachycardia is commonly associated with hydrops, as a consequence of 
low cardiac output. 
Diagnosis 
The heart rate, atrial and ventricular, can be analyzed by either M-mode sonography of the cardiac chambers or 
pulsed Doppler evaluation of atrioventricular inflows, hepatic veins and inferior vena cava. A heart rate of about 240 
bpm with atrioventricular conduction of 1:1, is pathognomonic of supraventricular tachycardia. An atrial rate greater 
than 300 bpm with an atrioventricular response of 1:2 or less indicates atrial flutter. A very fast atrial rate with 
irregular ventricular response is indicative of atrial fibrillation. A ventricular rate in the range of 200 bpm with a 
normal atrial rate is suggestive of ventricular tachycardia. 
Prognosis 
Sustained tachycardia is associated with suboptimal ventricular filling and decreased cardiac output. This results in 
atrial overload and congestive failure. Fetuses with supraventricular tachycardia that occasionally convert to sinus 
rhythm can tolerate well the condition. Sustained tachycardias of greater than 200 bpm frequently result in fetal 

hydrops. The combination of hydrops and dysrrhythmia has a poor prognosis (mortality of 80%) independently of the 
nature of the tachycardia. 
Fetal therapy 
After 32 weeks of gestation the fetus should be delivered and treated ex utero. Prenatal treatment is the standard of 
care for premature fetuses that have sustained tachycardias of more than 200 bpm, particularly if there is associated 
hydrops and/or polyhydramnios. The treatment depends on the type of tachycardia, and the aim is to either decrease 
the excitability or increase the conduction time to block a re-entrant mechanism. Although a vagual maneuver (such 
as simple compression of the cord) may sometimes suffice, the administration of antiarrhythmic drugs is often 
necessary. The drugs used include propranolol, verapamil, procainamide, quinidine, flecainide, amiodarone and 
adenosine; combination of these drugs is also possible but the optimal approach remains uncertain. These drugs are 
usually administered to the mother but they can also be given directly to the fetus (intraperitoneally, intramuscularly 
in the thigh or intravascular through the umbilical cord). The usual response to treatment is conversion to a normal 
rhythm, followed by shorter episodes of tachycardia that are more interspersed, and finally the presence of 
extrasystole alone. Fetuses with normal rhythm but persistent hydrops are still at risk of death. The survival rate of 
fetuses with tachyarrhythmias treated in utero is more than 90%. 
CARDIAC DYSRHYTHMIAS: COMPLETE ATRIOVENTRICULAR BLOCK 
In complete atrioventricular block, the atria beat at their own rhythm, and none of their impulses is transmitted to the 
ventricles. The ventricles have a slow rate (40-70 bpm). 
In 50% of cases structural anomalies are present (mostly left isomerism and corrected transposition of the great 
arteries). In the remaining cases, the condition is almost exclusively caused by the presence of maternal 
autoantibodies anti-Ro (SS-a) or anti-La (SS-B). Most mothers are asymptomatic but in a few cases connective tissue 
disease is present (lupus erythematosus, scleroderma, rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren's syndrome). Fetuses with 
cardiac malformations have heart block starting from the first trimester. Atrioventricular block secondary to maternal 
autoantibodies develops slowly throughout gestation; a normal cardiac rhythm may be found in the second trimester. 
Atrial and ventricular contractions are identified by either M-mode or pulsed Doppler, as previously described. The 
prognosis depends on the presence of cardiac defects, the ventricular rate and the presence of hydrops; usually, 
fetuses with a ventricular rate greater than 55 bpm have a normal intrauterine growth and do not develop heart 
failure. Conversely, hydrops is almost the rule for greater degrees of ventricular bradycardia. Intrauterine treatment 
by the administration of beta-mimetic agents has been used (with the aim of increasing electric excitability of the 
myocardial cells and thus ventricular rate), but the results have been disappointing. Maternal administration of 
steroids (Dexamethasone 8 mg/day) has been advocated for complete heart block secondary to maternal 
autoantibodies, but the value of this treatment remains, however, unproven. Invasive fetal cardiac pacing has been 
attempted but thus far there have been no survivors. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter5 
Pulmonary abnormalities 
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY 
For the purpose an an ultrasound survey of fetal anatomy, examination of the lungs in the same section used for the 
four-chamber view of the fetal heart is sufficient. Under normal condition, the fetal lungs are uniformely echogenic. At 
18-23 weeks, the central third of the thoracic area at the level of the four chamber view is occupied by the heart, and 
the remaining two thirds by the lungs, that are normally uniformely echogenic. This scanning plane can also be used 
for the measurement of the thoracic circumference, that is correlated with the development of the lungs. 
A sagittal plane of the fetal trunk usually allows one to identify the diaphragm as a thin sonolucent line separating the 
abdominal from the thoracic cavity. 
CYSTIC ADENOMATOID MALFORMATION (CAM) 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung is a developmental abnormality arising from an overgrowth of the 
terminal respiratory bronchioles. The condition may be bilateral involving all lung tissue, but in the majority of cases it 
is confined to a single lung or lobe. The lesions are either macrocystic (cysts of at least 5 mm in diameter) or 
microcystic (cysts less than 5 mm in diameter). In 85% of cases, the lesion is unilateral with equal frequency in the 
right and left lungs and equal frequency in the microcystic and macrocystic types. 
Prevalence 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung is found in about 1 in 4000 births. 
Etiology 
This is a sporadic abnormality. In about 10% of cases, there are other abnormalities, mainly cardiac and renal. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis is based on the ultrasonographic demonstration of a hyperechogenic pulmonary tumor which is 
cystic (CAM type 1), mixed (CAM type 2), or solid – microcystic (CAM type 3). Microcystic disease results in uniform 
hyperechogenicity of the affected lung tissue. In macrocystic disease, single or multiple cystic spaces may be seen 
within the thorax. Both microcystic and macrocystic disease may be associated with deviation of the mediastinum. 

When there is compression of the heart and major blood vessels in the thorax, fetal hydrops develops. 
Polyhydramnios is a common feature and this may be a consequence of decreased fetal swallowing of amniotic fluid 
due to esophageal compression, or increased fluid production by the abnormal lung tissue. Prognostic features for 
poor outcome include major lung compression causing pulmonary hypoplasia, polyhydramnios and development of 
hydrops fetalis irrespective of the type of the lesion. 
Prognosis 
Bilateral disease is lethal either in utero, due to progressive hydrops, or in the neonatal period. Isolated unilateral 
cystic adenomatoid malformation without hydrops is associated with a good prognosis; in about 70% of cases, the 
relative size of the fetal tumor remains stable, in 20% of cases there is antenatal shrinkage or resolution, and in 10% 
of cases there is progressive increase in mediastinal compression. In symptomatic neonates, thoracotomy and 
lobectomy are carried out and survival is about 90%. It is uncertain whether surgery is also needed for asymptomatic 
neonates. 
Fetaltherapy 
Large intrathoracic cysts causing major mediastinal shift and associated hydrops can be treated effectively by the 
insertion of thoraco-amniotic shunts. The role of more invasive intervention, such as hysterotomy and excision of 
solid tumors in cases of fetal hydrops, remains to be defined. Although good results have been reported after such 
surgery in a small number of cases, the potential risks to the mother both during the pregnancy and in subsequent 
confinements should not be underestimated. 
DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA 
Development of the diaphragm is usually completed by the 9th week of gestation. In the presence of a defective 
diaphragm, there is herniation of the abdominal viscera into the thorax at about 10–12 weeks, when the intestines 
return to the abdominal cavity from the umbilical cord. However, at least in some cases, intrathoracic herniation of 
viscera may be delayed until the second or third trimester of pregnancy. 
Prevalence 
Diaphragmatic hernia is found in about 1 per 4000 births. 
Etiology 
Diaphragmatic hernia is usually a sporadic abnormality. However, in about 50% of affected fetuses there are 
associated chromosomal abnormalities (mainly trisomy 18, trisomy 13 and Pallister–Killian syndrome – mosaicism for 
tetrasomy 12p), other defects (mainly craniospinal defects, including spina bifida, hydrocephaly and the otherwise 
rare iniencephaly, and cardiac abnormalities) and genetic syndromes (such as Fryns syndrome, de Lange syndrome 
and Marfan syndrome). 
Diagnosis 
Prenatally, the diaphragm is imaged by ultrasonography as an echo-free space between the thorax and abdomen. 
Diaphragmatic hernia can be diagnosed by the ultrasonographic demonstration of stomach and intestines (90% of the 
cases) or liver (50%) in the thorax and the associated mediastinal shift to the opposite side. Herniated abdominal 

contents, associated with a left-sided diaphragmatic hernia, are easy to demonstrate because the echo-free fluid-filled 
stomach and small bowel contrast dramatically with the more echogenic fetal lung. In contrast, a right-sided hernia is 
more difficult to identify because the echogenicity of the fetal liver is similar to that of the lung, and visualization of 
the gall bladder in the right side of the fetal chest may be the only way of making the diagnosis. 
Polyhydramnios (usually after 25 weeks) is found in about 75% of cases and this may be the consequence of impaired 
fetal swallowing due to compression of the esophagus by the herniated abdominal organs. The main differential 
diagnosis is from cystic lung disease, such as cystic adenomatoid malformation or mediastinal cystic processes, e.g. 
neuroenteric cysts, bronchogenic cysts and thymic cysts. In these cases, a fluid-filled structure causing mediastinal 
shift may be present within the chest. However, in contrast to diaphragmatic hernia, the upper abdominal anatomy is 
normal. 
Antenatal prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia remains one of the challenges of prenatal diagnosis because this would 
be vital in both counselling parents and also in selecting those cases that may benefit from prenatal surgery. Poor 
prognostic signs are, first, increased nuchal translucency thickness at 10–14 weeks, second, intrathoracic herniation 
of abdominal viscera before 20 weeks, and, third, severe mediastinal compression suggested by an abnormal ratio in 
the size of the cardiac ventricles and the development of polyhydramnios. 
Prognosis 
In the human, the bronchial tree is fully developed by the 16th week of gestation, at which time the full adult number 
of airways is established. The alveoli continue to develop even after birth, increasing in number and size until the 
growth of the chest wall is completed in adulthood. The growth of blood vessels supplying the acinus (intra-acinar 
vessels) parallels alveolar development, while the growth of pre-acinar vessels follows the development of the 
airways. In diaphragmatic hernia, the reduced thoracic space available to the developing lung leads to reduction in 
airways, alveoli and arteries. Furthermore, there is an increase in arterial medial wall thickness and extension of 
muscle peripherally into the small pre-acinar arteries, offering an explanation for the pulmonary hypertension and 
persistent fetal circulation observed after neonatal repair. Thus, although isolated diaphragmatic hernia is an 
anatomically simple defect, which is easily correctable, the mortality rate is about 50%. The main cause of death is 
hypoxemia due to pulmonary hypertension, resulting from the abnormal development of the pulmonary vascular bed. 
Fetaltherapy 
Extensive animal studies have suggested that pulmonary hypoplasia and hypertension due to intrathoracic 
compression are reversible by in utero surgical repair. However, such therapy is likely to have limited success in the 
human because the bronchial tree is fully developed by the 16th week of gestation. For a fetus with a sonographically 
demonstrable large diaphragmatic hernia at 16–18 weeks, irreversible maldevelopment of the bronchial tree and 
vasculature is likely. However, in fetuses with a diaphragmatic defect which allows the intrathoracic herniation of 
abdominal viscera only after mid-gestation (when the bronchial tree and pre-acinar vessels are fully developed), 
prenatal correction, by allowing further development of the alveoli and intra-acinar vessels, may well prevent 
pulmonary hypoplasia and neonatal death. In a few cases of diaphragmatic hernia, hysterotomy and fetal surgery 
have been carried out but this intervention has now be abandoned in favor of minimally invasive surgery. Animal 
studies have demonstrated that obstruction of the trachea results in expansion of the fetal lungs by retained 
pulmonary secretions. Endoscopic occlusion of the fetal trachea has also been carried out in human fetuses with 
diaphragmatic hernia, but the number of cases is too small for useful conclusions to be drawn as to the effectiveness 
of such treatment. 

PLEURAL EFFUSIONS 
Fetal pleural effusions, which may be unilateral or bilateral, may be an isolated finding or they occur in association 
with generalized edema and ascites. 
Prognosis 
Irrespective of the underlying cause, infants affected by pleural effusions usually present in the neonatal period with 
severe, and often fatal, respiratory insufficiency. This is either a direct result of pulmonary compression caused by the 
effusions, or due to pulmonary hypoplasia secondary to chronic intrathoracic compression. The overall mortality of 
neonates with pleural effusions is 25%, with a range from 15% in infants with isolated pleural effusions to 95% in 
those with gross hydrops. The mortality rate in cases of antenatally diagnosed chylothorax is about 50%. Isolated 
pleural effusions in the fetus may either resolve spontaneously or they can be treated effectively after birth. 
Nevertheless, in some cases, severe and chronic compression of the fetal lungs can result in pulmonary hypoplasia 
and neonatal death. In others, mediastinal compression leads to the development of hydrops and polyhydramnios, 
which are associated with a high risk of premature delivery and perinatal death. 
Fetaltherapy 
Attempts at prenatal therapy by repeated thoracocenteses for drainage of pleural effusions have been generally 
unsuccessful in reversing the hydropic state, because the fluid reaccumulates within 24–48 h of drainage. A better 
approach is chronic drainage by the insertion of thoracoamniotic shunts. This is useful both for diagnosis and 
treatment. First, the diagnosis of an underlying cardiac abnormality or other intrathoracic lesion may become 
apparent only after effective decompression and return of the mediastinum to its normal position. Second, it can 
reverse fetal hydrops, resolve polyhydramnios and thereby reduce the risk of preterm delivery, and may prevent 
pulmonary hypoplasia. Third, it may be useful in the prenatal diagnosis of pulmonary hypoplasia because, in such 
cases, the lungs often fail to expand after shunting. Furthermore, it may help to distinguish between hydrops due to 
primary accumulation of pleural effusions, in which case the ascites and skin edema may resolve after shunting, and 
other causes of hydrops such as infection, in which drainage of the effusions does not prevent worsening of the 
hydrops. Survival after thoracoamniotic shunting is more than 90% in fetuses with isolated pleural effusions and 
about 50% in those with hydrops. 
SEQUESTRATION OF THE LUNGS 
In lung sequestration, a portion of the lung develops without connection to the airways. The blood supply to the 
abnormal lung tissue is through arteries that arise from the descending aorta rather than from the pulmonary artery. 
This condition is classically divided in the radiological literature into intralobar (about 75%) and extralobar (about 
25%), but the difference (which is based on the presence or absence of a separate pleural covering from the normal 
lung) cannot be accurately determined with prenatal ultrasound. 
Prevalence 
Sequestration of the lungs is rare and the prevalence is less than 5% of congenital pulmonary abnormalities. 

Etiology 
Sequestration of the lungs is a sporadic abnormality. 
Diagnosis 
The sequestrated portion of the lung appears as a homogeneous, brightly echogenic mass in the lower lobes of the 
lungs or in the upper abdomen (infradiaphragmatic sequestration). The diagnosis is confirmed by color Doppler 
demonstration that the vascular supply of the sequestered lobe arises from the abdominal aorta. 
Large lung sequestration may act as an arteriovenous fistula and cause high-output heart failure and hydrops. 
Intralobar sequestrations are usually isolated, whereas more than 50% of extralobar sequestrations are associated 
with other abnormalities (mainly diaphragmatic hernia and cardiac defects). 
Prognosis 
Postnatal outcome depends on the presence of associated abnormalities, and hemodynamic disturbances. In general, 
intralobar sequestration has an excellent prognosis, whereas extralobar sequestration has a poor prognosis because 
of the high incidence of other defects and hydrops. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter6 
Anterior abdominal wall 
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY 
Normal development of the anterior abdominal wall depends on the fusion of four ectomesodermic folds (cephalic, 
caudal and two lateral). At 8–10 weeks of gestation, all fetuses demonstrate herniation of the mid-gut that is 
visualized as a hyperechogenic mass in the base of the umbilical cord; retraction into the abdominal cavity occurs at 
10–12 weeks and is completed by 11 weeks and 5 days. The integrity of the abdominal wall should always be 
demonstrated; this can be achieved by transverse scans demonstrating the insertion of the umbilical cord. It is also 
important to visualize the urinary bladder within the fetal pelvis, because this rules out exstrophy of the bladder and 
of the cloaca. 
EXOMPHALOS 
Exomphalos results from failure of normal embryonic regression of the mid-gut from the umbilical stalk into the 
abdominal celom. The abdominal contents, including intestines and liver or spleen covered by a sac of parietal 
peritoneum and amnion, are herniated into the base of the umbilical cord. 
Less often there is an associated failure in the cephalic embryonic fold, resulting in the pentalogy of Cantrell (upper 
mid-line omphalocele, anterior diaphragmatic hernia, sternal cleft, ectopia cordis and intracardiac defects) or failure of 
the caudal fold, in which case the omphalocele may be associated with exstrophy of the bladder or cloaca, 
imperforate anus, colonic atresia and sacral vertebral defects. The Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (usually sporadic 
and occasionally familial syndrome with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 14 000) is the association of omphalocele, 
macrosomia, organomegaly and macroglossia; in some cases there is mental handicap, which is thought to be 

secondary to inadequately treated hypoglycemia. About 5% of affected individuals develop tumors during childhood, 
most commonly nephroblastoma and hepatoblastoma. 
Prevalence 
Exomphalos is found in about 1 per 4000 births. 
Etiology 
The majority of cases are sporadic and the recurrence risk is usually less than 1%. However, in some cases, there 
may be an associated genetic syndrome. Chromosomal abnormalities (mainly trisomy 18 or 13) are found in about 
50% of cases at 12 weeks, 30% of cases at mid-gestation and in 15% of neonates. Similarly, in Beckwith– 
Wiedemann syndrome, most cases are sporadic, although autosomal dominant, recessive, X-linked and polygenic 
patterns of inheritance have been described. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of exomphalos is based on the demonstration of the mid-line anterior abdominal wall defect, the 
herniated sac with its visceral contents and the umbilical cord insertion at the apex of the sac. Ultrasonographic 
examination should be directed towards defining the extent of the lesion and exclusion of other malformations. 
Prognosis 
Exomphalos is a correctable malformation in which survival depends primarily on whether or not other malformations 
or chromosomal defects are present. For isolated lesions, the survival rate after surgery is about 90%. The mortality 
is much higher with cephalic fold defects than with lateral and caudal defects. 
GASTROSCHISIS 
In gastroschisis, the primary body folds and the umbilical ring develop normally and evisceration of the intestine 
occurs through a small abdominal wall defect located just lateral and usually to the right of an intact umbilical cord. 
The loops of intestine lie uncovered in the amniotic fluid and become thickened, edematous and matted. 

Prevalence 
Gastroschisis is found in about 1 per 4000 births. 
Etiology 
This is a sporadic abnormality. Associated chromosomal abnormalities are rare, and, although other malformations 
are found in 10–30% of the cases, these are mainly gut atresias, probably due to gut strangulation and infarction in 
utero. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis is based on the demonstration of the normally situated umbilicus and the herniated loops of 
intestine, which are free-floating and widely separated, and usually on the right of the cord insertion. In the 
midtrimester, the bowel loops are uniformely echogenic. 
In the thrid trimester, chemical peritonitis causes distension and thickening of the walls of the intesttine. 
About 30% of fetuses are growth-restricted but the diagnosis can be difficult because gastroschisis as such is 
associated with a small abdominal circumference. 
Prognosis 
Postoperative survival is about 90%; mortality is usually the consequence of short gut syndrome. In this condition, 
the infants require total parenteral nutrition and they usually die within the first 4 years of life from liver disease. 
BODY STALK ANOMALY 
This abnormality is characterized by the presence of a major abdominal wall defect, severe kyphoscoliosis and a 
rudimentary umbilical cord. 

Prevalence 
Body stalk anomaly is found in about 1 per 10 000 pregnancies. 
Etiology 
This is a sporadic abnormality. The pathogenesis is uncertain but possible causes include abnormal folding of the 
trilaminar embryo during the first 4 weeks of development, early amnion rupture with amniotic band syndrome, and 
early generalized compromise of embryonic blood flow. 
Diagnosis 
The ultrasonographic features are a major abdominal wall defect, severe kyphoscoliosis and a short or absent 
umbilical cord. Typically, the liver is directly attached to the placenta without an interposed umbilical cord and there is 
major distortion of the spine. 
In the first trimester, it is possible to demonstrate that part of the fetal body is in the amniotic cavity and the other 
part is in the celomic cavity. The findings suggest that early amnion rupture before obliteration of the celomic cavity is 
a possible cause of the syndrome. 
Prognosis 
This is a lethal abnormality. 
BLADDER EXSTROPHY AND CLOACAL EXSTROPHY 
Bladder exstrophy is a defect of the caudal fold of the anterior abdominal wall; a small defect may cause epispadias 
alone, whilst a large defect leads to exposure of the posterior bladder wall. In cloacal exstrophy, both the urinary and 
gastrointestinal tracts are involved. Cloacal exstrophy (also referred to as OEIS complex) is the association of an 
omphalocele, exstrophy of the bladder, imperforated anus, and spinal defects such as meningomyelocele. The 
hemibladders are on either side of the intestines. 
Prevalence 
Bladder exstrophy is found in 1 per 30 000 births and cloacal exstrophy is found in about 1 in per 200 000 births. 
Etiology 
Both bladder exstrophy and cloacal exstrophy are sporadic abnormalities. 
Diagnosis 
Bladder exstrophy should be suspected when, in the presence of normal amniotic fluid, the fetal bladder is not 
visualized (the filling cycle of the bladder is normally in the range of 15 min); an echogenic mass is seen protruding 
from the lower abdominal wall, in close association with the umbilical arteries. 

Figure 01 Figure 02 with color doppler 
Bladder Extrophy and absence of the penis -an echogenic mass is seen protruding from the lower abdominal
wall, in close association with the umbilical arteries (Color Doppler).
green arrows: everted bladder; blue arrows the scrotum; yellow arrows: umbilcal cord
Bladder Extrophy and absence of the penis 
green arrows: everted bladder; blue arrows the scrotum; yellow arrows: umbilcal cord 
In cloacal exstrophy, the findings are similar to bladder exstrophy (large infraumbilical defect that extends to the 
pelvis), but a posterior anomalous component (represented by herniated bowel and/or a meningomyelocele) is 
present. Other findings include single umbilical artery, ascites, vertebral anomalies, club foot and ambiguous genitalia 
(in boys, the penis is divided and duplicated). 

Prognosis 
With aggresive reconstructive bladder, bowel and genital surgery, survival is more than 80%. Although it has been 
suggested that gender re-assignment to females should occur, psychological follow-ups of such patients suggest that 
both male and females with this condition are capable of a normal lifestyle with normal intelligence, although some 
form of urinary tract diversion is required for all. Furthermore, both sexes have been reported to be fertile after 
surgery. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter7 
Gastrointestinaltract 
NORMALSONOGRAPHICANATOMY 
Sonographically, the fetal stomach is visible from 9 weeks of gestation as a sonolucent cystic structure in the upper 
left quadrant of the abdomen. The bowel is normally uniformly echogenic until the third trimester of pregnancy, when 
prominent meconium-filled loops of large bowel are commonly seen. The liver comprises most of the upper abdomen 
and the left lobe is greater in size than the right due to its greater supply of oxygenated blood. The gall bladder is 
seen as an ovoid cystic structure to the right and below the intrahepatic portion of the umbilical vein. The spleen may 
also be visualized in a transverse plane posterior and to the left of the fetal stomach. The abdominal circumference 
should be measured in a cross-section of the abdomen demonstrating the stomach and portal sinus of the liver. The 
visceral situs should be assessed, by demonstrating the relative position of the stomach, hepatic vessels, abdominal 
aorta and inferior vena cava. 
ESOPHAGEALATRESIA 
Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistulae, found in about 90% of cases, result from failure of the primitive 
foregut to divide into the anterior trachea and posterior esophagus, which normally occurs during the 4th week of 
gestation. 
Prevalence 
Esophageal atresia is found in about 1 in 3000 births. 
Etiology 
Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistulae are sporadic abnormalities. Chromosomal abnormalities (mainly 
trisomy 18 or 21) are found in about 20% of fetuses. Other major defects, mainly cardiac, are found in about 50% of 
the cases. Tracheoesophageal fistulae may be seen as part of the VATER association (vertebral and ventricular septal 
defects, anal atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, renal anomalies, radial dysplasia and single umbilical artery). In over 
80% of cases, esophageal atresia occurs in association with a tracheo-esophageal fistula, allowing intake of amniotic 
fluid from the stomach, that may be therefore normally distended, particularly in early gestation. 

Diagnosis 
Prenatally, the diagnosis of esophageal atresia is suspected when, in the presence of polyhydramnios (usually after 25 
weeks), repeated ultrasonographic examinations fail to demonstrate the fetal stomach. 
However, gastric secretions may be sufficient to distend the stomach and make it visible. If there is an associated 
fistula, the stomach may look normal. Occasionally (after 25 weeks), the dilated proximal esophageal pouch can be 
seen as an elongated upper mediastinal and retrocardiac anechoic structure. This is a dynamic finding, however, that 
occurs only at the time of fetal swallowing, and requires therefore prolonged sonographic visualization. 
The differential diagnosis for the combination of absent stomach and polyhydramnios includes intrathoracic 
compression, by conditions such as diaphragmatic hernia, and muscular-skeletal anomalies causing inability of the 
fetus to swallow. 

Prognosis 
Survival is primarily dependent on gestation at delivery and the presence of other anomalies. Thus, for babies with an 
isolated tracheoesophageal fistula, born after 32 weeks, when an early diagnosis is made, avoiding reflux and 
aspiration pneumonitis, postoperative survival is more than 95%. 
DUODENALATRESIA 
At 5 weeks of embryonic life, the lumen of the duodenum is obliterated by proliferating epithelium. The patency of the 
lumen is usually restored by the 11th week and failure of vacuolization may lead to stenosis or atresia. Duodenal 
obstruction can also be caused by compression from the surrounding annular pancreas or by peritoneal fibrous bands. 
Prevalence 
Duodenal atresia is found in about 1 per 5000 births. 
Etiology 
Duodenal atresia is a sporadic abnormality, although, in some cases, there is an autosomal recessive pattern of 
inheritance. Approximately half of fetuses with duodenal atresia have associated abnormalities, including trisomy 21 
(in about 40% of fetuses) and skeletal defects (vertebral and rib anomalies, sacral agenesis, radial abnormalities and 
talipes), gastrointestinal abnormalities (esophageal atresia/tracheoesophageal fistula, intestinal malrotation, Meckel’s 
diverticulum and anorectal atresia), cardiac and renal defects. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis is based on the demonstration of the characteristic ‘double bubble’ appearance of the dilated 
stomach and proximal duodenum, commonly associated with polyhydramnios. 
However, obstruction due to a central web may result in only a ‘single bubble’, representing the fluid-filled stomach. 
Continuity of the duodenum with the stomach should be demonstrated to differentiate a distended duodenum from 
other cystic masses, including choledochal or hepatic cysts. Although the characteristic ‘double bubble’ can be seen as 
early as 20 weeks, it is usually not diagnosed until after 25 weeks, suggesting that the fetus is unable to swallow a 
sufficient volume of amniotic fluid for bowel dilatation to occur before the end of the second trimester of pregnancy. 
Prognosis 
Survival after surgery in cases with isolated duodenal atresia is more than 95%. 
INTESTINALOBSTRUCTION 
Intestinal obstructions are either intrinsic or extrinsic. Intrinsic lesions result from absent (atresia) or partial 
(stenosis) recanalization of the intestine. In cases of atresia, the two segments of the gut may be either completely 
separated or connected by a fibrous cord. In cases of stenosis, the lumen of the gut is narrowed or the two intestinal 

segments are separated by a septum with a central diaphragm. Apple-peel atresia is characterized by absence of a 
vast segment of the small bowel, which can include distal duodenum, the entire jejunum and proximal ileus. Extrinsic 
obstructions are caused by malrotation of the colon with volvulus, peritoneal bands, meconium ileus, and agangliosis 
(Hirschsprung’s disease). The most frequent site of small bowel obstruction is distal ileus (35%), followed by proximal 
jejunum (30%), distal jejunum (20%), proximal ileus (15%). In about 5% of cases, obstructions occur in multiple 
sites. Anorectal atresia results from abnormal division of the cloaca during the 9th week of development. 
Prevalence 
Intestinal obstruction is found in about 1 per 2000 births; in about half of the cases, there is small bowel obstruction 
and in the other half anorectal atresia. 
Etiology 
Although the condition is usually sporadic, in multiple intestinal atresia, familial cases have been described. 
Associated abnormalities and chromosomal defects are rare. In contrast with anorectal atresia, associated defects 
such as genitourinary, vertebral, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal anomalies are found in about 80% of cases. 
Diagnosis 
The lumens of the small bowel and colon do not normally exceed 7 mm and 20 mm, respectively. Diagnosis of 
obstruction is usually made quite late in pregnancy (after 25 weeks), as dilatation of the intestinal lumen is slow and 
progressive. Jejunal and ileal obstructions are imaged as multiple fluid-filled loops of bowel in the abdomen. 
The abdomen is usually distended and active peristalsis may be observed.
If bowel perforation occurs, transient ascites, meconium peritonitis and meconium pseudocysts may ensue.
Polyhydramnios (usually after 25 weeks) is common, especially with proximal obstructions. Bowel enlargement and 
polyhydramnios may be found in fetuses with Hirschsprung’s disease, the megacystis– microcolon–intestinal 

hypoperistalsis syndrome and congenital chloride diarrhea. When considering a diagnosis of small bowel obstruction, 
care should be taken to exclude renal tract abnormalities and other intra-abdominal cysts such as mesenteric, ovarian 
or duplication cysts. In anorectal atresia, prenatal diagnosis is usually difficult because the proximal bowel may not 
demonstrate significant dilatation and the amniotic fluid volume is usually normal; occasionally calcified intraluminal 
meconium in the fetal pelvis may be seen. 
Prognosis 
Infants with bowel obstruction typically present in the early neonatal period with symptoms of vomiting and 
abdominal distention. The prognosis is related to the gestational age at delivery, the presence of associated 
abnormalities and site of obstruction. In those born after 32 weeks with isolated obstruction requiring resection of 
only a short segment of bowel, survival is more than 95%. Loss of large segments of bowel can lead to short gut 
syndrome, which is a lethal condition. 
HIRSCHSPRUNG’SDISEASE 
Hirschsprung’s disease is characterized by congenital absence of intramural parasympathetic nerve ganglia in a 
segment of the colon. It derives from failure of migration of neuroblasts from the neural crest to the bowel segments, 
which generally occurs between the 6th and 12th weeks of gestation. Another theory suggests that the disease is 
caused by degeneration of normally migrated neuroblasts during either pre- or postnatal life. 
Prevalence 
The disease occurs in about 1 in 3000 births. 
Etiology 
It is considered to be a sporadic disease, although in about 5% of cases there is a familial inheritance. In a small 
number of cases, Hirschsprung’s disease is associated with trisomy 21. 
Diagnosis 
The aganglionic segment is unable to transmit a peristaltic wave, and therefore meconium accumulates and causes 
dilatation of the lumen of the bowel. 
The ultrasound appearance is similar to that of anorectal atresia, when the affected segment is colon or rectum. 
Polyhydramnios and dilatation of the loops are present in the case of small bowel involvement; on this occasion, it is 
not different from other types of obstruction. 
Prognosis 
Postnatal surgery is aimed at removing the affected segment and this may be a two-stage procedure with temporary 
colostomy. Neonatal mortality is approximately 20%. 

MECONIUMPERITONITIS 
Intrauterine perforation of the bowel may lead to a local sterile chemical peritonitis, with the development of a dense 
calcified mass of fibrous tissue sealing off the perforation. Bowel perforation usually occurs proximal to some form of 
obstruction, although this cannot always be demonstrated. 
Etiology 
Intestinal stenosis or atresia and meconium ileus account for 65% of the cases. Other causes include volvulus and 
Meckel’s diverticulum. Meconium ileus is the impaction of abnormally thick and sticky meconium in the distal ileum, 
and, in the majority of cases, this is due to cystic fibrosis. 
Prevalence 
Meconium peritonitis is found in about 1 in 3000 births. 
Diagnosis 
In the typical case, meconium peritonitis is featured by the association of intra-abdominal echogenic area, dilated 
bowel loops and ascites. 
The diagnosis should be considered if the fetal bowel is observed to be dilated or whenever an area of fetal intra-
abdominal hyperechogenicity is detected. 
The differential diagnosis of hyperechogenic bowel includes: intra-amniotic hemorrhage; early ascites; fetal hypoxia; 
meconium peritonitis; and cystic fibrosis. 

Meconium ileus and hyperechogenic fetal bowel at 16–18 weeks of gestation may be present in 75% of fetuses with 
cystic fibrosis. The prevalence of cystic fibrosis in fetuses with prenatal diagnosis of intestinal obstruction may be 
about 10%. Therefore, when other causes of bowel hyperechogenicity have been excluded, DNA studies for cystic 
fibrosis should be considered. 
Prognosis 
Meconium peritonitis is associated with a more than 50% mortality in the neonatal period. 
HEPATOSPLENOMEGALY 
The fetal liver and spleen can be measured by ultrasonography. Causes of hepatosplenomegaly include immune and 
non-immune hydrops, congenital infection and metabolic disorders, and it is seen in Beckwith–Wiedemann and 
Zellweger syndromes. Hepatic enlargement may also be caused by hemangioma, which is usually hypoechogenic, or 
hepatoblastoma (the most frequent malignant tumor in fetal life), in which there are areas of calcification. 
HEPATICCALCIFICATIONS 
Hepatic calcifications are echogenic foci in the parenchyma or the capsule of the liver. 
Prevalence 
Hepatic calcifications are found at mid-trimester ultrasonography in about 1 per 2000 fetuses. 
Etiology 
The vast majority of cases are idiopathic but, in a few cases, hepatic calcifications have been found in association with 
congenital infections and chromosomal abnormalities. 
Diagnosis 
Solitary or multiple echogenic foci (1–2 mm in diameter) are observed within the substance of the liver or in the 
capsule. 
Prognosis 
This depends on the presence of associated infection or chromosomal defects. Isolated foci are of no pathological 
significance. 
ABDOMINALCYSTS 
Abdominal cystic masses are frequent findings at ultrasound examination. Renal tract anomalies or dilated bowel are 
the most common explanations, although cystic structures may arise from the biliary tree, ovaries, mesentery or 
uterus. The correct diagnosis of these abnormalities may not be possible by ultrasound examination, but the most 
likely diagnosis is usually suggested by the position of the cyst, its relationship with other structures and the 

normality of other organs. 
Choledochalcysts 
Choledochal cysts represent cystic dilatation of the common biliary duct. They are uncommon and their etiology is 
unknown. Prenatally, the diagnosis may be made ultrasonographically by the demonstration of a cyst in the upper 
right side of the fetal abdomen. The differential diagnosis includes enteric duplication cyst, liver cysts, situs inversus 
or duodenal atresia. The absence of polyhydramnios or peristalsis may help to differentiate the condition from bowel 
disorders. Postnatally, early diagnosis and removal of the cyst may avoid the development of biliary cirrhosis, portal 
hypertension, calculi formation or adenocarcinoma. The operative mortality is about 10%. 
Ovariancysts 
Ovarian cysts are common and they may be found in up to one-third of newborns at autopsy, although they are 
usually small and asymptomatic. Fetal ovarian cysts are hormone-sensitive (human chorionic gonadotropin from the 
placenta) and tend to occur after 25 weeks of gestation; they are more common in diabetic or rhesus isoimmunized 
mothers as a result of placental hyperplasia. The majority of cysts are benign and resolve spontaneously in the 
neonatal period. Potential complications include development of ascites, torsion, infarction or rupture. Prenatally, the 
cysts are usually unilateral and unilocular, although, if the cyst undergoes torsion or hemorrhage, the appearance is 
complex or solid. Large ovarian cysts can be found in association with polyhydramnios, possibly as a consequence of 
compression of the bowel. Obstetric management should not be changed, unless an enormous or rapidly enlarging 
cyst is detected or there is associated polyhydramnios; in these cases, prenatal aspiration may be considered. A 
difficult differential diagnosis is from hydrometrocolpos, which also presents as a cystic or solid mass arising from the 
pelvis of a female fetus. Other genitourinary or gastrointestinal anomalies are common and include renal agenesis, 
polycystic kidneys, esophageal atresia, duodenal atresia and imperforate anus. Most cases are sporadic, although a 
few cases are genetic, such as the autosomal recessive McKusick–Kaufman syndrome with hydrometrocolpos, 
polydactyly and congenital heart disease. 
Mesentericoromentalcysts 
Mesenteric or omental cysts may represent obstructed lymphatic drainage or lymphatic hamartomas. The fluid 
contents may be serous, chylous or hemorrhagic. Antenatally, the diagnosis is suggested by the finding of a 
multiseptate or unilocular, usually mid-line, cystic lesion of variable size; a solid appearance may be secondary to 
hemorrhage. Antenatal aspiration may be considered in cases of massive cysts resulting in thoracic compression. 
Postnatal management is conservative and surgery is reserved for cases with symptoms of bowel obstruction or acute 
abdominal pain following torsion or hemorrhage into a cyst. Complete excision of cysts may not be possible because 
of the proximity of major blood vessels and in up to 20% of cases there is recurrence after surgery. Although 
malignant change in mesenteric cysts has been described, this is rare. 
Hepaticcysts 
Hepatic cysts are typically located in the right lobe of the liver. They are quite rare and result from obstruction of the 
hepatic biliary system. They appear as unilocular, intrahepatic cysts, and they are usually asymptomatic, although 
rarely may show complications such as infections or hemorrhages. In 30% of the cases of polycystic kidneys (adult 
type), asymptomatic hepatic cysts may be associated. 
Intestinalduplicationcysts 
These are quite rare, and may be located along the entire gastrointestinal tract. They sonographically appear as 
tubular or cystic structures of variable size. They may be isolated or associated with other gastrointestinal 
malformations. Differential diagnosis includes other intra-abdominal cystic structures and also bronchogenic cysts, 
adenomatoid cystic malformation of the lung and pulmonary sequestration. Thickness of the muscular wall of the 
cysts and presence of peristalsis may facilitate the diagnosis. Postnatally, surgical removal is carried out. 
Anomaliesoftheumbilicalvein 
Abnormalities of the umbilical vein, which are very rare, can be divided in three groups: 
(1) Persistence of the right umbilical vein with ductus venosus and presence or absence of left umbical vein; 

(2) Absence of the ductus venosus with extrahepatic insertion of the umbilical vein; and 
(3) Dilated umbilical vein with normal insertion. 
Normally, the umbilical vein enters the abdomen almost centrally at the level of the liver and courses on the left of 
the gallbladder. Persistence of the right umbilical vein is demonstrated by the fact that it is localized on the right of 
the gallbladder, bending towards the stomach. Color Doppler may help to diagnose these anomalies and may allow 
the differential diagnosis with other cystic abdominal lesions. Associated anomalies are frequent in anomalies of the 
first two groups and this influences the prognosis. These anomalies include cardiac, skeletal, gastrointestinal and 
urinary anomalies. The anomalies of the third group are rarely associated with other anomalies, and prognosis 
depends on the time at diagnosis and dimension of the varicosity. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 8 
Kidneys and urinary tract 
NORMAL SONOGRAPHIC ANATOMY 
The kidneys and adrenals, located below the level of the stomach, on either side and anterior to the spine, are visible 
by ultrasonography from as early as 9 weeks of gestation and in all cases from 12 weeks. The renal echogenicity is 
high at 9 weeks but decreases with gestation; the adrenals appear as translucent structures with an echodense 
cortex. 
Longitudinal and transverse sections of the abdomen can be used to study the kidneys. In a longitudinal scan, kidneys 
appear as elliptical areas, while on transverse scan they appear as roundish structures at both sides of the spine. The 
kidneys appear slightly hypoechoic, compared to the liver and bowel loops. At 20 weeks, the kidneys show a 
hyperechoic capsule and the cortical area is slightly more echogenic than the medulla. With progressing gestation, fat 
tissue accumulates around the kidneys, enhancing the borders of the kidneys in contrast with the other splanchnic 
organs. At 26–28 weeks, renal pyramids can be detected, and the arcuate arteries can be seen pulsating in their 
proximity. Both the renal length and circumference increase with gestation, but the ratio of renal to abdominal 
circumference remains approximately 30% throughout pregnancy. The anteroposterior diameter of the renal pelvis 
should be < 5 mm at 15–19 weeks, < 6 mm at 20–29 weeks and < 8 mm at 30–40 weeks. The normal ureters are 
rarely seen in the absence of distal obstruction or reflux. The fetal bladder can be visualized from the first trimester 
(in about 80% of fetuses at 11 weeks and more than 90% by 13 weeks); changes in volume over time help to 
differentiate it from other cystic pelvic structures. 
RENAL AGENESIS 
Renal agenesis is the consequence of failure of differentiation of the metanephric blastema during the 25–28th day of 
development and both ureters and kidneys and renal arteries are absent. 
Prevalence 
Bilateral renal agenesis is found in 1 per 5000 births, while unilateral disease is found in 1 per 2000 births. 
Etiology 
Renal agenesis is usually an isolated sporadic abnormality but, in a few cases, it may be secondary to a chromosomal 
abnormality or part of a genetic syndrome (such as Fraser syndrome), or a developmental defect (such as VACTERL 
association). In non-syndromic cases, the risk of recurrence is approximately 3%. However, in about 15% of cases, 
one of the parents has unilateral renal agenesis and in these families the risk of recurrence is increased. 

Diagnosis 
Antenatally, the condition is suspected by the combination of anhydramnios (from 17 weeks) and empty fetal bladder 
(from as early as 14 weeks). Examination of the renal areas is often hampered by the oligohydramnios and the 
‘crumpled’ position adopted by these fetuses, and care should be taken to avoid the mistaken diagnosis of perirenal 
fat and large fetal adrenals for the absent kidneys. The differential diagnosis is from preterm rupture of membranes, 
severe uteroplacental insufficiency and obstructive uropathy or bilateral multicystic or polycystic kidneys. Vaginal 
sonography with high-frequency, high-resolution probes is useful in these cases. 
Failure to visualize the renal arteries with color Doppler is another important clue to the diagnosis in dubious cases, 
both with bilateral and unilateral agenesis. Prenatal diagnosis of unilateral renal agenesis is difficult because there are 
no major features, such as anhydramnios and empty bladder, to alert the ultrasonographer to the fact that one of the 
kidneys is absent. 
Prognosis 
Bilateral renal agenesis is a lethal condition, usually in the neonatal period due to pulmonary hypoplasia. The 
prognosis with unilateral agenesis is normal. 
INFANTILE POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (POTTER TYPE I) 
In this condition, the markedly enlarged kidneys are filled with numerous cortical cysts and dilated collecting ducts. 
The disease has a wide spectrum of renal and hepatic involvement and it is subdivided into perinatal (this is the most 
common), neonatal, infantile and juvenile types on the basis of the age of onset of the clinical presentation and the 
degree of renal tubular involvement. Although recurrences tend to be group-specific, we have seen one family in 
which the four subdivisions were each represented in the four affected infants. 

Prevalence
Infantile polycystic kidney disease is found in about 1 per 30 000 births. 
Etiology 
This is an autosomal recessive condition. The responsible gene is in the short arm of chromosome 6 and prenatal 
diagnosis in families at risk can be carried out by first-trimester chorion villous sampling. 
Diagnosis 
Prenatal diagnosis is confined to the types with earlier onset (perinatal and probably the neonatal types) and is based 
on the demonstration of bilaterally enlarged and homogeneously hyperechogenic kidneys. There is often associated 
oligohydramnios, but this is not invariably so. These sonographic appearances, however, may not become apparent 
before 24 weeks of gestation and, therefore, serial scans should be performed for exclusion of the diagnosis. 
Prognosis 
The perinatal type is lethal either in utero or in the neonatal period due to pulmonary hypoplasia. The neonatal type 
results in death due to renal failure within the 1st year of life. The infantile and juvenile types result in chronic renal 
failure, hepatic fibrosis and portal hypertension; many cases survive into their teens and require renal 
transplantation. 
MULTICYSTIC DYSPLASTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (POTTER TYPE II) 
Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease is thought to be a consequence of either developmental failure of the 
mesonephric blastema to form nephrons or early obstruction due to urethral or ureteric atresia. The collecting tubules 
become cystic and the diameter of the cysts determines the size of the kidneys, which may be enlarged or small. 
Exploration of the renal fossa in some cases reveals no renal artery, renal vein, ureter or cysts, suggesting that renal 
agenesis and dysplastic kidneys may be at different ends of a spectrum of renal malformation. This is further 
supported by the finding that, in about 15% of cases with multicystic kidneys, there is contralateral renal agenesis. 
Prevalence 
Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease is found in about 1 per 1000 births. 
Etiology 
In the majority of cases, this is a sporadic abnormality but chromosomal abnormalities (mainly trisomy 18), genetic 
syndromes and other defects (mainly cardiac) are present in about 50% of the cases. 

Diagnosis 
Ultrasonographically, the kidneys are replaced by multiple irregular cysts of variable size with intervening 
hyperechogenic stroma. The disorder can be bilateral, unilateral or segmental; if bilateral, there is associated 
anhydramnios and the bladder is ‘absent’. 
Prognosis 
Bilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney disease is fatal before or soon after birth, due to pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Unilateral disease is associated with a normal prognosis. There is still controversy in the postnatal management of 
patients with a multicystic kidney; some urologists advocate prophylactic nephrectomy, but the majority adopt an 
expectant approach because the kidney gradually shrinks and may disappear. The parents and family should also be 
scanned to exclude autosomal dominant branchio-to-renal syndrome. 
POTTER TYPE III RENAL DYSPLASIA 
Potter type III renal dysplasia is characterized by markedly enlarged irregular kidneys with innumerable cysts of 
variable sizes interspersed among normal or compressed renal parenchyma. It is the common morphological 
expression of autosomal dominant adult polycystic kidney disease (APKD) and of other Mendelian disorders such as 
tuberous sclerosis, Jeune syndrome, Sturge–Weber syndrome, Zellweger syndrome, Lawrence Moon Biedl syndrome 
and Meckel–Gruber syndrome. Both kidneys are generally equally enlarged and only rarely is one involved so slightly 
that it remains of normal size. One-third of the cases have cysts in the liver, pancreas, spleen or lungs and one-fifth 
are found to have cerebral aneurysms. 
Adult polycystic kidney disease (APKD) 
One in 1000 people carry the APKD mutant gene. Adult polycystic kidney disease is usually asymptomatic until the 
third or fourth decade of life, and, although histological evidence of the disease is likely to be present from 
intrauterine life, the age of onset of gross morphological changes that are potentially detectable by ultrasonography is 
uncertain. Rarely, however, kidneys that are anatomically similar may cause death in infancy or early childhood and 
the condition has been designated as ‘adult variety occurring in infancy’. 
Prenatal diagnosis by ultrasonography is confined to a few case reports and the kidneys have been described as 
enlarged and hyperechogenic with or without multiple cysts. Unlike infantile polycystic kidneys, where there is a loss 
of the corticomedullary junction, in APKD there is accentuation of this junction. The amniotic fluid volume is either 
normal or reduced. 

The kidney size is usually smaller than that of the infant polycystic kidneys. In counselling affected parents with 
APKD, it should be emphasized that the prenatal demonstration of sonographically normal kidneys does not 
necessarily exclude the possibility of developing polycystic kidneys in adult life. Nevertheless, prenatal diagnosis can 
now be made from chorion villous sampling and DNA analysis. 
OBSTRUCTIVE UROPATHIES 
The term ‘obstructive uropathy’ encompasses a wide variety of different pathological conditions characterized by 
dilatation of part or all of the urinary tract. When the obstruction is complete and occurs early in fetal life, renal 
hypoplasia (deficiency in total nephron population) and dysplasia (Potter type II; formation of abnormal nephrons and 
mesenchymal stroma) ensue. On the other hand, where intermittent obstruction allows for normal renal development, 
or when it occurs in the second half of pregnancy, hydronephrosis will result and the severity of the renal damage will 
depend on the degree and duration of the obstruction. Dilatation of the fetal urinary tract frequently, but not 
absolutely, signifies obstruction. Conversely, a fetus with obstruction may not have any urinary tract dilatation. 
Hydronephrosis 
Varying degrees of pelvicalyceal dilatation are found in about 1% of fetuses. Mild hydronephrosis or pyelectasia is 
defined by the presence of an anteroposterior diameter of the pelvis of > 4 mm at 15–19 weeks, > 5 mm at 20–29 
weeks and > 7 mm at 30–40 weeks. Transient hydronephrosis may be due to relaxation of smooth muscle of the 
urinary tract by the high levels of circulating maternal hormones, or maternal–fetal overhydration. In the majority of 
cases, the condition remains stable or resolves in the neonatal period. In about 20% of cases, there may be an 
underlying ureteropelvic junction obstruction or vesicoureteric reflux that requires postnatal follow-up and possible 
surgery. 
Moderate hydronephrosis, characterized by an anteroposterior pelvic diameter of more than 10 mm and pelvicalyceal 
dilatation, is usually progressive and in more than 50% of cases surgery is necessary during the first 2 years of life. 

Ureteropelvic junction obstruction 
This is usually sporadic and, although in some cases there is an anatomic cause, such as ureteral valves, in most 
instances the underlying cause is thought to be functional. In 80% of cases, the condition is unilateral. Prenatal 
diagnosis is based on the demonstration of hydronephrosis in the absence of dilated ureters and bladder. The degree 
of pelvicalyceal dilatation is variable and, occasionally, perinephric urinomas and urinary ascites may be present. 
Postnatally, renal function is assessed by serial isotope imaging studies and, if there is deterioration, pyeloplasty is 
performed. However, the majority of infants have moderate or good function and can be managed expectantly. 
Ureterovesical junction obstruction 
This is a sporadic abnormality characterized by hydronephrosis and hydroureter in the presence of a normal bladder. 
The dilated ureter is tortuous, and on ultrasound appears as a collection of cysts of variable size, localized between 
the renal pelvis, which is variably dilated, and the bladder, which is of normal morphology and dimensions. The 
etiology is diverse, including ureteric stricture or atresia, retrocaval ureter, vascular obstruction, valves, diverticulum, 
ureterocele, and vesicoureteral reflux. Ureteroceles (visible as a thin-walled and fluid-filled small circular area inside 
the bladder) are usually found in association with duplication of the collecting system. In ureteral duplication, the 
upper pole moiety characteristically obstructs and the lower one refluxes. The dilated upper pole may enlarge to 
displace the non-dilated lower pole inferiorly and laterally. 
Vesicoureteric reflux 
This sporadic abnormality is suspected when intermittent dilatation of the upper urinary tract over a short period of 
time is seen on ultrasound scanning. Occasionally, in massive vesicoureteric reflux without obstruction, the bladder 
appears persistently dilated because it empties but rapidly refills with refluxed urine. Primary megaureter can be 
distinguished from ureterovesical junction obstruction by the absence of significant hydronephrosis. 

Megacystis–microcolon–intestinal hypoperistalsis syndrome (MMIHS) 
This is a sporadic abnormality characterized by a massively dilated bladder and hydronephrosis in the presence of 
normal or increased amniotic fluid; the fetuses are usually female. There is associated shortening and dilatation of the 
proximal small bowel, and microcolon with absent or ineffective peristalsis. The condition is usually lethal due to 
bowel and renal dysfunction. 
Urethral obstruction 
Urethral obstruction can be caused by urethral agenesis, persistence of the cloaca, urethral stricture or posterior 
urethral valves. Posterior urethral valves occur only in males and are the commonest cause of bladder outlet 
obstruction. The condition is sporadic and is found in about 1 in 3000 male fetuses. With posterior urethral valves, 
there is usually incomplete or intermittent obstruction of the urethra, resulting in an enlarged and hypertrophied 
bladder with varying degrees of hydroureters, hydronephrosis, a spectrum of renal hypoplasia and dysplasia, 
oligohydramnios and pulmonary hypoplasia. In some cases, there is associated urinary ascites from rupture of the 
bladder or transudation of urine into the peritoneal cavity. 
Fetal therapy for obstructive uropathy 
In fetal lamb, ureteric ligation during the first half of gestation results in dysplastic kidneys, whereas, in the second 
half of pregnancy, ureteric ligation is associated with the development of hydronephrosis but preservation of renal 
architecture. Ligation of the urethra and urachus in fetal lambs at 100 days of gestation causes severe hydronephrosis 
and pulmonary hypoplasia; decompression by suprapubic cystostomy at 120 days’ gestation reduces the urinary tract 
dilatation and improves the survival rate. Similarly, ureteric ligation at 65 days of gestation produces renal dysplasia, 
and subsequent decompression prior to term prevents renal dysplasia and produces reversible postobstructive 
changes; the degree of renal damage is proportional to the length of time for which the obstruction existed. 
Encouraged by the results of these animal studies, and on the assumption that unrelieved obstruction causes 
progressive renal and pulmonary damage, several investigators in the 1980s performed in utero decompression of the 
urinary tract in the human, either by open surgical diversion or by the ultrasound-guided insertion of suprapubic 

vesico-amniotic catheters. Although these techniques demonstrated the feasibility of intrauterine surgery, they did 
not provide conclusive evidence that such intervention improves renal or pulmonary function beyond what can be 
achieved by postnatal surgery. It is possible that, in a few selected cases, intrauterine intervention may be beneficial. 
Assessment of fetal renal function 
Antenatal evaluation of renal function relies on a combination of ultrasonographic findings and analysis of fetal urine 
obtained by urodochocentesis or pyelocentesis. Poor prognostic signs are: 
(1) The presence of bilateral multicystic or severely hydronephrotic kidneys with echogenic kidneys, suggestive of 
renal dysplasia; 
(2) Anhydramnios implying complete urethral obstruction; and 
(3) High urinary sodium, calcium and J2 microglobulin levels. 
Potential candidates for intrauterine surgery are fetuses with bilateral moderately severe pelvicalyceal dilatation and 
normal cortical echogenicity, or severe megacystis and oligohydramnios, or normal levels of urinary sodium, calcium 
and J2 microglobulin. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 9 
Skeleton 
NORMALSONOGRAPHICANATOMY 
Limb buds are first seen by ultrasound at about the 8th week of gestation; the femur and humerus are seen from 9 
weeks, the tibia/fibula and radius/ulna from 10 weeks and the digits of the hands and the feet from 11 weeks. All long 
bones are consistently seen from 11 weeks. Body movements (wiggling) are seen at 9 weeks and, by 11 weeks, limbs 
move about readily. The lengths of the humerus, radius/ulna, femur and tibia/fibula are similar and increase linearly 
with gestation. At the 18–23-week scan, the three segments of each extremity should be visualized, but it is only 
necessary to measure the length of one femur. The relationship of leg and foot should also be assessed to rule out 
clubfoot. 

--Clubfoot 2D Ultrasound Clubfoot 3D Ultrasound (rendering mode) 
SKELETALANOMALIES 
Prevalence 
Skeletal dysplasia is found in about 1 per 4000 births; about 25% of affected fetuses are stillborn and about 30% die 
in the neonatal period. 
Classification 
The existing nomenclature for skeletal dysplasias is complicated. Some disorders are referred to by eponyms (such as 
Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome), by Greek terms describing a salient feature of the disease (diastrophic or twisted, 
metatrophic or changeable) or by a term related to the presumed pathogenesis of the disease (such as osteogenesis 
imperfecta). The fundamental problem with any classification of skeletal dysplasias is that the pathogenesis of these 
diseases is largely unknown and, therefore, the current system relies on purely descriptive findings of either clinical or 
radiological nature. According to the International Nomenclature for Skeletal Dysplasias, the diseases are subdivided 
into three different groups: 
(1) Osteochondrodysplasias (abnormalities of cartilage and / or bone growth and development); 
(2) Disorganized development of cartilaginous and fibrous components of the skeleton; and 
(3) Idiopathic osteolyses. 
Approach to prenatal diagnosis 
There is a wide range of rare skeletal dyplasias, each with a specific recurrence risk, dysmorphic expression, and 
implications for neonatal survival and quality of life. Our knowledge of the in utero expression of these syndromes is 
based on a few case reports and, therefore, in attempting to perform prenatal diagnosis of individual conditions in at-
risk families, extrapolation of findings from the perinatal period is often necessary. The incidental discovery of a 
skeletal dysplasia on routine ultrasound screening, in a pregnancy not known to be at risk of a specific syndrome, 
necessitates a systematic examination to arrive at the correct diagnosis. All limbs must be evaluated as to their 
length, shape, mineralization and movement, and associated abnormalities in other systems, particularly the head, 
thorax and spine, should be sought. 

Assessment of long bones 
Shortening of the extremities can involve the entire limb (micromelia, such as achondrogenesis, short-rib polydactyly 
syndrome, diastrophic dysplasia osteogenesis imperfecta type II), the proximal segment (rhizomelia, such as 
achondroplasia), the intermediate segment (mesomelia, such as mesomelic dysplasia) or the distal segment 
(acromelia, such as Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome). The diagnosis of rhizomelia or mesomelia requires comparison of 
the dimensions of the bones of the leg and forearm with those of the thigh and arm. The femur, however, is 
abnormally short even in mesomelic dwarfism and, therefore, in our routine fetal abnormality screening, we tend to 
confine limb measurements to that of the femur. When dealing with pregnancies at risk for a skeletal dysplasia, both 
segments of all limbs are measured. 
The severe limb reductions associated with osteogenesis imperfecta type II, achondrogenesis and thanatophoric, 
diastrophic, and chondroectodermal dysplasias can be detected by a single measurement of the femur length at 16– 
18 weeks of gestation. In the case of achondroplasia, however, the diagnosis may not become obvious until 22–24 
weeks and, therefore, serial measurements are necessary; homozygous achondroplasia, which is usually lethal, 
manifests in abnormally short limbs earlier than the heterozygous form. 
A minor degree of lateral curvature of the femur is commonly seen in normal fetuses. Pronounced bowing, however, 
is observed in association with campomelic dysplasia, thanatophoric dwarfism, autosomal dominant osteogenesis 
imperfecta, achondrogenesis and hypophosphatasia. In the latter, fractures and callus formation may also be 
detected. Reduced echogenicity of bones, suggestive of hypomineralization, is seen in such disorders as 
hypophosphatasia, osteogenesis imperfecta and achondrogenesis. The virtual absence of ossification of the spine, 
characteristic of achondrogenesis, may lead to the erroneous diagnosis of complete spinal agenesis. Similarly, the 
pronounced clarity with which the cerebral ventricles are imaged, as a result of the poorly mineralized globular 
cranium in cases of hypophosphatasia, may result in the misdiagnosis of hydrocephalus. Care must be exercised, 
however, because lesser degrees of hypomineralization may not be detectable. 
Isolated limb reduction deformities, such as amelia (complete absence of extremities), acheiria (absence of the hand), 
phocomelia (seal limb) or aplasia–hypoplasia of the radius or ulna, are often inherited as part of a genetic syndrome 
(Holt–Oram syndrome, Fanconi pancytopenia, thrombocytopenia with absent radii syndrome) and are readily 
diagnosible by ultrasonography in an at-risk fetus. Other causes of focal limb loss include the amniotic band 
syndrome, thalidomide exposure and caudal regression syndrome. 
Evaluation of hands and feet 
Fetal fingers and toes can be seen, and, with meticulous examination, abnormalities of numbers, shape, movement 
and attitudes can be recognized. Several skeletal dysplasias feature alterations of the hands and feet. Polydactyly 
refers to the presence of more than five digits. It is classified as postaxial if the extra digits are on the ulnar or fibular 
side and preaxial if they are located on the radial or tibial side. Syndactyly refers to soft tissue or bony fusion of 
adjacent digits. Clinodactyly consists of deviation of a finger(s). Disproportion between hands and feet and the other 
parts of the extremity may also be a sign of a skeletal dysplasia. 
Examination of fetal movements 
Maternal perception of fetal movements is usually decreased in fetuses with skeletal dysplasias, such as 
achondrogenesis and thanatophoric dysplasia. Ultrasonography can aid in the diagnosis of conditions characterized by 
limitation of flexion or extension of the limbs, such as arthrogryposis and multiple pterygium syndrome. 
Evaluation of thoracic dimensions 
Several skeletal dysplasias are associated with a small thorax, and chest restriction leads to pulmonary hypoplasia, 
which is the common cause of death in these conditions. The appropriateness of thoracic dimensions can be assessed 
by measuring the thoracic circumference at the level of the four-chamber view of the heart and examining the 
thoracic-to-abdominal circumference ratio, the thoracic-to-head circumference ratio, or the thoracic-to-cardiac 
circumference ratio. 

Skeletal dysplasias associated with a long narrow thorax include asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune), 
chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis–Van Creveld), campomelic dysplasia, Jarcho–Levin syndrome, achondrogenesis 
and hypophosphatasia. Dysplasias with a short thorax include osteogenesis imperfecta (type II), Kniest’s dysplasia 
(metatrophic dysplasia type II) and Pena–Shokeir syndrome. Hypoplastic thorax is found in short-rib polydactyly 
syndrome (type I, type II), thanatophoric dysplasia, cerebrocostomandibular syndrome, cleidocranial dysostosis 
syndrome, homozygous achondroplasia, Melnick–Needles syndrome (osteodysplasty), fibrochondrogenesis and 
otopalatodigital syndrome type II. 
Evaluation of the fetal head 
Several skeletal dysplasias are associated with defects of membranous ossification and, therefore, affect skull bones. 
The face should also be examined for the diagnosis of hypertelorism, micrognathia, short upper lip, and abnormalities 
of the ears. 
Diagnostic tests complementary to sonography 
Prenatal or postnatal evaluation includes chromosomal studies, biochemical investigations (e.g. hypophosphatasia) 
and DNA analysis for an increasing number of the osteochondrodysplasias. Postnatally, examination of skeletal 
radiographs is of particular importance, since the classification of skeletal dysplasias is largely based upon 
radiographic findings. 
OSTEOCHONDRODYSPLASIAS 
Thanatophoric dysplasia 
This is the most common lethal skeletal dysplasia with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 10 000. The term derives from 
the Greek, meaning death-bearing and the characteristic features are severe shortening of the limbs, narrow thorax, 
normal trunk length and large head with prominent forehead. In type I, which is sporadic, the femurs are curved 
(telephone receiver) and in type II, which is autosomal recessive, the femurs are straight but the skull is cloverleaf-
shaped. 

Achondrogenesis 
This is a lethal skeletal dysplasia with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 40 000. The characteristic features are severe 
shortening of the limbs, narrow thorax, short trunk and large head. In achondrogenesis type I, which is autosomal 
recessive, there is poor mineralization of both the skull and vertebral bodies as well as rib fractures. In type II, which 
is sporadic (new autosomal dominant mutations), there is hypomineralization of the vertebral bodies but normal 
mineralization of the skull, and there are no rib fractures. 

Osteogenesis imperfecta 
Osteogenesis imperfecta is a genetically heterogeneous group of disorders presenting with fragility of bones, blue 
sclerae, loose joints and growth deficiency. The underlying defect is a dominant negative mutation affecting COL1A1 
or COL1A2 alleles, which encode the proA1(I) and proa2(I) chains of type I collagen, a protein of paramount 
importance for normal skin and bone development. The mutations result in the production of abnormal quantity (OI 
type I) or quality (types II, III and IV) of collagen. 
There are four clinical subtypes. In type I, which is an autosomal dominant condition with a birth prevalence of about 
1 in 30 000, affected individuals have fragile bones, blue sclerae and progressive deafness, but life expectancy is 
normal. Prenatal diagnosis is available by DNA analysis. Ultrasonography in the second and third trimesters may 
demonstrate fractures of long bones. 
In type II, which is a lethal disorder with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 60 000, most cases represent new dominant 
mutations (recurrence is about 6%). The disorder is characterized by early prenatal onset of severe bone shortening 
and bowing due to multiple fractures affecting all long bones and ribs, and poor mineralization of the skull. 
Type III is a progressively deforming condition characterized by multiple fractures, usually present at birth, resulting 
in scoliosis and very short stature. Bowing of the femur has been described in these cases in utero. Both autosomal 
dominant and recessive modes of inheritance have been reported. 

Type IV is an autosomal dominant condition with variable expressivity. Severely affected individuals may have 
deformities of the long bones due to fractures. Prenatal diagnosis of types III and IV can be made by chorion villous 
sampling and DNA analysis, or by demonstration of abnormal collagen production in cultured fibroblasts. 
Hypophosphatasia 
This lethal, autosomal recessive condition, with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 100 000, is characterized by severe 
shortening of the long bones, small thorax, hypomineralization of the skull and long bones. There is absence of liver 
and bone isoenzymes of alkaline phosphatase, and first-trimester diagnosis is made by measurement of alkaline 
phosphatase isoenzymes in chorion villous samples. The diagnosis can also be made by DNA studies. 
Achondroplasia 
This autosomal dominant syndrome has a birth prevalence of about 1 in 26 000, but the majority of cases represent 
new mutations. The characteristic features of heterozygous achondroplasia include short limbs, lumbar lordosis, short 
hands and fingers, macrocephaly with frontal bossing and depressed nasal bridge. 
Intelligence and life expectancy are normal. Prenatally, limb shortening and typical facis usually become apparent 
only after 22 weeks of gestation. In the homozygous state, which is a lethal condition, short limbs are associated with 
a narrow thorax. Achondroplasia is due to a specific mutation within the fibroblast growth factor receptor type 3 gene 
(FGFR3) and can now be diagnosed by DNA analysis of fetal blood or amniotic fluid obtained in cases of suspicious 
sonographic findings. In cases where both parents have achondroplasia, there is a 25% chance that the fetus is 
affected by the lethal type and the diagnosis can be made by first-trimester chorion villous sampling. 
Campomelic dysplasia 
This lethal, autosomal recessive syndrome with a birth prevalence of 1 in 200 000 is characterized by shortening and 
bowing of the long bones of the legs, narrow chest, hypoplastic scapulae, and large calvarium with disproportionately 
small face. Some of the affected genetically male individuals show a female phenotype. Patients usually die in the 
neonatal period from pulmonary hypoplasia. 

Jarcho–Levin syndrome 
This is a heterogeneous disorder, characterized by vertebral and rib abnormalities (misalignment of the cervical spine 
and ribs). An autosomal recessive type is characterized by a constricted short thorax and respiratory death in infancy. 
Another autosomal recessive and an autosomal dominant type are associated with a short stature and are compatible 
with survival to adult life but with some degree of physical disability. 
Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome) 
This is an autosomal recessive condition with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 70 000. The characteristic features are 
narrow chest and rhizomelic limb shortening. There is a variable phenotypic expression and, consequently, the 
prognosis varies from neonatal death, due to pulmonary hypoplasia, to normal survival. Limb shortening is mild to 
moderate and this may not become apparent until after 24 weeks of gestation. 
Chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome) 
This rare, autosomal recessive condition is characterized by acromelic and mesomelic shortness of limbs, postaxial 
polydactyly, small chest, ectodermal dysplasia, and congenital heart defects in more than 50% of cases. 
Short limb polydactyly syndromes 
This group of lethal disorders is characterized by short limbs, narrow thorax and postaxial polydactyly. Associated 
anomalies are frequently found, including congenital heart disease, polycystic kidneys, and intestinal atresia. Four 
different types have been recognized. Type I (Saldino–Noonan) has narrow metaphyses; type II (Majewski) has cleft 
lip and palate and disproportionally shortened tibiae; type III (Naumoff) has wide metaphyses with spurs; type IV 
(Beemer–Langer) is characterized by median cleft lip, small chest with extremely short ribs, protuberant abdomen 
with umbilical hernia and ambiguous genitalia in some 46,XY individuals. 
Diastrophic dysplasia 
This autosomal recessive condition is characterized by severe shortening and bowing of all long bones, talipes 
equinovarus, hand deformities with abducted position of the thumbs (‘hitchhiker thumb’), multiple joint flexion 
contractures and scoliosis. There is a wide spectrum in phenotypic expression and some cases may not be 
diagnosable in utero. This disease is not lethal and neurodevelopment is normal. 
LIMBDEFICIENCYORCONGENITALAMPUTATIONS 
Absence of an extremity or a segment of an extremity is referred to as ‘limb deficiency’ or ‘congenital amputation’. 
The prevalence of limb reduction deformities is about 1 per 20 000 births. In about 50% of cases, there are simple 
transverse reduction deficiencies of one forearm or hand without associated anomalies. In the other 50% of cases, 
there are multiple reduction deficiencies and, in 25% of these, there are additional anomalies of the internal organs or 
craniofacial structures. In general, limb deficiency of the upper extremity is an isolated anomaly, whereas congenital 
amputation of the leg or bilateral amputations or reductions of all limbs are usually part of a genetic syndrome. 
Isolated amputation of an extremity can be due to amniotic band syndrome, exposure to a teratogen or a vascular 
accident. There is an association between chorion villous sampling before 10 weeks of gestation and transverse limb 

defects. Syndromes associated with limb deficiencies include the aglossia–adactylia syndrome (transverse 
amputations of the limbs ranging from absent digits to severe deficiencies of all four extremities, micrognathia, and 
vestigial tongue or ankylosis of the tongue to the hard palate, the floor of the mouth or the lips), and the Moebius 
sequence (facial anomalies attributed to paralysis of the 6th and 7th cranial nerves, leading to micrognathia and 
ptosis with upper limb defects, ranging from transverse amputations to absent digits). Both syndromes are sporadic. 
Limb reduction defects associated with other anomalies include the CHILD syndrome (congenital hemidysplasia with 
ichthyosiform erythroderma and limb defects). This is characterized by strict demarcation of the skin lesions to one 
side of the mid-line and limb deficiencies, which are unilateral, varying from hypoplasia of phalanges to complete 
absence of an extremity. The condition is also associated with heart defects and unilateral hydronephrosis or renal 
agenesis. 
In phocomelia, the extremities resemble those of a seal. Typically, the hands and feet are present (these may be 
normal or abnormal), but the intervening arms and legs are absent. Phocomelia can also be caused by exposure to 
thalidomide, but this is only of historical interest. Three syndromes must be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
phocomelia: Roberts syndrome (autosomal recessive disorder characterized by the association of tetraphocomelia and 
facial clefting defects or hypoplastic nasal alae), some varieties of thrombocytopenia with absent radius (TAR 
syndrome) and Grebe syndrome (autosomal recessive condition, described in the inbred Indian tribes of Brazil, 
characterized by marked hypomelia of upper and lower limbs, increasing in severity from proximal to distal segments 
– in contrast to Roberts syndrome, the lower limbs are more affected than the upper extremities). 
Congenital short femur has been classified into five groups: type I, simple hypoplasia of the femur; type II, short 
femur with angulated shaft; type III, short femur with coxa vara (the most common); type IV, absent or defective 
proximal femur; and type V, absent or rudimentary femur. One or both femurs can be affected but the right femur is 
more frequently involved. Femoral hypoplasia–unusual facies syndrome, which is sporadic, consists of bilateral 
femoral hypoplasia and facial defects, including short nose with broad tip, long philtrum, micrognathia and cleft 
palate. 
If the defect is unilateral, it may correspond to the femur–fibula–ulna or femur–tibia–radius complex. These two 
syndromes have different implications for genetic counselling; the former is non-familial, while the second has a 
strong genetic component. 
SPILTHANDANDFOOTSYNDROME 
The term ‘split hand and foot’ syndrome refers to a group of disorders characterized by splitting of the hand and foot 
into two parts; other terms include lobster-claw deformity and ectrodactyly. The conditions are classified into typical 
and atypical varieties. The typical variety (found in 1 per 90 000 births and usually inherited with an autosomal 
dominant pattern) consists of absence of both the finger and the metacarpal bone, resulting in a deep V-shaped 
central defect that clearly divides the hand into an ulnar and a radial part. The atypical variety (found in 1 per 150 

000 births) is characterized by a much wider cleft formed by a defect of the metacarpals and the middle fingers; the 
cleft is U-shaped and wide, with only the thumb and small finger remaining. 
Split hand and foot deformities can occur as isolated anomalies, but more commonly they are part of a more complex 
syndrome. Ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia–cleft lip/palate syndrome (EEC syndrome), which is autosomal 
dominant, involves the four extremities with more severe deformities of the hands; the spectrum of ectodermal 
defects is wide, including dry skin, sparse hair, dental defects and defects of the tear duct. Other syndromes include 
split foot and triphalangeal thumb, split foot and hand and central polydactyly, Karsch–Neugebauer syndrome (split 
hand/foot with congenital nystagmus), acrorenal syndrome and mandibulofacial dysostosis (Fontaine syndrome). 
CLUBHANDS 
Clubhand deformities are classified into two main categories: radial and ulnar. Radial clubhand includes a wide 
spectrum of disorders that encompass absent thumb, thumb hypoplasia, thin first metacarpal and absent radius. 
Ulnar clubhand, which is less common, ranges from mild deviations of the hand on the ulnar side of the forearm to 
complete absence of the ulna. While radial clubhand is frequently syndromatic, ulnar clubhand is usually an isolated 
anomaly. 
Clubhand deformities are often found in association with chromosomal abnormalities (such as trisomy 18), 
hematological abnormalities (such as Fanconi’s pancytopenia, TAR syndrome and Aase syndrome), or genetic 
syndromes with cardiac defects (such as Holt–Oram syndrome, or the Lewis upper limb–cardiovascular syndrome). 
Radial clubhand is also associated with congenital scoliosis. The three syndromes that should be considered part of 
the differential diagnosis include the VATER association (vertebral segmentation, ventricular septal defect, anal 
atresia, tracheoesophageal fistula, radial and renal defects, and single umbilical artery), Goldenhar syndrome and the 
Klippel–Feil syndrome. 
POLYDACTYLY 
Polydactyly is the presence of an additional digit, which may range from a fleshy nubbin to a complete digit with 
controlled flexion and extension. Postaxial polydactyly (the most common form) occurs on the ulnar side of the hand 
and fibular side of the foot. Preaxial polydactyly is present on the radial side of the hand and the tibial side of the 
foot. The majority of conditions are isolated with an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Some of them are part 
of a syndrome, usually an autosomal recessive one. Preaxial polydactyly, especially triphalangeal thumb, is most 
likely to be part of a multisystem syndrome. Central polydactyly, which consists of an extra digit (usually hidden 
between the long and the ring finger), is often bilateral and is associated with other hand and foot malformations; it is 
inherited with an autosomal mode of inheritance. 
FETALAKINESIADEFORMATIONSEQUENCE(FADS) 
This is a heterogeneous group of conditions with a birth prevalence of about 1 in 3000. Neurological, muscular, 
connective tissue, and skeletal abnormalities result in multiple joint contractures, including bilateral talipes and fixed 
flexion or extension deformities of the hips, knees, elbows and wrists. 

This sequence includes congenital lethal arthrogryposis, multiple pterygium and Pena–Shokeir syndromes. The 
deformities are usually symmetric and, in most cases, all four limbs are involved. The severity of the deformities 
increases distally in the involved limb, with the hands and feet typically being the most severely affected. The 
condition is commonly associated with polyhydramnios (usually after 25 weeks), narrow chest, micrognathia and 
nuchal edema (or increased nuchal translucency at 10–13+6 weeks). 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 10 
Features of chromosomal defects 
(With the collaboration of Rosalinde Snijders) 
PHENOTYPIC EXPRESSION 
The commonest chromosomal defects are trisomies 21, 18 or 13, Turner syndrome (45,X), 47,XXX, 47,XXY, 47,XYY 
and triploidy. In the first trimester, a common feature of many chromosomal defects is increased nuchal translucency 
thickness. In later pregnancy, each chromosomal defect has its own syndromal pattern of abnormalities. 
Trisomy 21 
Trisomy 21 is associated with a tendency towards brachycephaly, mild ventriculomegaly, flattening of the face, nuchal 
edema, atrioventricular septal defects, duodenal atresia and echogenic bowel, mild hydronephrosis, shortening of the 
limbs, sandal gap and clinodactyly or mid-phalanx hypoplasia of the fifth finger. 
Trisomy 18 
Trisomy 18 is associated with strawberry-shaped head, choroid plexus cysts, absent corpus callosum, Dandy–Walker 
complex, facial cleft, micrognathia, nuchal edema, heart defects, diaphragmatic hernia, esophageal atresia, 
exomphalos, renal defects, myelomeningocele, growth retardation and shortening of the limbs, radial aplasia, 
overlapping fingers and talipes or rocker bottom feet. 
Trisomy 13 
In trisomy 13, common defects include holoprosencephaly and associated facial abnormalities, microcephaly, cardiac 
and renal abnormalities (often enlarged and echogenic kidneys), exomphalos and postaxial polydactyly. 
Triploidy 
Triploidy, where the extra set of chromosomes is paternally derived, is associated with a molar placenta and the 
pregnancy rarely persists beyond 20 weeks. When there is a double maternal chromosome contribution, the 
pregnancy may persist into the third trimester. The placenta is of normal consistency and the fetus demonstrates 
severe asymmetrical growth retardation. Commonly, there is mild ventriculomegaly, micrognathia, cardiac 
abnormalities, myelomeningocoele, syndactyly, and ‘hitch-hiker’ toe deformity. 
Turner syndrome 
There are two types of this syndrome, the lethal and non-lethal types. The rate of intrauterine lethality between 12 
and 40 weeks is about 75%. The lethal type of Turner syndrome presents with large nuchal cystic hygromata, 
generalized edema, mild pleural effusions and ascites, and cardiac abnormalities. The non-lethal type usually does not 
demonstrate any ultrasonographic abnormalities. 
Sex chromosome abnormalities 
The main sex chromosome abnormalities, other than Turner syndrome, are 47,XXX, 47,XXY and 47,XYY. These are 
not associated with an increased prevalence of sonographically detectable defects. 

Types of abnormalities 
The following table describes the common chromosomal abnormalities in the presence of various sonographically 
detected defects. 
Common chromosomal abnormalities in fetuses with sonographic defects 
Trisomy 21 Trisomy 18 Trisomy 13 Triploidy Turner 
Skull/brain 
Strawberry-shaped head -+ ---
Brachycephaly + + + -+ 
Microcephaly --+ -+ 
Ventriculomegaly + + -+ -
Holoprosencephaly --+ --
Choroid plexus cysts + + ---
Absent corpus callosum -+ ---
Posterior fossa cyst + + + --
Enlarged cisterna magna + + + --
Face/neck 
Facial cleft -+ + --
Micrognathia -+ -+ -
Nuchal edema + + + --
Cystic hygromata ----+ 
Chest 
Diaphragmatic hernia -+ + --
Cardiac abnormality + + + + + 
Abdomen 
Exomphalos -+ + --
Duodenal atresia + ----
Collapsed stomach + + ---
Mild hydronephrosis + + + -+ 
Other renal abnormalities + + + + -
Other 
Hydrops + ---+ 
Small for gestational age -+ -+ + 
Relatively short femur + + -+ + 
Clinodactyly + ----
Overlapping fingers -+ ---
Polydactyly --+ --
Syndactyly ---+ -
Talipes -+ + + -

RISK FOR CHROMOSSOMAL DEFECTS 
Number of defects 
Ultrasound studies have demonstrated that major chromosomal defects are often associated with multiple fetal 
abnormalities. The overall risk for chromosomal defects increases with the total number of abnormalities that are 
identified. It is therefore recommended that, when an abnormality/marker is detected at routine ultrasound 
examination, a thorough check is made for the other features of the chromosomal defect(s) known to be associated 
with that marker; should additional abnormalities be identified, the risk is dramatically increased. 
Incidence of chromosomal defects in relation to number of sonographically detected abnormalities 
(Nicolaides et al., Lancet 1992;340:704–7) 
Abnormalities n Chromosomal defects 
1 1128 2% 
2 490 11% 
3 220 32% 
4 115 52% 
5 53 66% 
6 40 63% 
7 16 69% 
8 or more 24 92% 
Major defects 
If the 18–23-week scan demonstrates major defects, it is advisable to offer fetal karyotyping even if these defects are 
apparently isolated. The prevalence of these defects is low and therefore the cost implications are small. If the defects 
are either lethal or they are associated with severe handicap, fetal karyotyping constitutes one of a series of 
investigations to determine the possible cause and therefore the risk of recurrence. Examples of these defects include 
hydrocephalus, holoprosencephaly, multicystic renal dysplasia and severe hydrops. In the case of isolated neural tube 
defects, there is controversy as to whether the risk for chromosomal defects is increased. Similarly, for skeletal 
dysplasias where the likely diagnosis is obvious by ultrasonography, it would probably be unnecessary to perform 
karyotyping. If the defect is potentially correctable by intrauterine or postnatal surgery, it may be logical to exclude 
an underlying chromosomal abnormality, especially because for many of these conditions the usual abnormality is 
trisomy 18 or 13. Examples include facial cleft, diaphragmatic hernia, esophageal atresia, exomphalos and many of 
the cardiac defects. In the case of isolated gastroschisis or small bowel obstruction, there is no evidence of increased 
risk of trisomies. 
Minor defects or markers 
For apparently isolated abnormalities, there are large differences in the reported incidence of associated chromosomal 
defects. It is therefore uncertain whether, in such cases, karyotyping should be undertaken, especially for those 
abnormalities that have a high prevalence in the general population and for which the prognosis in the absence of a 
chromosomal defect is good. Since the incidence of chromosomal defects is associated with maternal age, it is 
possible that the wide range of results reported in the various studies is the mere consequence of differences in the 
maternal age distribution of the populations examined. In addition, since chromosomal abnormalities are associated 
with a high rate of intrauterine death, differences may arise from the fact that studies were undertaken at different 
stages of pregnancy. For example, to determine whether apparently isolated choroid plexus cysts at 20 weeks of 
gestation are associated with an increased risk for trisomy 18, it is essential to know the incidence of trisomy 18 at 20 
weeks, based on the maternal age distribution of the population that is examined. Therefore, we propose that, in the 
calculation of risks for chromosomal defects, it is necessary to take into account ultrasound findings as well as the 
maternal age and the gestational age at the time of the scan . 

Association with maternal age and gestation 
The risk for trisomies increases with maternal age and decreases with gestation; the rate of intrauterine lethality 
between 12 weeks and 40 weeks is about 30% for trisomy 21, and 80% for trisomies 18 and 13 (Appendix 1). Turner 
syndrome is usually due to loss of the paternal X chromosome and, consequently, the frequency of conception of 45,X 
embryos, unlike that of trisomies, is unrelated to maternal age. The prevalence is about 1 per 1500 at 12 weeks, 1 
per 3000 at 20 weeks and 1 per 4000 at 40 weeks. For the other sex chromosome abnormalities (47,XXX, 47,XXY 
and 47,XYY), there is no significant change with maternal age and, since the rate of intrauterine lethality is not higher 
than in chromosomally normal fetuses, the overall prevalence (about 1 per 500) does not decrease with gestation. 
Polyploidy affects about 2% of recognized conceptions but it is highly lethal and it is very rarely observed in live 
births; the prevalence at 12 and 20 weeks is about 1 per 2000 and 1 per 250 000, respectively. 
Type of defect 
If there are minor defects, the risk for trisomy 21 is calculated by multiplying the background (maternal age-and 
gestation-related risk) by a factor depending on the specific defect. For the following conditions, there are sufficient 
data in the literature to estimate the risk factors. 
Nuchal edema or fold more than 6 mm This is the second-trimester form of nuchal translucency. It is found in 
about 0.5% of fetuses and it may be of no pathological significance. However, it is sometimes associated with 
chromosomal defects, cardiac anomalies, infection or genetic syndromes. For isolated nuchal edema, the risk for 
trisomy 21 may be ten-times the background risk. 
Hyperechogenic bowel This is found in about 0.5% of fetuses and is usually of no pathological significance. The 
commonest cause is intra-amniotic bleeding, but occasionally it may be a marker of cystic fibrosis or chromosomal 
defects. For isolated hyperechogenic bowel, the risk for trisomy 21 may be seven-times the background risk. 

Short femur If the femur is below the 5th centile and all other measurements are normal, the baby is likely to be 
normal but rather short. Rarely, this is a sign of dwarfism. Occasionally, it may be a marker of chromosomal defects. 
On the basis of existing studies, short femur is found four-times as commonly in trisomy 21 fetuses compared to 
normal fetuses. However, there is some evidence that isolated short femur may not be more common in trisomic than 
normal fetuses. 
Echogenic foci in the heart These are found in about 4% of pregnancies and they are usually of no pathological 
significance. However, they are sometimes associated with cardiac defects and chromosomal abnormalities. For 
isolated hyperechogenic foci, the risk for trisomy 21 may be three-times the background risk. 
Choroid plexus cysts These are found in about 1–2% of pregnancies and they are usually of no pathological 
significance. When other defects are present, there is a high risk of chromosomal defects, usually trisomy 18 but 
occasionally trisomy 21. For isolated choroid plexus cysts, the risk for trisomy 18 and trisomy 21 is 1.5-times the 
background risk. 

Mild hydronephrosis This is found in about 1–2% of pregnancies and is usually of no pathological significance. 
When other abnormalities are present, there is a high risk of chromosomal defects, usually trisomy 21. For isolated 
mild hydronephrosis, the risk for trisomy 21 is 1.5-times the background risk. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 11 
Fetaltumors 
(With the collaboration of Israel Goldstein) 
INTRODUCTION 
Fetal tumors are rare, but they have important implications for the health of both the fetus and the mother. The 
natural history and prognosis of most fetal tumors are well known. Once a fetal tumor has been detected, close 
surveillance by a multidisciplinary team of doctors is mandatory, with anticipation and early recognition of problems 
during pregnancy, labor and immediate postnatal life. When the sonographic diagnosis is uncertain, fetal tissue biopsy 
may be necessary to obtain a histological diagnosis. In rare cases, intrauterine treatment may be possible. Some fetal 
tumors may be malignant and could metastasize to other fetal organs and the placenta; maternal metastases in such 
cases are unknown. In contrast, on rare occasions, maternal malignancies (melanoma, leukemia and breast cancer) 
can metastasize to the placenta; in about half of the cases with placental metastases, mostly with malignant 
melanoma, the tumor can metastasize to fetal viscera. 
Etiology and mechanisms of carcinogenesis 
Developmental errors during embryonic and fetal maturation may result in embryonic tumors. One hypothesis is that 
more cells are produced than are required for the formation of an organ or tissue and the origins of embryonic tumors 
rest in developmental errors in these surplus embryonic rudiments. Embryonic tumors developing after infancy are 
explained by the persistence of cell rests or developmental vestiges. Developmentally anomalous tissue (such as 
hamartomas and dysgenic gonads) is a source of neoplasms in older children and adults. When any of this 
developmentally abnormal tissue is present at birth, it is inferred that the cells failed to mature, migrate or 
differentiate properly during intrauterine life. 
Neoplastic transformation of cells in tissue culture and in vivo carcinogenesis are dynamic, multistep and complex 
processes that can be separated artificially into three phases: initiation, promotion and progression. These phases 
may be applied to the natural history of virtually all human tumors, including embryonic ones. Initiation is the result 
of exposure of cells or tissues to an appropriate dose of a carcinogen; an initiated cell is permanently damaged and 
has a malignant potential. The initiated cells can persist for months or years before becoming malignant. During the 
promotion phase, initiated cells clonally expand. Promotion may be modulated or reversed by a variety of 
environmental conditions. In the last phase, progression, the transformed cells develop into a tumor, ultimately with 
metastasis. Embryonic tumors can, therefore, be regarded as defects in the integrated control of cell differentiation 
and proliferation. A genetic model of carcinogenesis has also been introduced in an attempt to clarify the 
pathogenesis and behavioral peculiarities of certain embryonic tumors. According to this hypothesis, embryonal 
neoplasms arise as a result of two mutational events in the genome. The first mutation is prezygotic in familial cases 
and postzygotic in non-familial; the second mutation is always postzygotic. 
Benignity of fetal and infantile neoplasms 
Some neonatal and infantile tumors have a benign clinical behavior despite histological evidence of malignancy. 
Examples include congenital neuroblastomas and hepatoblastomas in the first year of life, and congenital and infantile 
fibromatosis, and sacrococcygeal teratomas in the first few months of life. The factors responsible for this ‘oncogenic 
period of grace’, which starts in utero and extends through the first few months of extrauterine life, are uncertain. 
Association of neoplasia and congenital malformations 
The concept that teratogenesis and oncogenesis have shared mechanisms is well documented by numerous 
examples. Probably, there is simultaneous or sequential cellular and tissue reaction to specific injurious agents. The 
degree of cytodifferentiation, the metabolic or immunological state of the embryo or fetus, and the length of time of 
exposure to the agent will determine whether the effect is teratogenic, oncogenic, both, or neither. Many biological, 

chemical and physical agents known to be teratogenic to the fetus or embryo are carcinogenic postnatally. 
Alternatively, a teratogenic event during intrauterine life may predispose the fetus to an oncogenic event later in life. 
This would explain neoplastic transformation occurring in hamartomas, developmental vestiges, heterotopias and 
dysgenetic tissues. It is postulated that the anomalous tissues harbor latent oncogenes which, under certain 
environmental conditions, are activated, resulting in malignant transformation of a tumor. 
Classification 
A formal classification of fetal tumors does not exist. Apart from distinguishing solid from cystic lesions, probably the 
best classification should be by location. The main compartments of fetal tumors are the head and brain, face and 
neck, thorax (including the heart), abdomen and retroperitoneum, extremities, genitalia, sacrococcygeal region, and 
skin. 
Prenatal diagnosis 
The approach for prenatal diagnosis of fetal tumors should be based on three sets of ultrasound signs: general signs, 
organ-specific signs and tumor-specific signs. The general sonographic features, that should raise the suspicion of an 
underlying fetal tumor, include: 
(1) Absence or disruption of contour, shape, location, sonographic texture or size, of a normal anatomic structure; 
(2) Presence of an abnormal structure or abnormal biometry; 
(3) Abnormality in fetal movement; 
(4) Polyhydramnios; and 
(5) Hydrops fetalis. 
Polyhydramnios is particularly important, because almost 50% of fetal tumors are accompanied by this finding. The 
underlying mechanisms include interference with swallowing (such as thyroid goiter or myoblastoma), mechanical 
obstruction (such as gastrointestinal tumors), excessive production of amniotic fluid (such as sacrococcygeal 
teratoma), and decreased resorption by lung tissue in lung pathology. Intracranial tumors are also commonly 
associated with polyhydramnios and the mechanism may be neurogenic lack of swallowing or inappropriate polyuria. 
Tumor-specific signs include pathological changes within the tumor mass (calcifications, liquefaction, organ edema, 
internal bleeding, neovascularization and rapid changes in size and texture). Organ-specific signs are rare, but in 
some cases they are highly suggestive of the condition (such as cardiomegaly with a huge solid or cystic mass 
occupying the entire heart, suggesting intrapericardial teratoma). 
In some cases, normal and abnormal sonographic findings may mimic fetal tumors. Examples may vary from severe 
cases of bladder exstrophy (where the protruding bladder mass appears as a solid tumor-like structure), to rare cases 
of fetal scrotal inguinal hernia (where bowel loops occupy the scrotum, appearing as huge masses). 
Prognosis 
Apart from intracranial tumors (where the prognosis is generally poor), the prognosis for tumors in other locations is 
variable and depends on the size of the tumor (with resultant compression of adjacent organs), degree of 
vascularization (with the risk of causing heart failure and hydrops), and associated polyhydramnios (with the risk of 
preterm delivery). 
INTRACRANIALTUMORS 
Intracranial tumors include teratomas, epidermoid, dermoid, germinoma, medulloblastoma, meningeal sarcoma, 
lipoma of the corpus callosum, oligodendroglioma, gangliocytoma, and glioblastoma, choroid plexus papilloma, 
tuberous sclerosis (Bourneville’s disease), neurofibromatosis (Von Recklinghausen’s disease), and systemic 
angiomatosis of the central nervous system and eye (Von Hippel–Lindau’s disease). 

Prevalence 
Brain tumors are exceedingly rare in children, and only about 5% arise during fetal life; teratoma is the most 
frequently reported. 
Etiology 
Embryonic tumors are thought to derive from embryologically displaced cells. Brain tumors have been produced in 
animals by the use of chemical and viral teratogens. The relevance of these experiments to human brain neoplasms is 
unclear. 
Diagnosis 
A brain tumor should be suspected in the presence of mass-occupying lesions (cystic or solid areas), and a change in 
shape or size of the normal anatomic structures (such as shift in the mid-line). Cystic tumors and teratomas are 
usually characterized by complete loss of the normal intracranial architecture. In some cases, the lesion appears as a 
low echogenic structure, and it may be difficult to recognize. Hydrocephalus is frequently associated with brain tumors 
and may be the presenting sign. The ultrasound appearances of all intracranial tumors are similar and, therefore, 
precise histological diagnosis from a scan is almost impossible. Possible exceptions are lipomas (that have a typical 
hyperechogenic homogeneous appearance) and choroid plexus papillomas (that appear as an overgrowth of the 
choroid plexus). Identification of brain neoplasm associated with tuberous sclerosis, neurofibromatosis, and systemic 
angiomatosis of the central nervous system and eye can be attempted in patients at high risk; in most cases, 
however, antenatal sonography is negative, at least in the second trimester. 
Prognosis 
Prognosis depends on a number of factors, including the histological type and the size and location of the lesion. 
Congenital intracranial teratomas are usually fatal. The limited experience with the other neoplasms in prenatal 
diagnosis precludes the formulation of prognostic considerations. 
TUMORSOFTHEFACEANDNECK 
Epignathus 
This is a very rare teratoma arising from the oral cavity or pharynx. Most cases of epignathus arise from the sphenoid 
bone. Some arise from the hard and soft palate, the pharynx, the tongue and jaw. From their sites of origin, the 
tumors grow into the oral or nasal cavity or intracranially. The tumors, which are usually benign, consist of tissues 
derived from any of the three germinal layers; most of them contain adipose tissue, cartilage, bone, and nervous 
tissue. Prenatal diagnosis is suggested by the demonstration of a solid tumor arising from the oral cavity; 
calcifications and cystic components may also be present. Differential diagnosis includes neck teratomas, 
encephaloceles, and other tumors of the facial structures. Polyhydramnios (due to pharyngeal compression) is usually 
present. A careful examination of the brain is important because the tumor may grow intracranially. The outlook 
depends on the size of the lesion and the involvement of vital structures. Lesions detected antenatally have been very 
large. Polyhydramnios has been associated with poor prognosis. The major cause of neonatal death is asphyxia due to 

airway obstruction. Surgical resection with a normal postoperative course is possible. 
Myoblastoma 
This is a very rare benign tumor, which usually arises from the oral cavity. The tumor occurs in females exclusively 
and it may be the consequence of excessive production of estrogens by the fetal ovaries under human chorionic 
gonadotropin stimulation. The ultrasound features are those of a large solid mass protruding from the fetal mouth. 
Vascular connections between the tumor and the floor of the oral cavity may be demonstrated using color Doppler 
ultrasound. Polyhydramnios (due to pharyngeal compression) is common. 
Cervical teratoma 
This is a rare tumor. Ultrasound features include a unilateral and well-demarcated partly solid and cystic, or 
multiloculated mass, calcifications (in about 50% of cases), and polyhydramnios (in about 30% of cases due to 
esophageal obstruction). The prognosis is very poor and the intrauterine or neonatal mortality rate (due to airway 
obstruction) is about 80%. Survival after surgery is more than 80% but, since these tumors tend to be large, 
extensive neck dissection and multiple additional procedures are necessary to achieve complete resection of the 
tumor with acceptable functional and cosmetic results. 
Goiter 
Fetal goiter (enlargement of the thyroid gland) can be associated with hyperthyroidism (the result of iodine excess or 
deficiency, intrauterine exposure to antithyroid drugs or congenital metabolic disorders of thyroid synthesis), 
hypothyroidism or an euthyroid state. Ultrasound diagnosis is based on the demonstration of a solid, anteriorly 
located symmetric mass, which may result in hyperextension of the fetal head. Polyhydramnios is common due to 
mechanical obstruction of the esophagus. The prognosis depends on the basic cause of the goiter. Most cases are in 
women with a history of thyroid disease. Fetal blood sampling can aid in determining fetal thyroid status, especially in 
women suffering from Grave’s disease where a transplacental transfer of drugs or thyroid-stimulating antibodies may 
result in fetal goiter. Maternal therapy usually corrects fetal hyperthyroidism. Direct fetal therapy in cases of fetal 
hypothyroidism can be undertaken by amniocentesis or by cordocentesis and this can result in resolution of the fetal 
goiter. 

TUMORSOFTHETHORAX 
Lung tumors 
Fetal lung tumors have not been reported in the literature. Other lesions, which are malformations, and which may 
appear as solid masses in the thorax, include cystic adenoid malformation of lung and extralobar lung sequestration. 
Mediastinal tumors 
Mediastinal tumors (which include neuroblastoma and hemangioma) may cause mediastinal shift, lung hypoplasia, 
hydrops and polyhydramnios (due to esophageal compression). 
Rhabdomyoma (hamartoma) of the heart 
Rhabdomyoma (which represents excessive growth of cardiac muscle) is the most common primary cardiac tumor in 
the fetus, neonate, and young child; the birth prevalence is 1 per 10 000. In 50% of cases, the tumor is associated 
with tuberous sclerosis (autosomal dominant condition with a high degree of penetrance and variable expressivity). 
The ultrasound features are those of a single or multiple echogenic masses impinging upon the cardiac cavities. The 
prognosis depends on the number, size and location of the tumors. The clinical spectrum varies from completely 
asymptomatic to severely ill. The mortality rate in infants operated on within the first year of life is about 30%. Up to 
80% of the infants with tuberous sclerosis have seizures and mental retardation, which are the most serious long-
term complications of the disease. 
Intrapericardial teratoma 
In the majority of cases, the tumor is located in the right side of the heart. It may reach a size that is 2–3 times that 
of the normal heart. The tumor may be cystic or pedunculated. Pericardial effusion is always present and results from 
rupture of cystic areas within the tumor, or from obstruction of cardiac and pericardial lymphatic veins. Cardiac 
tamponade and hydrops may develop and the prognosis is very poor. 
TUMORSOFTHEABDOMENANDRETROPERITONEUM 
Hepatic tumors 
Primary hepatic tumors (hemangioma, mesenchymal hamartoma, hepatoblastoma and adenoma) are extremely rare. 
All hepatic tumors may show the same sonographic features: either a defined lesion (cystic or solid) is present or 
hepatomegaly exists. Calcifications may appear, and both oligohydramnios and polyhydramnios have been observed. 
The other tumors are very rare and little is known about their natural history. Hemangiomata are histologically benign 
and they regress spontaneously after infancy. However, occasionally, they are associated with arteriovenous 
shunting, congestive heart failure and hydrops, resulting in intrauterine or neonatal death. 

Neuroblastoma 
This is one of the most common tumors of infancy and is found in about 1 per 20 000 births. Neuroblastoma arises 
from undifferentiated neural tissue of the adrenal medulla or sympathetic ganglia in the abdomen, thorax, pelvis, or 
head and neck. Usually, the lesion is isolated, but occasional metastasis before birth may occur. Sonographically, the 
tumor appears as a cystic, solid, or complex mass in the region of the adrenal gland (directly above the level of the 
kidney and under the diaphragm). Occasionally, calcifications are present. Tumors arising from the sympathetic 
ganglia may appear in the neck, chest, or in the abdomen. There may be associated polyhydramnios and fetal 
hydrops. The tumor can metastasize in utero (placenta, liver, or blood vessels). The prognosis is excellent if the 
diagnosis is made in utero or in the first year of life (survival more than 90%), but, for those diagnosed after the first 
year, survival is less than 20%. 
Renal tumors 
Mesoblastic nephroma (renal hamartoma) is the most frequent renal tumor, while Wilms’ tumor (nephroblastoma) is 
extremely rare. The sonographic picture in both tumors is of a solitary mass replacing the normal architecture of the 
kidney, and, in most cases, there is associated polyhydramnios. Cystic areas may appear in both tumors. Mesoblastic 
nephromas are benign, and nephrectomy is curative in the majority of cases. Wilms’ tumor is a genetically 
heterogeneous group of malignant tumors and up to 60% of affected cases are associated with genetic syndromes 
(such as Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome). Treatment of the tumor requires surgery, chemotherapy and sometimes 
radiotherapy. 
TUMORSOFTHEEXTREMITIES 
Tumors of the extremities include: 
(1) Vascular hamartosis; a malformation in which newly formed vessels proliferate; 
(2) Hemangioma, a combined lesion of both skin and internal organs. The Klippel–Weber–Trenaunay syndrome should 
be considered in the differential diagnosis. The hemangiomas may vary in size and location. Some authors do not 
consider them to be true tumors, but rather suspect them to represent vascular malformations; 
(3) Lymphangioma, a cavernous lymphangioma, which involves the lymphatic vessels and is related to cystic 
hygroma; 
(4) Sarcoma (mainly rhabdomyosarcoma); this should be distinguished from infantile myofibromatosis. 
TUMORSOFTHESKIN 
Malignant melanoma is a rare tumor capable of metastasizing into other organs including the fetal liver, lungs and 
placenta. 
SACROCOCCYGEALTERATOMA 
The sacrococcygeal region is the most frequent site of teratomas of the fetus. 
Prevalence 
Sacrococcygeal teratoma is found in about 1 per 40 000 births. Females are four times more likely to be affected than 
males, but malignant change is more common in males. 
Etiology 
This tumor is thought to arise from totipotential cells in Hensen’s node. A theory of ‘twinning accident’ with 
incomplete separation during embryogenesis has also been proposed. The condition is sporadic but some cases are 
familial, with autosomal dominant inheritance. 

Diagnosis 
Sacrococcygeal teratomas usually appear solid or mixed solid and cystic (multiple cysts are irregular in shape and 
size). Occasionally, the tumor is completely cystic, and more rarely completely solid. Most teratomas are extremely 
vascular, which is easily shown using color Doppler ultrasound. The tumors may be entirely external, partially internal 
and partly external, or mainly internal. Polyhydramnios is frequent, and this may be due to direct transudation into 
the amniotic fluid and due to fetal polyuria, secondary to the hyperdynamic circulation, which is the consequence of 
arteriovenous shunting. Similarly, high-output heart failure leading to hepatomegaly, placentomegaly and hydrops 
fetalis can occur. 
Prognosis 
Sacrococcygeal teratoma is associated with a high perinatal mortality (about 50%), mainly due to the preterm 
delivery (the consequence of polyhydramnios) of a hydropic infant requiring major neonatal surgery. Difficult surgery, 
especially with tumors that extend into the pelvis and abdomen, can result in nerve injury and incontinence. The 
tumor is invariably benign in the neonatal period but delayed surgery or incomplete excision can result in malignant 
transformation (about 10% before 2 months of age to about 80% by 4 months). 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter12 
Hydropsfetalis 
HYDROPSFETALIS 
Hydrops is defined by abnormal accumulation of serous fluid in skin (edema) and body cavities (pericardial, pleural, or 
ascitic effusions). 
Prevalence 
Hydrops fetalis is found in about 1 per 2,000 births. 
Etiology 
Hydrops is a non-specific finding in a wide variety of fetal and maternal disorders, including hematological, 
chromosomal, cardiovascular, renal, pulmonary, gastrointestinal, hepatic and metabolic abnormalities, congenital 
infection, neoplasms and malformations of the placenta or umbilical cord. Hydrops is classically devided into immune 
(due to maternal hemolytic antibodies) and non-immune (due to all other etiologies). With the widespread 
introduction of immunoprophylaxis and the successfull treatment of Rhesus disease by fetal blood transfusions, non-
immune causes have become responsible for at least 75% of the cases, and make a greater contribution to perinatal 
mortality. While in many instances the underlying cause may be determined by maternal antibody and infection 
screening, fetal ultrasound scanning, including echocardiography and Doppler studies, and fetal blood sampling, quite 
often the abnormality remains unexplained even after expert post-mortem examination. 
Prognosis 
Although isolated ascites, both in fetuses and neonates, may be transitory, the spontaneous resolution of hydrops has 
not been reported and the overall mortality for this condition is about 80%. 
UltrasoundDiagnosis 
Figure1 -longitudinalview,abdnormalaccumulationof Figure2 -longitudinalview,abdnormalaccumulationof 
serous fluid at the body cavities (pericardial, pleural, or serous fluid at the body cavities (pericardial, pleural, or 
asciticeffusions). asciticeffusions)&Colordopplerenergyflow. 

Figure3 -transverseview,atthestomachandbowellevel, Figure4 -transverse view, at the stomach level, with 
withabdnormalaccumulationofserousfluidattheabdome abdnormalaccumulationofserousfluidattheabdomeor 
orasciticeffusion. asciticeffusion. 
Fetaltherapy 
Immune hydrops can be successfully treated by blood transfusions to the fetus. Such treatment often results in 
reversal of hydrops and the survival rate is about 80%. Fetal therapy can also successfully reverse some types of 
non-immune hydrops, such as fetal tachyarrhythmias (by transplacental or direct fetal administration of 
antiarrhythmic drugs), pleural effusions (by pleuro-amniotic shunting), urinary ascites (by vesico-amniotic or 
peritoneal-amniotic shunting), parvovirus B19 infection or severe fetomaternal hemorrhage (by fetal blood 
transfusions), diaphragmatic hernia, cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lungs and sacrococcygeal teratoma (by 
open fetal surgery), and the recipient fetus in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (by endoscopic laser coagulation of 
the communicating placental vessels). 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter 13 
Smallforgestationalage 
SMALLFORGESTATIONALAGE 
Small for gestational age fetuses are defined by the finding that the abdominal circumference is below the 5th centile 
for gestation. About 80% of such fetuses are constitutionally small, with no increased perinatal death or morbidity, 
15% are growth restricted due to reduced placental perfusion and "utero-placental insufficiency", and 5% are growth 
restricted due to low growth potential, the result of genetic disease or enviromental damage. 
Ultrasound findings 
The finding of a small abdominal circumference should stimulate the sonographer to consider four possible causes: 
wrong dates, normal small, abnormal small or starving small fetus. Accurate measurements of the head and 
abdominal circumference, femur length and transverse cerebellar diameter should be taken and their various ratios 
should be examined. Additionally, a detailed examination should be carried out for the detection of any defects or 
markers of chromosomal abnormalities (mainly triploidy and trisomy 18), and for assessment of amniotic fluid and 
fetal activity. 
BPD/OFD/HC TCD 
AC FL 

In cases of wrong dates, there may be a suggestive history (uncertain last menstrual period, irregular cycle, 
conception within three months of stopping the contraceptive pill or breast feeding), all measurements symmetrically 
small, no obvious anatomical defects, normal amniotic fluid volume and fetal activity. A repeat ultrasound 
examination in two weeks will demonstrate an increase in fetal measurements and the rate of growth is normal (the 
lines joining the measurements are parallel to the appropriate normal mean for gestation). 
In normal small fetuses, the mother is usually small (the main determinant of fetal size is maternal size), and the 
ultrasound findings are similar to pregnancies with wrong dates. However, a repeat scan in two weeks may 
demonstrate a further deviation from normal in the various fetal measurements. 
In starving small fetuses, the fetal measurements demonstrate asymmetry (the greatest deficit is observed in the 
abdominal circumference, then the femur length and finally the head circumference with the transverse cerebellar 
diameter being the least affected), there are no obvious fetal anatomical defects, the amniotic fluid and fetal 
movements are reduced, the placenta is often thickened with translucent areas (placental lakes) and there are 
abnormal Doppler waveforms in the uterine and / or umbilical arteries. 
In abnormal small fetuses there may be anatomical defects suggestive of chromosomal abnormalities (in triploidy 
there may be a molar placenta or in the presence of a normal placenta the fetus demonstrates severe asymmetrical 
growth retardation, mild ventriculomegaly, micrognathia, cardiac abnormalities, myelomeningocoele, syndactyly, or 
'hitch-hiker' toe deformity; trisomy is characterised by strawberry-shaped head, choroid plexus cysts, absent corpus 
callosum, enlarged cisterna magna, facial cleft, micrognathia, nuchal oedema, heart defects, diaphragmatic hernia, 
oesophageal atresia, exomphalos, renal defects, myelomeningocoele, growth retardation and shortening of the limbs, 
radial aplasia, overlapping fingers and talipes or rocker bottom feet). The amniotic fluid may be normal decreased or 
often increased. In congenital infection growth retardation may be associated with features of hydrops and brain 
abnormalities (ventriculomegaly, microcephaly or cerebral calcifications). 
Doppler ultrasound 
Doppler ultrasound provides a non-invasive method for the study of fetal haemodynamics. Investigation of the uterine 
and umbilical arteries provide information on the perfusion of the utero-placental and feto-placental circulations 
respectively, while Doppler studies of selected fetal organs are valuable in detecting the hemodynamic 
rearrangements that occur in response to fetal hypoxaemia. In normal pregnancy, impedance to flow in the uterine 
artery decreases with gestation and this presumably reflects the trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries and their 
conversion into low resistance vessels. Similarly, there is a decrease in impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries due 
to progressive maturation of the placenta and increase in the number of tertiary stem villi. 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the uterine artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries in 1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries in early 2º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries in late 2º and 3º 
trimester 

Normal Pregnancy -Development of the umbilical artery
Normal impedance to flow in the 
umbilical arteries and normal pattern 
of pulsatility at the umbilical vein in 
1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the 
umbilical arteries and umbilical vein 
in early 2º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the 
umbilical arteries and umbilcal vein 
in late 2º and 3º trimester 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Descending Aorta
Color Doppler Energy with 
visualization of the Aortic Arch and 
descending thoracic aorta 
Normal flow of the descending 
thoracic aorta in 2º and 3º 
trimesters 

Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Middle Cerebral Artery
Color Doppler Energy with 
visualization of the Circle of Willis 
and the Middle Cerebral Artery 
Normal flow of the Middle Cerebral 
Artery in 1º trimester 
Normal flow of the Middle Cerebral 
Artery in 2º and 3º trimester 
Normal flow of the ductus venosus 
Normal flow of the inferior vena cava 
Normal flow of the ventricular valves 
Color Doppler Energy with bifurcation of the renal arteries 
Normal flow of the renal artery 

Abnormal Development of the uterine artery
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the characteristic waveform 
of early diastolic notching) 
Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the characteristic 
waveform of early diastolic notching) 
Very high resitance flow in the uterine arteries (with reverese diastolic flow) 
Abnormal Development of the umbilical artery 
Umbilical arteries 
- high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
- high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
- very high pulsatility index 
- end diastolic velocity 
- pulsation in the umbilical vein 
Umbilical arteries 
Severe cases absence of reversal of end diastolic frequencies 

Redistribution of blood flow -Middle Cerebral Artery
Color Doppler Energy with visualization of the Circle of Willis and the Middle 
Cerebral Artery. Note the vascularization. 
Decrease in impedance to flow in the middle cerebral arteries 
Redistribution of blood flow -Descending Aorta and Renal Artery 
Descending Thoracic Aorta 
- descrease the diastolic flow 
- increase of the impedance 
Renal artery 
- end diastolic flow 
- increase of the impedance 
Severe fetal hypoxemia there is decompenation in the cardiovascular system and 
right heart failure 
Peripheral vasoconstriction, as seen in fetal redistribution, causes an increase in 
ventricular afterload and thus ventricular end diastolic pressure increases. This 
results in retrograde blood flow in IVC with increase velocity in atrial contraction. 
Umbilcal vein pulsations are also observed in severe hypoxia. 
In severe fetal hypoxemia there is decompenation in the cardiovascular system and 
right heart failure. This is manifested by the absence or reversal of forward flow 
during atrial contraction in the ductus venosus and this is a sign of impending fetal 
death. 

In constitutionally small fetuses Doppler studies of the placental and fetal circulations are normal. Similarly in growth 
restricted fetuses due to genetic disease the results are often normal. In growth restriction due to placental 
insufficiency there is increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the characteristic waveform of early 
diastolic notching) and umbilical arteries (high pulsatility index and in severe cases absence of reversal of end 
diastolic frequencies). These data support the findings from histopathologic studies that in this condition there is 
failure of the normal development of maternal placental arteries into low resistance vessels (and therefore reduced 
oxygen and nutrient supply to the intervillous space), and reduction in the number of placental terminal capillaries 
and small muscular arteries in the tertiary stem villi (and therefore impaired maternal-fetal transfer). 
Doppler studies of the fetal circulation demonstrate decrease in impedance to flow in the middle cerebral arteries and 
increase in impedance in the descending thoracic aorta and renal artery. These findings suggest that in fetal 
hypoxemia there is an increase in the blood supply to the brain and reduction in the perfusion of the kidneys, gastro-
intestinal tract and the lower extremities. Although knowledge of the factors governing circulatory readjustments and 
their mechanism of action is incomplete, it appears that partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide play a role, 
presumably through their action on chemoreceptors. In severe fetal hypoxemia there is decompenation in the 
cardiovascular system and right heart failure. This is manifested by the absence or reversal of forward flow during 
atrial contraction in the ductus venosus and this is a sign of impending fetal death. 
Chromosomal defects 
Although low birth weight is a common feature of many chromosomal abnormalities, the incidence of chromosomal 
defects in small for gestational age neonates is less than 1-2%. However, data derived from postnatal studies 
underestimate the association between chromosomal abnormalitites and growth retardation, since many pregnancies 
with chromosomally abnormal fetuses result in intrauterine death. Thus in fetuses presenting with growth retardation 
in the second trimester the incidence of chromosomal abnormalities is 10-20%. The chromosomal abnormalities 
associated with severe growth restriction are triploidy, trisomy 18 and deletion of the short arm of chromosome 4. 
The incidence of chromosomal defects is much higher in (a) fetuses with multiple malformations, than in those with 
no structural defects, (b) the group with normal or increased amniotic fluid volume, than in those with reduced or 
absent amniotic fluid, and (c) in the group with normal waveforms from both uterine and umbilical arteries, than in 
those with abnormal waveforms from either or both vessels. A substantial proportion of the chromosomally abnormal 
fetuses demonstrate the asymmetry (high head to abdomen circumference ratio), thought to be typical for 
uteroplacental insufficiency; indeed the most severe form of asymmetrical growth retardation is found in fetuses with 
triploidy. 
Growth restriction can also be caused by confined placental mosaicism. In this condition, which is found in about 1% 
of pregnancies, the fetal karyotype is normal but there are two different chromosomal complements in the placenta 
(one is usually normal and the other an autosomal trisomy). Placental mosaicism is also associated with uniparental 
disomy (inheritance of two homologous chromosomes from one parent), which often results in growth restriction. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Chapter14 
Abnormalities of the amniotic fluid volume
Amniotic fluid is produced by fetal urination but in the first 16 weeks of gestation additional sources include the 
placenta, amniotic membranes, umbilical cord and fetal skin. Removal of amniotic fluid is by fetal swallowing. 
Ultrasonographically, the diagnosis of polyhydramnios or oligohydramnios is made when there is excessive or virtual 
absence of echo-free spaces around the fetus. 
OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS/ANHYDRAMNIOS 
Oligohydramnios means reduced amniotic fluid and anhydramnios means absence of amniotic fluid. 
Prevalence 
Oligohydramnios in the second trimester is found in about 1 per 500 pregnancies. 
Etiology 
Oligohydramnios in the second trimester is usually the result of preterm premature rupture of the membranes, 
uteroplacental insufficiency and urinary tract malformations (bilateral renal agenesis, multicystic or polycystic 
kidneys, or urethral obstruction). 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of oligohydramnios is usually made subjectively. 
Quantitative criteria include: 
(a) the largest single pocket of amniotic fluid being 1 cm or less, or 
(b) amniotic fluid index (the sum of the vertical measurements of the largest pockets of amniotic fluid in the four 
quadrants of the uterus) of less than 5 cm. 
Anecoic areas simulating pockets of amniotic fluid Color Doppler energy at the umbilical cord 
In the absence of the "accoustic window" normally provided by the amniotic fluid, and the "undesirable" postures 
often adopted by these fetuses, confident exclusion of fetal defects may be impossible. Nevertheless, the detection of 
a dilated blader in urethral obstruction and enlarged echogenic or multicystic kidneys in renal disease should be 
relatively easy. The main difficulty is in the differential diagnosis of renal agenesis. In cases of preterm prelabour 

rupture of the membranes, detailed questioning of the mother may reveal a history of chronic leakage of amniotic 
fluid. Furthermore, in uteroplacental insufficiency, Doppler blood flow studies will often demomstrate high impedance 
to flow in the placental circulation and redistribution in the fetal circulation. In the remaining cases, intra-amniotic 
instillation of normal saline may help improve ultrasonographic examination and lead to the diagnosis of fetal 
abnormalities like renal agenesis. 
Prognosis 
Bilateral renal agenesis, multicystic or polycystic kidneys are lethal abnormalities, usually in the neonatal period due 
to pulmonary hypoplasia. Preterm rupture of membranes at 20 weeks or earlier is associated with a poor prognosis; 
about 40% miscarry within five days of membrane rupture due to chorioamnionitis and in the remaining 60% of 
pregnancies more than 50% of neonates die due to pulmonary hypoplasia. Uteroplacental insufficiency resulting in 
oligohydramnios at 18-23 weeks is very severe and the most likely outcome is intrauterine death. 
POLYHYDRAMNIOS 
Polyhydramnios means increased or excessive amniotic fluid volume. 
Prevalence 
Polyhydramnios in the second trimester is found in about 1 per 200 pregnancies. 
Etiology 
There are essentially two major causes of polyhydramnios; reduced fetal swallowing or absorption of amniotic fluid 
and increased fetal urination. Reduced fetal swallowing may be due to craniospinal defects (such as anencephaly), 
facial tumours, gastrointestinal obstruction (such as esophageal atresia, duodenal atresia and small bowel 
obstruction), compressive pulmonary disorders (such as pleural effusions, diaphragmatic hernia or cystic adenomatoid 
malformation of the lungs), narrow thoracic cage (due to skeletal dysplasias), and fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence (due to neuromascular impairement of fetal swallowing). Increased fetal urination is observed in maternal 
diabetes mellitus and maternal uremia (increased glucose and urea cause osmotic diuresis), hyperdynamic fetal 
circulation due to fetal anemia (due to red cell isoimmunization or congenital infection) or fetal and placental tumours 
or cutaneous arteriovenous malformations (such as sacrococcygeal teratoma, placental chorioangioma), or twin-to 
twin transfusion syndrome. 
Diagnosis 
The diagnosis of polyhydramnios is usually made subjectively. Quantitatively, polyhydramnios is defined as an 
amniotic fluid index (the sum of the vertical measurements of the largest pockets of amniotic fluid in the four 
quadrants of the uterus) of 20 cm or more. Alternatively, the vertical measurement of the largest single pocket of 
amniotic fluid free of fetal parts is used to classify polyhydramnios into mild (8-11 cm), moderate (12-15 cm) and 
severe (16 cm or more). Although 80% of cases with mild polyhydramnios are considered to be idiopathic, in the 
majority of cases with moderate or severe polyhydramnios there are maternal or fetal disorders. In most cases 
polyhydramnios develops late in the second or in the third trimester of pregnancy. Acute polyhydramnios at 18-23 
weeks is mainly seen in association with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Testing for maternal diabetes, detailed 
sonographic examination for anomalies, and fetal karyotyping should constitute the cornerstones of the diagnostic 
protocol in the investigation of these cases. 

-Moderate polyhydramnios Polyhydramnios Diaphragmatic Hernia 
Prenataltherapy 
The aim is to reduce the risk of very premature delivery and the maternal discomfort that often accompanies severe 
polyhydramnios. Treatment will obviously depend on the diagnosis, and will include better glycemic control of 
maternal diabetes mellitus, antiarrhythmic medication for fetal hydrops due to dysrrhythmias, thoracoamniotic 
shunting for fetal pulmonary cysts or pleural effusions. For the other cases, polyhydramnios may be treated by 
repeated amniocenteses every few days and drainage of large volumes of amniotic fluid. However, the procedure 
itself may precipitate premature labour. An alternative and effective method of treatment is maternal administration 
of indomethacin; however, this drug may cause fetal ductul constriction and close monitoring by serial fetal 
echocardiographic studies is necessary. In twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, presenting with acute polyhydramnios 
at 18-23 weeks of gestation, endocopic laser occlusion of placental anastomoses or serial amniodrainage may be 
carried out. 
Prognosis 
This depends on the cause of polyhydramnios. 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

AppendixI 
Risk of major trisomies in relation to maternal age
and gestation
Table 1 Risk of Trisomy 21 (Snijders et al. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:167-70) 
Maternalage Gestationalage 
(years) 10weeks 12weeks 14weeks 16weeks 20weeks 40weeks 
20 1/983 1/1068
25 1/870 1/946
30 1/576 1/626
31 1/500 1/543
32 1/424 1/461
33 1/352 1/383
34 1/287 1/312
35 1/229 1/249
36 1/180 1/196
37 1/140 1/152
38 1/108 1/117
39 1/82 1/89
40 1/62 1/68
41 1/47 1/51
42 1/35 1/38
43 1/26 1/29
44 1/20 1/21
45 1/15 1/16
1/1140 1/1200 1/1295 1/1527 
1/1009 1/1062 1/1147 1/1352 
1/668 1/703 1/759 1/895 
1/580 1/610 1/658 1/776 
1/492 1/518 1/559 1/659 
1/409 1/430 1/464 1/547 
1/333 1/350 1/378 1/446 
1/266 1/280 1/302 1/356 
1/209 1/220 1/238 1/280 
1/163 1/171 1/185 1/218 
1/125 1/131 1/142 1/167 
1/95 1/100 1/108 1/128 
1/72 1/76 1/82 1/97 
1/54 1/57 1/62 1/73 
1/41 1/43 1/46 1/55 
1/30 1/32 1/35 1/41 
1/23 1/24 1/26 1/30 
1/17 1/18 1/19 1/23 
Table 2 Risk of trisomy 18 (Snijders et al. Fetal Diag Ther 1995;10:356–67) 
Maternal age 
(years) 
Gestational age 
10 weeks 12 weeks 14 weeks 16 weeks 20 weeks 40 weeks 
20 1/1993 1/2484 1/3015 1/3590 1/4897 1/18013 
25 1/1765 1/2200 1/2670 1/3179 1/4336 1/15951 
30 1/1168 1/1456 1/1766 1/2103 1/2869 1/10554 
31 1/1014 1/1263 1/1533 1/1825 1/2490 1/9160 
32 1/860 1/1072 1/1301 1/1549 1/2490 1/7775 
33 1/715 1/891 1/1081 1/1287 1/1755 1/6458 
34 1/582 1/725 1/880 1/1047 1/1429 1/5256 
35 1/465 1/580 1/703 1/837 1/1142 1/4202 
36 1/366 1/456 1/553 1/659 1/899 1/3307 
37 1/284 1/354 1/430 1/512 1/698 1/2569 
38 1/218 1/272 1/330 1/393 1/537 1/1974 
39 1/167 1/208 1/252 1/300 1/409 1/1505 
40 1/126 1/157 1/191 1/227 1/310 1/1139 
41 1/95 1/118 1/144 1/171 1/233 1/858 
42 1/71 1/89 1/108 1/128 1/175 1/644 
43 1/53 1/66 1/81 1/96 1/131 1/481 
44 1/40 1/50 1/60 1/72 1/98 1/359 

Table 3 Risk of trisomy 13 (Snijders et al. Fetal Diag Ther 1995;10:356–67) 
Maternal age 
(years) 
Gestational age 
10 weeks 12 weeks 14 weeks 16 weeks 20 weeks 40 weeks 
20 1/6347 1/7826 1/9389 1/11042 1/14656 1/42423 
25 1/5621 1/6930 1/8314 1/9778 1/12978 1/37567 
30 1/3719 1/4585 1/5501 1/6470 1/8587 1/24856 
31 1/3228 1/3980 1/4774 1/5615 1/7453 1/21573 
32 1/2740 1/3378 1/4052 1/4766 1/6326 1/18311 
33 1/2275 1/2806 1/3366 1/3959 1/5254 1/15209 
34 1/1852 1/2284 1/2740 1/3222 1/4277 1/12380 
35 1/1481 1/1826 1/2190 1/2576 1/3419 1/9876 
36 1/1165 1/1437 1/1724 1/2027 1/2691 1/7788 
37 1/905 1/1116 1/1339 1/1575 1/2090 1/6050 
38 1/696 1/858 1/1029 1/1210 1/1606 1/4650 
39 1/530 1/654 1/784 1/922 1/1224 1/3544 
40 1/401 1/495 1/594 1/698 1/927 1/2683 
41 1/302 1/373 1/447 1/526 1/698 1/2020 
42 1/227 1/280 1/335 1/395 1/524 1/1516 
43 1/170 1/209 1/251 1/295 1/392 1/1134 
44 1/127 1/156 1/187 1/220 1/292 1/846 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Appendix II 
Antenatalsonographicfindingsinskeletaldysplasias
Type of limb shortening 
Rhizomelia 
Mesomelia 
Micromelia 
Thanatophoric dysplasia 
Atelosteogenesis 
Chondrodysplasia punctata (rhizomelic type) 
Diastrophic dysplasia 
Congenital short femur 
Achondroplasia 
Mesomelic dysplasia 
COVESDEM association 
Acromelia 
Ellis-Van Creveld syndrome 
Achondrogenesis 
Atelosteogenesis 
Short-rib polydactyly syndrome (types I & III) 
Diastrophic dysplasia 
Fibrochondrogenesis 
Osteogenesis imperfecta (type II) 
Kniest dysplasia 
Dyssegmental dysplasia 
Altered thoracic dimensions
Long narrow thorax 
Short thorax 
Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia 
Ellis Van Creveld syndrome 
Metatropic dysplasia 
Fibrochondrogenesis 
Atelosteogenesis 
Campomelic dysplasia 
Jarcho-Levin syndrome 
Achondrogenesis 
Hypophosphatasia 
Dyssegmental dysplasia 
Cleidocranial dysplasia 
Osteogenesis imperfecta (type II) 
Kniest’s dysplasia 
Pena-Shokeir syndrome 
Hypoplastic thorax 
Short-rib polydactyly syndrome (types I & II) 
Thanatophoric dysplasia 
Cerebro-costo-mandibular syndrome 
Cleidocranial dysostosis syndrome 
Homozygous achondroplasia 
Melnick-Needles syndrome (osteodysplasty) 
Fibrochondrogenesis 
Otopalatodigital syndrome (type II) 

Hand and foot abnormalities
Postaxial polydactyly Chondroectodermal dysplasia 
Short rib-polydactyly syndrome (type I, type III) 
Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia 
Otopalatodigital syndrome 
Mesomelic dysplasia Werner type (associated with 
absence of thumbs) 
Preaxial polydactyly Chondroectodermal dysplasia 
Short-rib polydactyly syndrome type II 
Carpenter syndrome 
Syndactyly Poland syndrome 
Carpenter syndrome 
Aper syndrome 
Otopalatodigital syndrome (type II) 
Mesomelic dysplasia Werner type 
TAR syndrome 
Jarcho-Levin syndrome 
Roberts syndrome 
Brachydactyly Mesomelic dysplasia Robinow type 
Otopalatodigital syndrome 
Hitch-hiker thumb Diastrophic dysplasia 
Club feet deformity Diastrophic dysplasia 
Osteogenesis imperfecta 
Kniest’s dysplasia 
Spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita 
Skull and face deformities
Large head Achondroplasia 
Achondrogenesis 
Thanathophoric dysplasia 
Osteogenesis imperfecta 
Cleidocranial dysplasia 
Hypophosphatasia 
Campomelic syndrome 
Short rib-polydactyly syndrome (type III) 
Robinow mesomelic dysplasia 
Otopalatodigital syndrome 
Clover-leaf skull Thanatophoric dysplasia (type II) 
Campomelic syndrome 
Other craniostenosis Apert’s syndrome 
Carpenter syndrome 
Hypophosphatasia 
Congenital cataracts Chondrodysplasia punctata 
Cleft palate Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia 
Kniest’s dysplasia 
Diastrophic dysplasia 
Spondyloepiphyseal syndrome 
Campomelic syndrome 
Jarcho-Levin syndrome 
Chondroectodermal dysplasia 
Short-rib polydactyly syndrome (type II) 
Metatropic dysplasia 
Dyssegmental dysplasia 
Otopalatodigital syndrome type II 
Roberts syndrome 

Skull and face deformities (contd.)
Hypertelorism Otopalatodigital syndrome 
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita 
Larsen’s syndrome 
Roberts syndrome 
Cleidocranial dysplasia 
Achondroplasia 
Campomelic dysplasia 
Coffin syndrome 
Klippel-Feil syndrome 
Aper syndrome 
Sprengel’s deformity 
Mesomelic dysplasia 
Holt-Oram syndrome 
Micrognathia Campomelic dysplasia 
Diastrophic dysplasia 
Otopalatodigital syndrome 
Achondrogenesis 
Mesomelic dysplasia 
Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita 
Nager acrofacial dysostosis 
Oromandibular limb hypogenesis 
Atelosteogenesis 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Appendix III 
Fetalbiometryat14-40weeksofgestation
Table 1 Biparietal diameter 
Table 2 Head circumference 
Table 3 Anterior cerebral ventricle diameter 
Table 4 Posterior cerebral ventricle diameter 
Table 5 Anterior cerebral ventricle diameter to hemisphere diameter ratio 
Table 6 Posterior cerebral ventricle diameter to hemisphere diameter ratio 
Table 7 Transverse cerebellar diameter 
Table 8 Cisterna magna diameter 
Table 9 Abdominal circumference 
Table 10 Head circumference to abdominal circumference ratio 
Table 11 Femur length 
Table 12 Head circumference to femur length ratio 

NormalFetalBiometry 
The normal ranges for fetal biometry presented in this section were established from cross-sectional data on 1040 
singleton pregnancies at 14–40 weeks of gestation(Snijders & Nicolaides, Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:34– 
48).The patients fulfilled the following criteria: (1) known last menstrual period with a cycle length of 26–30 days, (2) 
no fetal abnormalities and no pregnancy complications, (3) live birth at term, (4) birth weight above the 3rd and 
below the 97th centile for gestation (Yudkin et al., Early Hum Dev 1987;15:45–52). For each 7-day interval from 14 
to 40 weeks, 40 patients were included. 
Measurements of biparietal diameter (BPD), occipito-frontal diameter (OFD), anterior and posterior cerebral ventricle 
diameter (Va and Vp), and hemisphere (H) were obtained from a transverse axial plane of the fetal head showing a 
central mid-line echo broken in the anterior third by the cavum septii pellucidi and demonstrating the anterior and 
posterior horns of the lateral ventricles. BPD and OFD were measured from the outer borders of the skull and head 
circumference (HC) was calculated [3.14 x(BPD+OFD)/2]. Va was the distance between the lateral wall of the anterior 
horn to the mid-line and Vp was the distance between the medial and lateral walls of the posterior horn. The 
hemisphere was measured from the mid-line to the inner border of the skull. Transverse cerebellar diameter (TCD) 
and cisterna magna diameter (CM) were measured in the suboccipitobregmatic plane of the head. The femur length 
(FL) was measured from the greater trochanter to the lateral condyle. For abdominal circumference (AC), a 
transverse section of the fetal abdomen was taken at the level of the stomach and the bifurcation of the main portal 
vein into its right and left branches. The anteroposterior (AD1) and transverse (AD2) diameters were measured and 
AC was calculated [3.14 x (A)/2]. The following ratios were calculated: HC/AC, HC/FL, Va/H and Vp/H. 
For each of the measurements and their ratios, regression analysis was applied examining linear, quadratic and cubic 
models for the association with gestational age (in days). For those measurements where the standard deviation 
increased or decreased with gestation, logarithmic or square root transformation was applied to stabilize variance. If 
the quadratic or cubic terms did not improve the original linear model (an independent correlation with p < 0.05 and 
improvement of the correlation coefficient), the linear model was chosen as the best fit. Where the quadratic or cubic 
components did improve the model, they were included in the equation for the regression line. Equations for 
regression lines on transformed data were used to calculate the mean and residual SD in transformed units. To 
produce the reference ranges in the original units, the mean and limits of the calculated reference range in 
transformed units were subjected to anti-logarithmic or power transformation as appropriate. 

Table 1 Biparietal diameter (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 28 31 34 
15+0 - 15+6 31 34 37 
16+0 - 16+6 34 37 40 
17+0 - 17+6 36 40 43 
18+0 - 18+6 39 43 47 
19+0 - 19+6 42 46 50 
20+0 - 20+6 45 49 54 
21+0 - 21+6 48 52 57 
22+0 - 22+6 51 56 61 
23+0 - 23+6 54 59 64 
24+0 - 24+6 57 62 68 
25+0 - 25+6 60 66 71 
26+0 - 26+6 63 69 75 
27+0 - 27+6 66 72 78 
28+0 - 28+6 69 75 81 
29+0 - 29+6 72 78 85 
30+0 - 30+6 74 81 88 
3 +0 -3 +6 77 83 90 
3 +0 -3 +6 79 86 93 
3+0 -3 +6 81 88 96 
3 +0 -3 +6 83 90 98 
3 +0 -3 +6 85 92 100 
3 +0 -3 +6 86 94 102 
3 +0 -3 +6 87 95 103 
3 +0 -3 +6 88 96 104 
3 +0 -3 +6 89 97 105 

Table 2 Head circumference (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 102 110 118 
15+0 - 15+6 111 120 129 
16+0 - 16+6 120 130 140 
17+0 - 17+6 130 141 152 
18+0 - 18+6 141 152 164 
19+0 - 19+6 151 163 176 
20+0 - 20+6 162 175 189 
21+0 - 21+6 173 187 201 
22+0 - 22+6 184 198 214 
23+0 - 23+6 195 210 227 
24+0 - 24+6 206 222 240 
25+0 - 25+6 217 234 252 
26+0 - 26+6 227 245 264 
27+0 - 27+6 238 256 277 
28+0 - 28+6 248 267 288 
29+0 - 29+6 257 277 299 
30+0 - 30+6 266 287 309 
31+0 - 31+6 274 296 319 
32+0 - 32+6 282 304 328 
33+0 - 33+6 288 311 336 
34+0 - 34+6 294 317 342 
35+0 - 35+6 299 323 348 
36+0 - 36+6 303 327 353 
37+0 - 37+6 306 330 356 
38+0 - 38+6 308 332 358 
39+0 - 39+6 309 333 359 
HC = [3.14 x (BPD+OFD)/2] 

Table 3 Anterior cerebral ventricle diameter (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 5.2 6.7 8.1 
15+0 - 15+6 5.3 6.8 8.3 
16+0 - 16+6 5.4 6.9 8.4 
17+0 - 17+6 5.6 7.0 8.5 
18+0 - 18+6 5.7 7.2 8.6 
19+0 - 19+6 5.8 7.3 8.8 
20+0 - 20+6 5.9 7.4 8.9 
21+0 - 21+6 6.1 7.5 9.0 
22+0 - 22+6 6.2 7.7 9.2 
23+0 - 23+6 6.3 7.8 9.3 
24+0 - 24+6 6.4 7.9 9.4 
25+0 - 25+6 6.6 8.1 9.5 
26+0 - 26+6 6.7 8.2 9.7 
27+0 - 27+6 6.8 8.3 9.8 
28+0 - 28+6 7.0 8.4 9.9 
29+0 - 29+6 7.1 8.5 10.1 
30+0 - 30+6 7.2 8.7 10.2 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.3 8.8 10.3 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.5 9.0 10.4 
3+0 -3 +6 7.6 9.1 10.6 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.7 9.2 10.7 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.9 9.3 10.8 
3 +0 -3 +6 8.0 9.5 10.9 
3 +0 -3 +6 8.1 9.6 11.1 
3 +0 -3 +6 8.2 9.7 11.2 
3 +0 -3 +6 8.3 9.8 11.3 

Table 4 Posterior cerebral ventricle diameter (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 5.1 6.7 8.4 
15+0 - 15+6 5.1 6.8 8.5 
16+0 - 16+6 5.2 6.9 8.6 
17+0 - 17+6 5.3 7.0 8.7 
18+0 - 18+6 5.4 7.1 8.8 
19+0 - 19+6 5.5 7.2 8.8 
20+0 - 20+6 5.6 7.2 8.9 
21+0 - 21+6 5.6 7.3 9.0 
22+0 - 22+6 5.7 7.4 9.1 
23+0 - 23+6 5.8 7.5 9.2 
24+0 - 24+6 5.9 7.6 9.3 
25+0 - 25+6 6.0 7.7 9.3 
26+0 - 26+6 6.1 7.7 9.4 
27+0 - 27+6 6.1 7.8 9.5 
28+0 - 28+6 6.2 7.9 9.6 
29+0 - 29+6 6.3 8.0 9.7 
30+0 - 30+6 6.4 8.1 9.8 
3 +0-3 +6 6.5 8.2 9.9 
3 +0-3 +6 6.6 8.3 9.9 
3+0 -3 +6 6.7 8.3 10.0 
3 +0 -3 +6 6.7 8.4 10.1 
3 +0 -3 +6 6.8 8.5 10.2 
3 +0 -3 +6 6.9 8.6 10.3 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.0 8.7 10.4 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.1 8.8 10.4 
3 +0 -3 +6 7.2 8.8 10.5 

Table 5 Anterior cerebral ventricle diameter (Va) to hemisphere diameter (H) ratio 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 0.39 0.47 0.56 
15+0 - 15+6 0.36 0.43 0.51 
16+0 - 16+6 0.33 0.40 0.48 
17+0 - 17+6 0.31 0.37 0.44 
18+0 - 18+6 0.29 0.35 0.41 
19+0 - 19+6 0.27 0.32 0.39 
20+0 - 20+6 0.26 0.31 0.37 
21+0 - 21+6 0.24 0.29 0.35 
22+0 - 22+6 0.23 0.28 0.33 
23+0 - 23+6 0.22 0.27 0.32 
24+0 - 24+6 0.21 0.26 0.31 
25+0 - 25+6 0.21 0.25 0.30 
26+0 - 26+6 0.20 0.24 0.29 
27+0 - 27+6 0.19 0.23 0.28 
28+0 - 28+6 0.19 0.23 0.27 
29+0 - 29+6 0.19 0.22 0.27 
30+0 - 30+6 0.18 0.22 0.26 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.18 0.21 0.26 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.18 0.21 0.26 
3+0 -3 +6 0.18 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.17 0.21 0.25 

Table 6 Posterior cerebral ventricle diameter (Vp) to hemisphere diameter (H) ratio 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 0.36 0.45 0.56 
15+0 - 15+6 0.34 0.42 0.52 
16+0 - 16+6 0.31 0.39 0.48 
17+0 - 17+6 0.29 0.36 0.45 
18+0 - 18+6 0.27 0.34 0.42 
19+0 - 19+6 0.26 0.32 0.40 
20+0 - 20+6 0.24 0.30 0.37 
21+0 - 21+6 0.23 0.29 0.35 
22+0 - 22+6 0.22 0.27 0.34 
23+0 - 23+6 0.21 0.26 0.32 
24+0 - 24+6 0.20 0.25 0.31 
25+0 - 25+6 0.19 0.24 0.29 
26+0 - 26+6 0.18 0.23 0.28 
27+0 - 27+6 0.18 0.22 0.27 
28+0 - 28+6 0.17 0.21 0.26 
29+0 - 29+6 0.17 0.21 0.26 
30+0 - 30+6 0.16 0.20 0.25 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.16 0.20 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.16 0.19 0.24 
3+0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 
3 +0 -3 +6 0.15 0.19 0.24 

Table 7 Transverse cerebellar diameter (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 12 14 15 
15+0 - 15+6 13 15 17 
16+0 - 16+6 14 16 18 
17+0 - 17+6 15 17 19 
18+0 - 18+6 16 18 21 
19+0 - 19+6 17 20 22 
20+0 - 20+6 19 21 24 
21+0 - 21+6 20 22 25 
22+0 - 22+6 21 24 27 
23+0 - 23+6 22 25 28 
24+0 - 24+6 24 26 30 
25+0 - 25+6 25 28 31 
26+0 - 26+6 26 29 33 
27+0 - 27+6 27 31 34 
28+0 - 28+6 29 32 36 
29+0 - 29+6 30 33 37 
30+0 - 30+6 31 35 39 
3 +0-3 +6 32 36 40 
3 +0-3 +6 34 37 42 
3+0-3 +6 35 39 43 
3 +0-3 +6 36 40 44 
3 +0-3 +6 37 4 46 
3 +0-3 +6 38 4 47 
3 +0-3 +6 39 4 48 
3 +0-3 +6 40 4 49 
3 +0-3 +6 41 4 51 

Table 8 Cisterna magna diameter (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 1.9 3.5 5.3 
15+0 - 15+6 2.1 3.8 5.7 
16+0 - 16+6 2.4 4.1 6.0 
17+0 - 17+6 2.6 4.3 6.3 
18+0 - 18+6 2.8 4.6 6.6 
19+0 - 19+6 3.1 4.9 6.9 
20+0 - 20+6 3.3 5.1 7.2 
21+0 - 21+6 3.5 5.4 7.5 
22+0 - 22+6 3.7 5.6 7.7 
23+0 - 23+6 3.9 5.8 8.0 
24+0 - 24+6 4.1 6.0 8.2 
25+0 - 25+6 4.3 6.2 8.5 
26+0 - 26+6 4.4 6.4 8.7 
27+0 - 27+6 4.6 6.6 8.9 
28+0 - 28+6 4.7 6.8 9.1 
29+0 - 29+6 4.9 6.9 9.3 
30+0 - 30+6 5.0 7.0 9.4 
3 +0-3 +6 5.1 7.2 9.6 
3 +0-3 +6 5.2 7.3 9.7 
3+0-3 +6 5.3 7.4 9.8 
3 +0-3 +6 5.3 7.5 9.9 
3 +0 -3 +6 5.4 7.5 10.0 
3 +0 -3 +6 5.4 7.6 10.0 
3 +0 -3 +6 5.4 7.6 10.1 
3 +0 -3 +6 5.5 7.6 10.1 
3 +0 -3 +6 5.5 7.6 10.1 

Table 9 Abdominal circumference (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 80 90 102 
15+0 - 15+6 88 99 112 
16+0 - 16+6 96 108 122 
17+0 - 17+6 105 118 133 
18+0 - 18+6 114 128 144 
19+0 - 19+6 123 139 156 
20+0 - 20+6 133 149 168 
21+0 - 21+6 143 161 181 
22+0 - 22+6 153 172 193 
23+0 - 23+6 163 183 206 
24+0 - 24+6 174 195 219 
25+0 - 25+6 184 207 233 
26+0 - 26+6 195 219 246 
27+0 - 27+6 205 231 259 
28+0 - 28+6 216 243 272 
29+0 - 29+6 226 254 285 
30+0 - 30+6 237 266 298 
3 +0-3 +6 246 277 3 0 
3 +0-3 +6 256 287 3 2 
3+0-3 +6 265 297 34 
3 +0-3 +6 274 307 3 5 
3 +0-3 +6 282 316 3 5 
3 +0-3 +6 289 324 3 4 
3 +0-3 +6 295 332 3 2 
3 +0-3 +6 302 339 3 0 
3 +0-3 +6 307 345 387 

Table 10 Head circumference (HC) to abdominal circumference (AC) ratio 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 1.12 
15+0 - 15+6 1.11 
16+0 - 16+6 1.10 
17+0 - 17+6 1.09 
18+0 - 18+6 1.09 
19+0 - 19+6 1.08 
20+0 - 20+6 1.07 
21+0 - 21+6 1.06 
22+0 - 22+6 1.05 
23+0 - 23+6 1.04 
24+0 - 24+6 1.03 
25+0 - 25+6 1.02 
26+0 - 26+6 1.01 
27+0 - 27+6 1.00 
28+0 - 28+6 0.99 
29+0 - 29+6 0.98 
30+0 - 30+6 0.97 
3 +0-3 +6 0.96 
3 +0-3 +6 0.95 
3+0-3 +6 0.94 
3 +0-3 +6 0.93 
3 +0-3 +6 0.92 
3 +0-3 +6 0.91 
3 +0-3 +6 0.90 
3 +0-3 +6 0.89 
3 +0-3 +6 0.88 
1.23 1.33 
1.22 1.32 
1.21 1.31 
1.20 1.30 
1.19 1.29 
1.18 1.29 
1.17 1.28 
1.16 1.27 
1.15 1.26 
1.14 1.25 
1.13 1.24 
1.12 1.23 
1.11 1.22 
1.10 1.21 
1.09 1.20 
1.08 1.19 
1.08 1.18 
1.07 1.17 
1.06 1.16 
1.05 1.15 
1.04 1.14 
1.03 1.13 
1.02 1.12 
1.01 1.11 
1.00 1.10 
0.99 1.09 

Table 11 Femur length (mm) 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 14 17 19 
15+0 - 15+6 17 19 22 
16+0 - 16+6 19 22 25 
17+0 - 17+6 21 24 28 
18+0 - 18+6 24 27 30 
19+0 - 19+6 26 30 33 
20+0 - 20+6 29 32 36 
21+0 - 21+6 32 35 39 
22+0 - 22+6 34 38 42 
23+0 - 23+6 37 41 45 
24+0 - 24+6 39 43 47 
25+0 - 25+6 42 46 50 
26+0 - 26+6 44 48 53 
27+0 - 27+6 47 51 55 
28+0 - 28+6 49 53 58 
29+0 - 29+6 51 56 60 
30+0 - 30+6 53 58 63 
3 +0 -3 +6 55 60 65 
3 +0 -3 +6 57 62 67 
3+0 -3 +6 59 64 69 
3 +0 -3 +6 61 66 71 
3 +0 -3 +6 63 68 73 
3 +0 -3 +6 64 69 74 
3 +0 -3 +6 66 71 76 
3 +0 -3 +6 67 72 77 
3 +0 -3 +6 68 73 78 

Table 12 Head circumference (HC) to femur length (FL) ratio 
Gestation 5th median 95th 
14+0 - 14+6 6.08 6.55 7.05 
15+0 - 15+6 5.81 6.28 6.76 
16+0 - 16+6 5.59 6.04 6.52 
17+0 - 17+6 5.40 5.84 6.31 
18+0 - 18+6 5.23 5.67 6.13 
19+0 - 19+6 5.09 5.53 5.98 
20+0 - 20+6 4.98 5.41 5.85 
21+0 - 21+6 4.88 5.31 5.75 
22+0 - 22+6 4.80 5.22 5.66 
23+0 - 23+6 4.74 5.16 5.59 
24+0 - 24+6 4.69 5.11 5.54 
25+0 - 25+6 4.65 5.06 5.50 
26+0 - 26+6 4.62 5.03 5.46 
27+0 - 27+6 4.60 5.01 5.44 
28+0 - 28+6 4.58 4.99 5.41 
29+0 - 29+6 4.56 4.97 5.40 
30+0 - 30+6 4.54 4.95 5.38 
31+0 - 31+6 4.52 4.93 5.36 
32+0 - 32+6 4.50 4.91 5.34 
33+0 - 33+6 4.48 4.89 5.31 
34+0 - 34+6 4.45 4.85 5.27 
35+0 - 35+6 4.41 4.81 5.23 
36+0 - 36+6 4.35 4.76 5.17 
37+0 - 37+6 4.29 4.69 5.11 
38+0 - 38+6 4.21 4.61 5.02 
39+0 - 39+6 4.12 4.51 4.92 
Diagnosis of Fetal Abnormalities - The 18-23 weeks scan 
Copyright 2002 © by the authors, ISUOG & Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 

Contents
Introduction 
1. Doppler ultrasound: principles and practice (Colin Deane)
Introduction
Basic principles
Continuous wave and pulsed wave
Ultrasound flow modes
Factors affecting the color flow image
Spectral or pulsed wave Doppler
Blood flow measurements
2. Safety of diagnostic ultrasound in fetal scanning (Colin Deane)
Introduction
Effects
Output regulations, standards and guidelines -who does what?
A practical approach to fetal scanning 
Selected WFUMB statements on the safety of diagnostic ultrasound 
3. Methodology of Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal circulations 
Factors affecting flow velocity waveform 
Uteroplacental circulation 
Umbilical artery flow 
Fetal arterial flow 
Fetal cardiac flow
Fetal venous flow
4. Doppler studies in fetal hypoxemic hypoxia
Fetal oxygenation
Pathological findings in pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction 
Doppler studies 
5. Screening for placental insufficiency by uterine artery Doppler
Introduction
Studies in selected populations
Studies in unselected populations
Prophylaxis studies
Conclusions
6. Doppler studies in red blood cell isoimmunization
Pathophysiology
Diagnosis and treatment of fetal anemia
Doppler studies
Conclusions

7. Doppler studies in pregnancies with maternal diabetes mellitus 
Pathophysiology 
Doppler studies of the umbilical and uterine arteries 
Doppler studies of the fetal middle cerebral artery and aorta 
Doppler studies of the fetal heart 
Conclusions 
8. Doppler studies in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 
Pathophysiology 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
9. Doppler studies in maternal autoimmune disease 
Systemic lupus erythematosus 
Antiphospholipid syndrome 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
10. Doppler studies in post-term pregnancies 
Post-term pregnancy 
Doppler studies 
Conclusions 
11. Doppler studies in twin pregnancy 
Chorionicity in twins 
Pregnancy complications 
Doppler studies in twins 
Doppler studies in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
Conclusions 
12. Color Doppler sonography in the assessment of the fetal heart (Rabih Chaoui) 
Introduction 
Examination of the normal heart 
Examination of the abnormal heart 
Differential diagnosis of tricuspid regurgitation 
13. Color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of fetal abnormalities (Rabih Chaoui) 
Introduction 
Placental and umbilical vessels 
Renal vessels 
Intracranial vessels 
Intrathoracic vessels 
Intra-abdominal vessels 
Fetal tumors 
Visualization of fluid movements 
Differential diagnosis of oligohydramnios 
.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Introduction 
Doppler assessment of the placental circulation plays an important role in screening for impaired placentation and its 
complications of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction and perinatal death. Assessment of the fetal circulation 
is essential in the better understanding of the pathophysiology of a wide range of pathological pregnancies and their 
clinical management. This book provides a comprehensive account of Doppler ultrasound in Obstetrics and will be of 
value to those involved in antenatal care and fetal medicine. 
The first chapter explains how the competent use of Doppler ultrasound techniques requires an understanding of the 
hemodynamics within vessels, the capabilities and limitations of Doppler ultrasound, and the different parameters 
which contribute to the flow display. Chapter 2 examines how ultrasound can cause thermal and mechanical effects in 
the body and emphasizes the responsibility of sonographers in ensuring that ultrasound is used safely. Chapter 3 
describes the methodology for obtaining and analyzing flow velocity waveforms from the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and fetal heart, arteries and veins and explains the physiological changes that occur during pregnancy. 
Chapter 4 reviews the effects of impaired placental perfusion on fetal oxygenation and the hemodynamic responses to 
fetal hypoxemia. Chapter 5 summarizes the results of screening studies involving assessment of impedance to flow in 
the uterine arteries in identifying pregnancies at risk of the complications of impaired placentation, and examines the 
value of prophylactic treatment with low-dose aspirin, vitamins C and E and nitric oxide donors in reducing the risk for 
subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. The hemodynamic responses to fetal anemia and the value of Doppler 
ultrasound in the management of red cell isoimmunized pregnancies are described in Chapter 6. Chapter 7 outlines 
the relation between impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries and maternal glycemic control or 
maternal nephropathy and vasculopathy in diabetes mellitus. It also describes the hemodynamic consequences of 
fetal acidemia and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. Chapter 8 discusses the potential value of Doppler ultrasound in the 
management of pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, both in terms of distinction between infected and 
non-infected cases and in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. The value of uterine and umbilical artery Doppler in 
identifying pregnancies at risk of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth restriction and perinatal death in systemic lupus 
erythematosus and antiphospholipidsyndrome is summarized in Chapter 9. Chapter 10 reviews the Doppler findings in 
the placental and fetal circulations in post-term pregnancies and examines the value of Doppler in the prediction of 
perinatal death. Chapter 11 presents the Doppler findings in twin pregnancies and the hemodynamic changes 
associated with discordant fetal growth due to placental insufficiency and twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
Chapters 12 and 13 describe the application of color Doppler in the diagnosis of cardiac and extracardiac 
abnormalities, respectively. 
As with the introduction of any new technology into routine clinical practice, it is essential that those undertaking 
Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal circulations are adequately trained and their results are subjected to 
rigorous audit. The Fetal Medicine Foundation, under the auspices of the International Society of Ultrasound in 
Obstetrics and Gynecology, has introduced a process of training and certification to help to establish high standards of 
scanning on an international basis. The Certificates of Competence in Doppler assessment of the placental and fetal 
circulations are awarded to those sonographers that can perform these scans to a high standard, can demonstrate a 
good knowledge of the indications and limitations of Doppler and can interpret the findings in both high-risk and lowrisk 
pregnancies. 
.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 1 
Doppler ultrasound: principles and practice 
by Colin Deane 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, the capabilities of ultrasound flow imaging have increased enormously. Color flow imaging is now 
commonplace and facilities such as ‘power’ or ‘energy’ Doppler provide new ways of imaging flow. With such 
versatility, it is tempting to employ the technique for ever more demanding applications and to try to measure 
increasingly subtle changes in the maternal and fetal circulations. To avoid misinterpretation of results, however, it is 
essential for the user of Doppler ultrasound to be aware of the factors that affect the Doppler signal, be it a color flow 
image or a Doppler sonogram. 
Competent use of Doppler ultrasound techniques requires an understanding of three key components: 
(1) The capabilities and limitations of Doppler ultrasound; 
(2) The different parameters which contribute to the flow display; 
(3) Blood flow in arteries and veins. 
This chapter describes how these components contribute to the quality of Doppler ultrasound images. Guidelines are 
given on how to obtain good images in all flow imaging modes. For further reading on the subject, there are texts 
available covering Doppler ultrasound and blood flow theory in more detail 1-3. 
BASIC PRINCIPLES 
Ultrasound images of flow, whether color flow or spectral Doppler, are essentially obtained from measurements of 
movement. In ultrasound scanners, a series of pulses is transmitted to detect movement of blood. Echoes from 
stationary tissue are the same from pulse to pulse. Echoes from moving scatterers exhibit slight differences in the 
time for the signal to be returned to the receiver (Figure 1). These differences can be measured as a direct time 
difference or, more usually, in terms of a phase shift from which the ‘Doppler frequency’ is obtained (Figure 2). They 
are then processed to produce either a color flow display or a Doppler sonogram. 

Figure 1: Ultrasound velocity measurement. The diagram shows a scatterer S moving at velocity V with a 
beam/flow angle ... The velocity can be calculated by the difference in transmit-to-receive time from the first 
pulse to the second (t2), as the scatterer moves through the beam. 
Figure 2: Doppler ultrasound. Doppler ultrasound measures the movement of the scatterers through the 
beam as a phase change in the received signal. The resulting Doppler frequency can be used to measure 
velocity if the beam/flow angle is known. 

As can be seen from Figures 1 and 2, there has to be motion in the direction of the beam; if the flow is perpendicular 
to the beam, there is no relative motion from pulse to pulse. The size of the Doppler signal is dependent on: 
(1) Blood velocity: as velocity increases, so does the Doppler frequency; 
(2) Ultrasound frequency: higher ultrasound frequencies give increased Doppler frequency. As in B-mode, lower 
ultrasound frequencies have better penetration. 
(3) The choice of frequency is a compromise between better sensitivity to flow or better penetration; 
(4) The angle of insonation: the Doppler frequency increases as the Doppler ultrasound beam becomes more aligned 
to the flow direction (the angle ..between the beam and the direction of flow becomes smaller). This is of the utmost 
importance in the use of Doppler ultrasound. The implications are illustrated schematically in Figure 3. 
Figure 3: Effect of the Doppler angle in the sonogram. (A) higher-frequency Doppler signal is obtained if the 
beam is aligned more to the direction of flow. In the diagram, beam (A) is more aligned than (B) and 
produces higher-frequency Doppler signals. The beam/flow angle at (C) is almost 90° and there is a very poor 
Doppler signal. The flow at (D) is away from the beam and there is a negative signal. 
All types of Doppler ultrasound equipment employ filters to cut out the high amplitude, low-frequency Doppler signals 
resulting from tissue movement, for instance due to vessel wall motion. Filter frequency can usually be altered by the 
user, for example, to exclude frequencies below 50, 100 or 200 Hz. This filter frequency limits the minimum flow 
velocities that can be measured. 
CONTINUOUS WAVE AND PULSED WAVE 
As the name suggests, continuous wave systems use continuous transmission and reception of ultrasound. Doppler 
signals are obtained from all vessels in the path of the ultrasound beam (until the ultrasound beam becomes 
sufficiently attenuated due to depth). Continuous wave Doppler ultrasound is unable to determine the specific location 
of velocities within the beam and cannot be used to produce color flow images. Relatively inexpensive Doppler 
ultrasound systems are available which employ continuous wave probes to give Doppler output without the addition of 
B-mode images. Continuous wave Doppler is also used in adult cardiac scanners to investigate the high velocities in 
the aorta. 

Doppler ultrasound in general and obstetric ultrasound scanners uses pulsed wave ultrasound. This allows 
measurement of the depth (or range) of the flow site. Additionally, the size of the sample volume (or range gate) can 
be changed. Pulsed wave ultrasound is used to provide data for Doppler sonograms and color flow images. 
Aliasing 
Pulsed wave systems suffer from a fundamental limitation. When pulses are transmitted at a given sampling 
frequency (known as the pulse repetition frequency), the maximum Doppler frequency ƒd that can be measured 
unambiguously is half the pulse repetition frequency. If the blood velocity and beam/flow angle being measured 
combine to give a ƒd value greater than half of the pulse repetition frequency, ambiguity in the Doppler signal occurs. 
This ambiguity is known as aliasing. A similar effect is seen in films where wagon wheels can appear to be going 
backwards due to the low frame rate of the film causing misinterpretation of the movement of the wheel spokes. 

Figure 4 : Aliasing of color doppler imaging and Figure 5 : Reduce color gain and increase pulse
artefacts of color. Color image shows regions of aliased repetition frequency.
flow (yellow arrows).
Figure 6 (a,b): Example of aliasing and correction of the aliasing. (a) Waveforms with aliasing, with abrupt 
termination of the peak systolic and display this peaks bellow the baseleineSonogram clear without aliasing. 
(b) Correction: increased the pulse repetition frequency and adjust baseline (move down) 
The pulse repetition frequency is itself constrained by the range of the sample volume. The time interval between 
sampling pulses must be sufficient for a pulse to make the return journey from the transducer to the reflector and 
back. If a second pulse is sent before the first is received, the receiver cannot discriminate between the reflected 
signal from both pulses and ambiguity in the range of the sample volume ensues. As the depth of investigation 
increases, the journey time of the pulse to and from the reflector is increased, reducing the pulse repetition frequency 
for unambiguous ranging. The result is that the maximum ƒd measurable decreases with depth. 
Low pulse repetition frequencies are employed to examine low velocities (e.g. venous flow). The longer interval 
between pulses allows the scanner a better chance of identifying slow flow. Aliasing will occur if low pulse repetition 
frequencies or velocity scales are used and high velocities are encountered (Figure 4,5 and 6). Conversely, if a high 
pulse repetition frequency is used to examine high velocities, low velocities may not be identified. 

Figure 7 (a,b): Color flow imaging: effects of pulse repetition frequency or scale. (above) The pulse 
repetition frequency or scale is set low (yellow arrow). The color image shows ambiguity within the umbilical 
artery and vein and there is extraneous noise. (b) The pulse repetition frequency or scale is set appropriately 
for the flow velocities (bottom). The color image shows the arteries and vein clearly and unambiguously. 

ULTRASOUND FLOW MODES 
Since color flow imaging provides a limited amount of information over a large region, and spectral Doppler provides 
more detailed information about a small region, the two modes are complementary and, in practice, are used as such. 
Color flow imaging can be used to identify vessels requiring examination, to identify the presence and direction of 
flow, to highlight gross circulation anomalies, throughout the entire color flow image, and to provide beam/vessel 
angle correction for velocity measurements. Pulsed wave Doppler is used to provide analysis of the flow at specific 
sites in the vessel under investigation. When using color flow imaging with pulsed wave Doppler, the color flow/Bmode 
image is frozen while the pulsed wave Doppler is activated. Recently, some manufacturers have produced 
concurrent color flow imaging and pulsed wave Doppler, sometimes referred to as triplex scanning. 
When these modes are used simultaneously, the performance of each is decreased. Because transducer elements are 
employed in three modes (B-mode, color flow and pulsed wave Doppler), the frame rate is decreased, the color flow 
box is reduced in size and the available pulse repetition frequency is reduced, leading to increased susceptibility to 
aliasing. 
Power Doppler is also referred to as energy Doppler, amplitude Doppler and Doppler angiography. The magnitude of 
the color flow output is displayed rather than the Doppler frequency signal. Power Doppler does not display flow 
direction or different velocities. It is often used in conjunction with frame averaging to increase sensitivity to low flows 
and velocities. It complements the other two modes (Table 01). Hybrid color flow modes incorporating power and 
velocity data are also available from some manufacturers. These can also have improved sensitivity to low flow. A 
brief summary of factors influencing the displays in each mode is given in the following sections. Most of these factors 
are set up approximately for a particular mode when the application (e.g. fetal scan) is chosen, although the operator 
will usually alter many of the controls during the scan to optimize the image. 
Table 1: Flow imaging modes 
Spectral Doppler 
.. Examines flow at one site 
.. Detailed analysis of distribution of flow 
.. Good temporal resolution – can examine flow waveform 
.. Allows calculations of velocity and indices 
Color flow 
.. Overall view of flow in a region 
.. Limited flow information 
.. Poor temporal resolution/flow dynamics (frame rate can be low when scanning deep) 
.. color flow map (diferent color maps) 
.. direction information 
.. velocity information (high velocity & low velocity) 
.. turbulent flows 

COLOR FLOW MAPS (DIRECTIONAL) 

Power/energy/amplitude flow 
.. Sensitive to low flows 
.. No directional information in some modes 
.. Very poor temporal resolution 
.. Susceptible to noise 
"Color Power Angio" of the Circle of Willis "Color Power Angio" of a submucosus fibroid, note the 
small vessels inside the tumor.

COLOR POWER/ENERGY DOPPLER (AMPLITUDE FLOW) 

Color flow imaging 
Color flow Doppler ultrasound produces a color-coded map of Doppler shifts superimposed onto a B-mode ultrasound 
image (Color Flow Maps). Although color flow imaging uses pulsed wave ultrasound, its processing differs from that 
used to provide the Doppler sonogram. Color flow imaging may have to produce several thousand color points of flow 
information for each frame superimposed on the B-mode image. Color flow imaging uses fewer, shorter pulses along 
each color scan line of the image to give a mean frequency shift and a variance at each small area of measurement. 
This frequency shift is displayed as a color pixel. The scanner then repeats this for several lines to build up the color 
image, which is superimposed onto the B-mode image. The transducer elements are switched rapidly between Bmode 
and color flow imaging to give an impression of a combined simultaneous image. The pulses used for color flow 
imaging are typically three to four times longer than those for the B-mode image, with a corresponding loss of axial 
resolution. 
Assignment of color to frequency shifts is usually based on direction (for example, red for Doppler shifts towards the 
ultrasound beam and blue for shifts away from it) and magnitude (different color hues or lighter saturation for higher 
frequency shifts). The color Doppler image is dependent on general Doppler factors, particularly the need for a good 
beam/flow angle. Curvilinear and phased array transducers have a radiating pattern of ultrasound beams that can 
produce complex color flow images, depending on the orientation of the arteries and veins. In practice, the 
experienced operator alters the scanning approach to obtain good insonation angles so as to achieve unambiguous 
flow images. 
Table 2: Factors affecting color flow image 
Main factors 
.. Power: transmitted power into tissue* 
.. Gain: overall sensitivity to flow signals 
.. Frequency: trades penetration for sensitivity and resolution* 
.. Pulse repetition frequency (also called scale): low pulse repetition frequency to look at low velocities, high 
pulse repetition frequency reduces aliasing* 
.. Area of investigation: larger area reduces frame rate* 
.. Focus: color flow image optimized at focal zone* 
Other factors 
.. Triplex color: pulse repetition frequency and frame rate reduced by need for B-mode/spectral pulses 
.. Persistence: high persistence produces smoother image but reduces temporal resolution* 
.. Pre-processing: trades resolution against frame rate* 
.. Filter: high filter cuts out more noise but also more of flow signal* 
.. Post-processing assigns color map/variance* 
* Settings appropriate for specific examinations assigned by set-up/application keys 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE COLOR FLOW IMAGE 
The controls that affect the appearance of the color flow image are summarized in Table 2. The main factors include: 
(1) Power and gain:Color flow uses higher-intensity power than B-mode. Attention should be paid to safety indices. 
Power and gain should be set to obtain good signal for flow and to minimize the signals from surrounding tissue. 

Figure 8 : Setting the color gain to minimize the signals (artefacts) from surrondng tissue, on left color gain 
= 71, then on right decreasing the color gain to 35. 
(2) Frequency selection: Many scanner/transducer combinations permit changes of frequency. High frequencies give 
better sensitivity to low flow and have better spatial resolution. Low frequencies have better penetration (Figure 5) 
and are less susceptible to aliasing at high velocities. 
(3) Velocity scale/pulse repetition frequency: Low pulse repetition frequencies should be used to examine low 
velocities but aliasing may occur if high velocities are encountered (Figura 7a,b). 
(4) Region of interest: Because more pulses are needed to look at flow than for the B-mode image, reducing the 
width and maximum depth of the color flow area under investigation will usually improve frame rate and may allow a 
higher color scan line density with improved spatial resolution (Figure 9). 
(5) Focus: The focus should be at the level of the area of interest. This can make a significant difference to the 
appearance and accuracy of the image (Figure 7). 
Figure 9 : Set the focus at the region of interest, and also could use more than one focal zone. 
In practice, the operator will make many changes to the controls and will try different probe positions to optimize the 
image. Practical guidelines are given in Table 3. 

Table 3: Color flow imaging: practical guidelines 
(1) Select the appropriate applications/set-up key. This optimizes parameters for specific examinations 
(2) Set power to within fetal study limits. Adjust color gain. Ensure focus is at the region of interest and adjust gain to 
optimize color signal 
(3) Use probe positioning/beam steering to obtain satisfactory beam/vessel angle 
(4) Adjust pulse repetition frequency/scale to suit the flow conditions. Low pulse repetition frequencies are more 
sensitive to low flows/velocities but may produce aliasing. High pulse repetition frequencies reduce aliasing but are 
less sensitive to low velocities 
(5) Set the color flow region to appropriate size. A smaller color flow ‘box’ may lead to a better frame rate and better 
color resolution/sensitivity 
SPECTRAL OR PULSED WAVE DOPPLER 
Pulsed wave Doppler ultrasound is used to provide a sonogram of the artery or vein under investigation (Figure 12). 
The sonogram provides a measure of the changing velocity throughout the cardiac cycle and the distribution of 
velocities in the sample volume (or gate) (Figure 11). If an accurate angle correction is made, then absolute velocities 
can be measured. The best resolution of the sonogram occurs when the B-mode image and color image are frozen, 
allowing all the time to be employed for spectral Doppler. If concurrent imaging is used (real-time duplex or triplex 
imaging), the temporal resolution of the sonogram is compromised. 
Figure 10 (a): Doppler spectra of uterine artery flow. The color flow image allows beam/flow angle 
visualization. The sonogram shows high velocities throughout the cardiac cycle, indicating low distal 
resistance. 

Figure 10 (b): Doppler spectra of uterine artery flow. The sonogram shows a pulsatile flow waveform with 
low diastolic velocities. This is indicative of high distal resistance 
.. 
.. 
Figure 11: Setting up the sample volume. 
(b) - direction of the Doppler beam, (g) - gate or sample volume (a) - angle correction 
Sonogram of the descending aorta. With the angle correction the peak velocities could be measured. 
.. 
FACTORS AFFECTING THE SPECTRAL IMAGE 
The controls that affect the appearance of the sonogram are summarized in Table 4. The main factors include: 
(1) Power and gain: Pulsed wave Doppler uses higher intensity power than B-mode. Attention should be paid to safety 
indices. Power and gain should be set so that clear signals are obtained. 
(2) Velocity scale/pulse repetition frequency: Low pulse repetition frequencies should be used to look at low velocities 
but aliasing may occur if high velocities are encountered. 
(3) Gate size: If flow measurements are being attempted, the whole vessel should be insonated. A large gate may 
include signals from adjacent vessels (Figure 13). 
.. 

Table 4: Factors affecting the spectral Doppler image 
Main factors 
.. Power: transmitted power into tissue* 
.. Gain: overall sensitivity to flow signals 
.. Pulse repetition frequency (also called scale): low pulse repetition frequency to look at low velocities, high 
pulse repetition frequency reduces aliasing* 
.. Gate size* 
.. Beam steering can allow improved beam/flow angle for better accuracy of velocity calculation* 
.. Live duplex/triplex spectral resolution constrained by need for B-mode/color pulses 
Other factors 
.. Gate: sharpness of resolution* 
.. Filter: high filter cuts out more noise but more of flow signal* 
.. Post-processing: assigns brightness to output* 
*Settings appropriate for specific examinations assigned by set-up/application keys 
.. 
.. 
Figure 12: Umbilical cord displaying umbilical artery (red) and umbilical vein (blue), the gate or sample 
volume include both signals (left). Sonogram of the umbilical artery and vein (right). 

Figure 13: Influence of gate size. The spectral Doppler gate insonates an artery and vein and the sonogram 
shows flow from both of these vessels. The calculation of mean velocity (arrow) is meaningless since 
velocities from one vessel subtract from those of the other 
Guidelines for a practical approach to obtain good-quality spectral images are given in Table 5 . 
Table 5: Spectral Doppler imaging: practical guidelines 
(1) Set power to within fetal study limits 
(2) Position the pulsed wave Doppler cursor on the vessel to be investigated 
(3) Adjust gain so that the sonogram is clearly visible and free of noise 
(4) Use probe positioning/beam steering to obtain a satisfactory beam/vessel angle. Angles close to 90° will give 
ambiguous/unclear values. The beam/vessel angle should be 60° or less if velocity measurements are to be made 
(5) Adjust the pulse repetition frequency/scale and baseline to suit flow conditions. The sonogram should be clear and 
not aliased 
(6) Set the sample volume to correct size. Correct the angle to obtain accurate velocities. Use the B-mode and color 
flow image of the vessel to make the angle correction 
BLOOD FLOW MEASUREMENTS 
Velocity measurement 
Theoretically, once the beam/flow angle is known, velocities can be calculated from the Doppler spectrum as shown in 

the Doppler equation. However, errors in the measured velocity may still occur 1,4. Sources of error can be broadly 
divided into three categories. 
(1) Errors can arise in the formation of the Doppler spectrum due to: 
(a) Use of multiple elements in array transducers; 
(b) Non-uniform insonation of the vessel lumen; 
(c) Insonation of more than one vessel; 
(d) Use of filters removing low-velocity components. 
(2) Errors can arise in the measurement of the ultrasound beam/flow velocity angle. 
(a) Use of high angles ( ..> 60°) may give rise to error because of the comparatively large changes in 
the cosine of the angle which occur with small changes of angle (Figure 14). 
(b) The velocity vector may not be in the direction of the vessel axis. 
(3) Errors can arise in the calculation packages provided by the manufacturers for analysis of the Doppler spectrum 
(for instance, of intensity weighted mean velocity). 
(a) While efforts can be made to minimize errors, the operator should be aware of their likely range. It is 
good practice to try to repeat velocity measurements, if possible using a different beam approach, to 
gain a feel for the variability of measurements in a particular application. However, even repeated 
measurements may not reveal systematic errors occurring in a particular machine. 
(b) The effort applied to produce accurate velocity measurements should be balanced against the 
importance of absolute velocity measurements for an investigation. 
(c) Changes in velocity and velocity waveform shape are often of more clinical relevance when making a 
diagnosis. In this and other cases, absolute values of velocity measurement may not be required. 

Figure 14: Effect of high vessel/beam angles. (a) and (b) A scan of fetal aortic flow is undertaken at a high 
beam/vessel angle. Beam/flow angles should be kept to to 60° or less. A huge discrepancy is observed when 
using angles > 60°. If absolute velocities are to be measured, beam/flow angles should be kept to 60° or less. 

Calculation of absolute flow 
Total flow measurement using color or duplex Doppler ultrasound is fraught with difficulties, even under ideal 
conditions 5. Errors that may arise include: 
(1) Those due to inaccurate measurement of vessel cross-sectional area, for example the cross-sectional area of 
arteries which pulsate during the cardiac cycle; 
(2) Those originating in the derivation of velocity (see above). 
These errors become particularly large when flow calculations are made in small vessels; errors in measurement of 
diameter are magnified when the diameter is used to derive cross-sectional area. As with velocity measurements, it is 
prudent to be aware of possible errors and to conduct repeatability tests. 
Flow waveform analysis 
Non-dimensional analysis of the flow waveform shape and spectrum has proved to be a useful technique in the 
investigation of many vascular beds. It has the advantage that derived indices are independent of the beam/flow 
angle. 
Changes in flow waveform shape have been used to investigate both proximal disease (e.g. in the adult peripheral 
arterial circulation) and distal changes (in the fetal circulation and uterine arteries). While the breadth of possible uses 
shows the technique to be versatile, it also serves as a reminder of the range of factors which cause changes to the 
local Doppler spectrum. If waveform analysis is to be used to observe changes in one component of the proximal or 
distal vasculature, consideration must be given to what effects other components may have on the waveform. 
Flow waveform shape: indices of measurement 
Many different indices have been used to describe the shape of flow waveforms 1 . Techniques range from simple 
indices of systolic to diastolic flow to feature extraction methods such as principal component analysis. All are 
designed to describe the waveform in a quantitative way, usually as a guide to some kind of classification. In general, 
they are a compromise between simplicity and the amount of information obtained. 
Figure 15: Arterial velocity sonogram (waveform). 

The relative merits of indices used in uterine arteries have been discussed elsewhere 6,7. Commonly used indices 
available on most commercial scanners are: 
(1) Resistance index (RI) (also called resistive index or Pourcelot’s index); 
(2) Systolic/diastolic (S/D) ratio, sometimes called the A/B ratio; 
(3) Pulsatility index (PI) 8. 
These indices are all based on the maximum Doppler shift waveform and their calculation is described in Figure 12. 
The PI takes slightly longer to calculate than the RI or S/D ratio because of the need to measure the mean height of 
the waveform. It does, however, give a broader range of values, for instance in describing a range of waveform 
shapes when there is no end-diastolic flow. 
Figure 16: Flow velocity indices 
In addition to these indices, the flow waveform may be described or categorized by the presence or absence of a 
particular feature, for example the absence of end-diastolic flow and the presence of a post-systolic notch. 
Generally, a low pulsatility waveform is indicative of low distal resistance and high pulsatility waveforms occur in high-
resistance vascular beds (Figure 8), although the presence of proximal stenosis, vascular steal or arteriovenous 
fistulas can modify waveform shape. Care should be taken when trying to interpret indices as absolute measurements 
of either upstream or downstream factors. For example, alterations in heart rate can alter the flow waveform shape 
and cause significant changes in the value of indices. 

REFERENCES 
.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
1. Evans DH, McDicken WN, Skidmore R, Woodcock JP. Doppler Ultrasound: Physics, Instrumentation, and 
Clinical Applications. Chichester: Wiley, 1989. 
2. Powis RL, Schwartz RD. Practical Doppler Ultrasound for the Clinician. Williams and Wilkins, 1991. 
3. Goldberg BB, Merton DA, Deane CR. An Atlas of Ultrasound Color Flow Imaging. London: Martin Dunitz, 
1997. 
4. Gill RW. Measurement of blood flow by ultrasound: accuracy and sources of error. Ultrasound Med Bio, 
1985;7:625–42. 
5. Rourke C, Hendrickx P, Roth U, Brassel F, Creutzig A, Alexander K. Color and conventional image-directed 
ultrasonography: accuracy and sources of error in quantitative blood flow measurement. J Clin Ultrasound 
1992;20:187–93 
6. Thompson RS, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. A comparison of Doppler ultrasound waveform indices in the 
umbilical artery. I. Indices derived from the maximum velocity waveform. Ultrasound Med Biol 
1986;12:835–44. 
7. Thompson RS, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. A comparison of Doppler ultrasound waveform indices in the 
umbilical artery. II. Indices derived from the mean velocity and first moment waveforms. Ultrasound Med 
Biol 1986;12:845–54. 
8. Gosling RG, King DH. Continuous wave ultrasound as an alternative and complement to X-rays in vascular 
examination. In Reneman RS, ed. Cardiovascular Applications of Ultrasound. Amsterdam: North Holland, 
1974:266–82. 

Chapter 2 
Safety of diagnostic ultrasound in fetal scanning 
by Colin Deane 
INTRODUCTION 
Diagnostic ultrasound is generally perceived by users and patients as a safe technique with no adverse effects. Since 
ultrasound is so widely used in pregnancy, it is essential for all practitioners to ensure that its use remains safe. 
Ultrasound causes thermal and mechanical effects in tissue which are increased as the output power is increased. 
In the last decade, there has been a general trend towards increased output with the introduction of color flow 
imaging, more use of pulsed ‘spectral Doppler’ and higher demands on B-mode imaging 1. In response to these 
increases, recommendations for the safe use of ultrasound have been issued by several bodies. In addition, recent 
regulations have changed the emphasis of responsibility so that more onus is now placed on the operator to ensure 
that ultrasound is used safely. This chapter summarizes the effects and the standards issued and outlines 
recommendations for safe use in obstetric practice. 
EFFECTS 
Ultrasound is a mechanical energy in which a pressure wave travels through tissue. Reflection and scattering back to 
the transducer are used to form the image. The physical effects of ultrasound are generally categorized as: 
(1) Thermal effects – heating of tissue as ultrasound is absorbed by tissue. Heat is also produced at the transducer 
surface; 
(2) Cavitation – the formation of gas bubbles at high negative pressure; 
(3) Other mechanical effects – radiation forces leading to streaming in fluids and stress at tissue interfaces. 
The implications of these effects have been determined by in vitro, animal and human epidemiological studies and are 
briefly summarized below. 
Thermal effects 
As the ultrasound waves are absorbed, their energy is converted into heat. The level of conversion is highest in tissue 
with a high absorption coefficient, particularly in bone, and is low where there is little absorption (e.g. amniotic fluid). 
The temperature rise is also dependent on the thermal characteristics of the tissue (conduction of heat and 
perfusion), the ultrasound intensity and the length of time for which the tissue volume is scanned. The intensity is, in 
turn, dependent on the power output and the position of the tissue in the beam profile. The intensity at a particular 
point is altered by many of the operator controls, for example power output, mode (B-mode, color flow, spectral 
Doppler), scan depth, focus, zoom and area of color flow imaging. With so many variables, it has proved difficult to 
model temperature rises in tissue. In vitro studies have been used with a ‘worst case’ model of tissue to predict 
temperature rises o, for instance in the formation of thermal indices (see below). The transducer face itself can 
become heated during an examination. Heat is localized to the tissue in contact with the transducer. 
Cavitation 
Cavitation is the formation of transient or stable bubbles, described as inertial or non-inertial cavitation. Inertial 
cavitation has the most potential to damage tissue and occurs when a gas-filled cavity grows, during pressure 
rarefaction of the ultrasound pulse, and contracts, during the compression phase. Collapse of the bubble can generate 

local high temperatures and pressures. 
It has been hypothesized that ultrasonically induced cavitation is the cause of hemorrhage in the lungs and intestines 
in animal studies 2–6 . In these studies, effects have been seen at tissue interfaces with gas. The absence of gas in 
fetuses means that the threshold for cavitation is high and does not occur at current levels of diagnostic ultrasound. 
The introduction of contrast agents leads to the formation of microbubbles that potentially provide gas nuclei for 
cavitation. The use of contrast agents lowers the threshold at which cavitation occurs, but this is not current practice 
in obstetrics. 
Other mechanical effects 
The passage of ultrasound through tissue causes a low-level radiation force on the tissue. This force produces a 
pressure in the direction of the beam and away from the transducer and should not be confused with the oscillatory 
pressure of the ultrasound itself. The pressure that results and the pressure gradient across the beam are very low, 
even for intensities at the higher end of the diagnostic range 7. The effect of the force is manifest in volumes of fluid 
where streaming can occur with motion within the fluid. The fluid velocities which result are low and are unlikely to 
cause damage. 
Effects on fetuses 
Effects are divided into mechanical and thermal. For mechanical effects, there is no evi-dence that cavitation occurs in 
fetal scanning. In a study of low-amplitude lithotripsy pulses in mouse fetuses, there has been concern that 
hemorrhage may be the result of tissue movement caused by radiation forces 8 . There is no evidence that this occurs 
in vivo in fetal scanning. The primary concern in fetal imaging is temperature rise. It is known that hyperthermia is 
teratogenic. The efforts of investigators have concentrated on defining the temperature increases and exposure times 
which may give rise to biological effects and on determining the ultrasound levels which might, in turn, lead to those 
temperature rises. With this information, criteria have been identified for the safe use of diagnostic ultrasound. 
Temperature rises of 2.5°C have been demonstrated in excised unperfused guinea pig brain tissue after 2 minutes’ 
exposure to ultrasound at the high end of pulsed wave Doppler ultrasound intensity levels 9 . At the bone surface, 
temperature increases of up to 5°C were found. In a study on sheep using different intensity criteria 10 , the 
temperature rise in utero was found to be 40% lower than that in the equivalent non-perfused test. While the 
observed temperature increases occurred in high-intensity modes (typical of pulsed wave Doppler used at maximum 
power), these levels of intensity are achievable with some current scanner/transducer combinations. 
The issue of sensitivity of fetal tissue to temperature rise is complex and is not completely understood. Acute and 
chronic temperature rises have been investigated in animals, but study designs and results are varied. Work carried 
out in this field is summarized elsewhere 11 . 
The uncertainty over chronic changes is reflected in the WFUMB guidelines 12 . These state that ultrasound that 
produces temperature rises of less than 1.5°C may be used without reservation. They also state that ultrasound 
exposure causing temperature rises of greater than 4°C for over 5 min should be considered potentially hazardous. 
This leaves a wide range of temperature increases which are within the capability of diagnostic ultrasound equipment 
to produce and for which no time limits are recommended. 
Epidemiology 
Several studies have examined the development of fetuses receiving different levels of ultrasound investigation. In 
trials comparing ultrasound screened and non-screened groups, there has generally been no difference in birth 
weights between groups. There have been no unequivocal data to suggest that there is impaired development of 
hearing, vision, behavior or neurological function due to ultrasound screening. In a large, randomized trial of over 
3200 pregnant women in which half were offered routine ultrasonography at 19 and 32 weeks, there was no evidence 
of impaired growth or neurological development up to follow-up at 8–9 years. There was a possible association of left-
handedness amongst boys undergoing ultrasonography 13 . Scanning of this group was performed with B-mode only. 
There have been concerns that epidemiological studies to date do not reflect the higher output capabilities of modern 
scanners. 

OUTPUT REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES – WHO DOES WHAT? 
Regulations governing the output of diagnostic ultrasound have been largely set by the USA’s Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), although the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) is currently in the process of 
setting internationally agreed standards. 
The relevant national societies for ultrasound users (e.g. American Institutue of Ultrasound in Medicine (AIUM), British 
Medical Ultrasound Society (BMUS)) usually have safety committees who offer advice on the safe use of ultrasound. 
In 1992, the AIUM, in conjunction with the National Electrical Manufacturers Association (NEMA) developed the 
Output Display Standard (ODS), including the thermal index and mechanical index which have been incorporated in 
the FDA’s new regulations 14,15. 
Within Europe, the Federation of Societies of Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology (EFSUMB) also addresses safety and 
has produced safety guidelines (through the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety). The World 
Federation (WFUMB) held safety symposia in 1991 (on thermal issues) and 1996 (thermal and non-thermal issues), 
at which recommendations were proffered. Following review, these were published in 1992 and 1998 as guidelines. 
Past regulations 
The initial FDA regulations on ultrasound output were produced in 1976. These imposed application-specific limits, 
based on existing output levels which had demonstrated no adverse effects. Limits were divided into: 
(1) Ophthalmic applications; 
(2) Fetal and other (including abdominal, pediatric, small parts); 
(3) Cardiac; 
(4) Peripheral vessels. 
For spatial peak time-averaged intensity (I-SPTA) (the measure most associated with temperature rise), the 
maximum levels were: 
.. 
Scanners typically had a key/button which limited output for obstetric applications. Although power and intensity 
limits could be exceeded in some scanners, especially when using pulsed wave Doppler or color Doppler, this required 
a deliberate effort on the behalf of the users. 
Current regulations 
In revising its regulations in 1993, the FDA 15 altered its approach to ultrasound safety. The new regulations combine 
an overall limit of I-SPTA of 720 mW/cm 2 for all equipment with a system of output displays to allow users to employ 
effective and judicious levels of ultrasound appropriate to the examination undertaken. 
The new regulations allow an eight-fold increase in ultrasound intensity to be used in fetal examinations. They place 
considerably more responsibility on the user to understand the output measurements and to use them in their 
scanning. 
The output display is based on two indices, the mechanical index (MI) and the thermal index (TI). 
Ophthalmic 17 mW/cm2 
Fetal and other 94 mW/cm2 
Cardiac 430 mW/cm2 
Peripheral vessel 720 mW/cm2

Mechanical index 
The mechanical index is an estimate of the maximum amplitude of the pressure pulse in tissue. It gives an indication 
as to the relative risk of mechanical effects (streaming and cavitation). The FDA regulations allow a mechanical index 
of up to 1.9 to be used for all applications except ophthalmic (maximum 0.23). 
Thermal index 
The thermal index is the ratio of the power used to that required to cause a maximum temperature increase of 1°C. A 
thermal index of 1 indicates a power causing a temperature increase of 1°C. A thermal index of 2 would be twice that 
power but would not necessarily indicate a peak temperature rise of 2°C. Because temperature rise is dependent on 
tissue type and is particularly dependent on the presence of bone, the thermal index is subdivided into three indices: 
(1) TIS: thermal index for soft tissue; 
(2) TIB: thermal index with bone at/near the focus; 
(3) TIC: thermal index with bone at the surface (e.g. cranial examination). 
For fetal scanning, the highest temperature increase would be expected to occur at bone and TIB would give the 
‘worst case’ conditions. The mechanical index and thermal index must be displayed if the ultrasound system is 
capable of exceeding an index of 1. The displayed indices are based on the manufacturer’s experimental and modelled 
data. These measurements are not infallible; an independent study has demonstrated significant discrepancies over 
declared I-SPTA output of up to 400% 16. 
Future IEC standards 
An IEC standard (Draft IEC 61681) is being drawn up to establish a safety classification for ultrasound equipment 
based on its ability to produce cavitation or a temperature rise. The standard proposes two classifications of 
equipment: class A, which has a lower output and for which no output display is required, and class B which has a 
higher output and for which an output display is required. The draft is currently undergoing review. 
Guidelines 
Ultrasound organizations have produced statements on the safe use of ultrasound. These are not regulatory 
statements but are intended to educate and advise. WFUMB guidelines have been issued in two special issues of 
Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology 12-17 . Statements and recommendations are given on B-mode scanning, Doppler 
imaging, transducer heating, thermal effects (see page 33). The AIUM have produced statements on the safety of 
ultrasound. They are available from the AIUM office and can be obtained from the AIUMwebsite – 
http://www.aium.org/stmts.htm. The European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety has published statements 
18,19 on the use of pulsed Doppler measurement in fetuses, stating that its use in routine examinations during the 
period of organogenesis is considered inadvisable at present. 
A PRACTICAL APPROACH TO SAFE FETAL SCANNING 
No injurious effects have been identified from ultrasound scanning of the fetus. However, changes in power output, 
increased use of Doppler ultrasound and a change in regulations governing outputs means that every measure should 
be taken by users to maintain safe practices. 
Scanning practice 
.. The ALARA ("As Low As Reasonably Achievable") principle should be maintained. Power outputs used should 
be adequate to conduct the examination. If in doubt, use a low power and increase it as necessary. 
Application keys for obstetrics should bring in each mode at its lowest output so that the operator is 
required to increase power if the examination demands it. 
.. B-mode generally has the lowest power output and intensity. M-mode, color flow and spectral Doppler have 
higher outputs which can cause more heating at the site of examination. The examination should begin with 
B-mode and use color and spectral Doppler only when necessary. 

.. The intensity (and temperature rise) is highly dependent on scanner settings. For example, the intensity 
changes in response to changes in: 
(a) Power Output, 
(b) Depth of examination, 
(c) Mode used (color flow, spectral Doppler), 
(d) Transmitted frequency used, 
(e) Color pulse repetition frequency (scale), 
(f) Region of color flow interest, 
(g) Focus. 
If the display for the scanner/transducer combination shows thermal and mechanical indices, the indices 
should be readily visible. Of the thermal indices, TIB is most relevant to heating in the second and third 
trimesters. The operator should be aware of changes to the indices in response to changes in control 
settings. 
.. Special care should be taken in febrile patients, since ultrasound heating will cause additional heating to the 
fetus. 
.. The WFUMB recommends that ultrasound causing a temperature rise of no more than 1.5°C may be used 
without reservation on thermal grounds. 
.. Thermal indices exceeding 1.5 should not be used routinely and, if required for specific diagnostic 
information, should be used for the minimum time necessary. The influence of higher intensity levels can be 
moderated by moving the transducer so that specific areas of tissue are not subjected to long periods of 
higher intensity investigation. 
.. Do not scan for longer than is necessary to obtain the diagnostic information. 
SELECTED WFUMB STATEMENTS ON THE SAFETY OF DIAGNOSTIC ULTRASOUND 
B-mode imaging (issued 1992) 
Known diagnostic ultrasound equipment as used today for simple B-mode imaging operates at acoustic outputs that 
are not capable of producing harmful temperature rises. Its use in medicine is therefore not contraindicated on 
thermal grounds. This includes endoscopic, transvaginal and transcutaneous applications. 
Doppler (1992) 
It has been demonstrated in experiments with unperfused tissue that some Doppler diagnostic equipment has the 
potential to produce biologically significant temperature rises, specifically at bone/soft tissue interfaces. The effects of 
elevated temperatures may be minimized by keeping the time during which the beam passes through any one point 
in tissue as short as possible. Where output power can be controlled, the lowest available power level consistent with 
obtaining the desired diagnostic information should be used. 
Although the data on humans are sparse, it is clear from animal studies that exposures resulting in temperatures less 
than 38.5°C can be used without reservation on thermal grounds. This includes obstetric applications. 
Transducer heating (1992) 
A substantial source of heating may be the transducer itself. Tissue heating from this source is localized to the volume 
in contact with the transducer. 

Recommendations on thermal effects (1997) 
A diagnostic exposure that produces a maximum temperature rise of no more than 1.5°C above normal physiological 
levels (37°C) may be used without reservation on thermal grounds. 
A diagnostic exposure that elevates embryonic and fetal in situ temperature to 4°C (4°C above normal temperature) 
for 5 min or more should be considered potentially hazardous. 

REFERENCES 
1. Henderson J, Willson K, Jago JR, et al. A survey of the acoustic outputs of diagnostic ultrasound equipment 
in current clinical use in the Northern Region. Ultrasound Med Biol 1995;21:699–705. 
2. Baggs R, Penney DP, Cox C, Child SZ. Thresholds for ultrasonically induced lung hemorrhage in neonatal 
swine. Ultrasound Med Biol 1996;22:119–28. 
3. Dalecki D, Child SZ, Raeman CH, Cox C, Carstensen EL. Ultrasonically-induced lung haemorrhage in young 
swine. Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:777–81. 
4. Frizzell LA, Chen E, Chong L. Effects of pulsed ultrasound on the mouse neonate: hind limb paralysis and 
lung haemorrhage. Ultrasound Med Biol 1994;20:53–63. 
5. Holland CK, Zheng X, Apfel RE, Alderman JL, Fernandez L, Taylor KJW. Direct evidence of cavitation in vivo 
from diagnostic ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol 1996;22:917–25. 
6. Zacchary JG, O’Brien WD. Lung lesions induced by continuous and pulsed wave (diagnostic) ultrasound in 
mice, rabbits and pigs. Vet Pathol 1995;32:43–54. 
7. Duck FA. Acoustic streaming and radiation pressure in diagnostic applications: what are the implications? In 
Barnett SB, Kossoff G, eds. Safety of Diagnostic Ultrasound. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 1998:87– 
98. 
8. Dalecki D, Child SZ, Raeman CH, Penney DP, Mayer R, Cox C, Carstensen EL. Thresholds for fetal 
haemorrhages produced by a piezoelectric lithotripter. Ultrasound Med Biol 1997;23:287–97. 
9. Bosward KL, Barnett SB, Wood AKW, Edwards MJ, Kossoff G. Heating of the guinea pig fetal brain during 
exposure to pulsed ultrasound. Ultrasound Med Biol 1993;19:415–24. 
10. Duggan PM, Liggins GC, Barnett SB. Ultrasonic heating of the brain of the fetal sheep in utero. Ultrasound 
Med Biol 1995;21:553–60. 
11. Tarantal AF. Effects of ultrasound exposure on fetal development in animal models. In Barnett SB, Kossoff 
G, eds. Safety of Diagnostic Ultrasound. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 1998:39–51. 
12. Barnett SB, ed. Conclusions and recommendations on thermal and non-thermal mechanisms for biological 
effects of ultrasound. In WFUMB Symposium on Safety of Ultrasound in Medicine. Ultrasound Med Biol, 
1998;24, special issue 
13. Salveson K, Vatten L, Eik-Nes S, Hugdahl K, Bakketeig L. Routine ultrasonography in utero and subsequent 
handedness and neurological development. Br Med J 1993;307:159–64. 
14. AIUM / NEMA. Standard for Real-Time Display of Thermal and Mechanical Acoustic Output Indices on 
Diagnostic Ultrasound Equipment. Rockville: American Institute of Ultrasound in Medicine, 1992 
15. FDA. Revised 510(k) Diagnostic Ultrasound Guidance for 1993. Rockville, MD: Food and Drug 
Administration, Center for Devices and Radiological Health, 1993. 
16. Jago JR, Henderson J, Whittingham TA, Willson K. How reliable are manufacturer’s reported acoustic output 
data? Ultrasound Med Biol 1995;12:135–6. 
17. Barnett SB, Kossoff G. eds. Issues and recommendations regarding thermal mechanisms for biological 
effects of ultrasound. In WFUMB Symposium on Safety and Standardization in Medical Ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Med Biol 1992;18, special issue. 
18. European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. Guidelines for the safe use of 
Doppler ultrasound for clinical applications. Report from the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation 
Safety. Eur J Ultrasound 1995;2:167–8. 
19. European Federation of Societies for Ultrasound in Medicine and Biology. Clinical safety statement for 
diagnostic ultrasound. Report from the European Committee for Ultrasound Radiation Safety. Eur J 
Ultrasound 1996;3:283. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 3 
Methodology of Doppler assessment of the placental 
and fetal circulations 
Doppler ultrasound provides a non-invasive method for the study of fetal hemodynamics. Investigation of the uterine 
and umbilical arteries gives information on the perfusion of the uteroplacental and fetoplacental circulations, 
respectively, while Doppler studies of selected fetal organs are valuable in detecting the hemodynamic 
rearrangements that occur in response to fetal hypoxemia. 
FACTORS AFFECTING FLOW VELOCITY WAVEFORM 
Maternal position 
During Doppler studies, the mother should lie in a semirecumbent position with a slight lateral tilt. This minimizes the 
risk of developing supine hypotension syndrome due to caval compression. 
Fetal Heart Rate 
There is an inverse relation between fetal heart rate and length of cardiac cycle and, therefore, fetal heart rate 
influences the configuration of the arterial Doppler waveform. When the heart rate drops, the diastolic phase of the 
cardiac cycle is prolonged and the end-diastolic frequency shift declines. Although the Doppler indices are affected by 
the fetal heart rate, the change is of no clinical significance when the rate is within the normal range. 
Fetal breathing movements 
During fetal breathing movements, there are variations in the shape of the flow velocity waveforms from fetal vessels 
and, therefore, Doppler examinations should be conducted only during fetal apnea and in the absence of fetal hiccup 
or excessive movement. 
Blood viscosity 
Animal studies have demonstrated that increased blood viscosity is associated with reduced cardiac output and 
increased peripheral resistance, and vice versa. However, Giles et al. were unable to demonstrate a significant 
association between blood viscosity (measured in post-delivery umbilical cord blood) and impedance to flow in the 
umbilical artery1. 
UTEROPLACENTAL CIRCULATION 
Anatomy 
The blood supply to the uterus comes mainly from the uterine arteries, with a small contribution from the ovarian 
arteries. These vessels anastomose at the cornu of the uterus and give rise to arcuate arteries that run 
circumferentially round the uterus. The radial arteries arise from the arcuate vessels and penetrate at right angles 
into the outer third of the myometrium. These vessels then give rise to the basal and spiral arteries, which nourish 
the myometrium and decidua and the intervillous space of the placenta during pregnancy, respectively. There are 
about 100 functional openings of spiral arteries into the intervillous space in a mature placenta, but maternal blood 
enters the space in discrete spurts from only a few of these 2,3. 

Physiological changes in pregnancy 
Physiological modification of spiral arteries is required to permit the ten-fold increase in uterine blood flow which is 
necessary to meet the respiratory and nutritional requirements of the fetus and placenta. Brosens et al. examined 
microscopically several hundred placental bed biopsies, seven Cesarean hysterectomy specimens and two intact 
second-trimester uteri 4. Basal arteries showed no changes, but spiral arteries were invaded by cytotrophoblastic cells 
and were converted into uteroplacental arteries. These have a dilated and tortuous lumen, a complete absence of 
muscular and elastic tissue, no continuous endothelial lining, mural thrombi and fibrinoid deposition. 
This conversion of the spiral arteries to uteroplacental arteries is termed ‘physiological change’. It has been reported 
to occur in two stages: the first wave of trophoblastic invasion converts the decidual segments of the spiral arteries in 
the first trimester and the second wave converts the myometrial segments in the second trimester 5 . As a result of 
this ‘physiological change’, the diameter of the spiral arteries increases from 15–20 to 300–500 mm, thus reducing 
impedance to flow and optimizing fetomaternal exchange in the intervillous space. 
Invasive assessment of blood flow 
Assali et al . measured uterine blood flow by placing electromagnetic flow meters in the uterine vessels at the time of 
hysterotomy for termination of pregnancy and demonstrated that both uterine blood flow and oxygen consumption 
increase with gestation 6. Browne and Veall injected 24 Na tracer directly into the choriodecidual space of women with 
anterior placentae and used a Geiger counter to construct decay curves for the falling levels of radioactivity 7. 
Although this method was beset by technical failures, it established the commonly quoted figure of 600 ml/min for 
uterine blood flow at term. 
Methodology of obtaining waveforms 
Campbell et. al. used pulsed wave Doppler to obtain velocity waveforms from ‘arcuate’ arteries, which were described 
as vessels in the wall of the uterus distinct from the common, internal and external iliac arteries 8. Trudinger et al . 
described the use of continuous wave Doppler to obtain velocity waveforms from branches of the uterine artery in the 
placental bed 9. The placental site was located using real-time ultrasound and the Doppler probe was then pointed at 
the center of the placental bed and ‘searched’ until characteristic waveforms were obtained. Validation of the method 
was performed by directing a pulsed wave Doppler facility along the same line and obtaining identical waveforms from 
subplacental vessels. 
Schulman et al . described the use of continuous wave Doppler ultrasound to locate the uterine artery 10. The Doppler 
probe was directed into the parauterine area in the region of the lower uterine segment and rotated until a 
characteristic waveform pattern was recognized. In the early stages of the study, the methodology was validated with 
Duplex equipment or by in vivo measurements obtained during Cesarean section. They found that patterns of uterine, 
arcuate and iliac vessels could be differentiated from each other and from other vessels in the pelvis. The presence of 
an early diastolic notch was noted and was found to disappear between 20 and 26 weeks. 
Bewley et al . used continuous wave Doppler to obtain flow velocity waveforms from four fixed points on the uterus 
(Figure 1) 11. The two lower ‘uterine’ sites were insonated in a similar way to that described by Schulman et al. 10, 
except that the transducer was pointed medially and caudally about 2 cm above and halfway along the inguinal 
ligament on either side of the uterus. The two upper ‘arcuate’ sites were halfway between the fundus of the uterus 
and its most lateral point. 
Arduini et al . compared color flow imaging and conventional pulsed Doppler in the study of the uterine artery12. Color 
flow imaging was used to visualize the flow through the main uterine artery medial to the external iliac artery (Figure 
2) and the Doppler sample gate was placed at the point of maximal color brightness. Color flow imaging was found to 
allow a higher number of reliable recordings to be obtained, to shorten the observation time, and to reduce the intra-
and interobserver coefficients of variation. 

Figure 1: Sites of insonation of uterine artey. Adapted from Bewley et. al. 1989 
.. 
Figure 2: Ultrasound image with convencional color Doppler showing the uterine artery and the external iliac 
artery (left). Normal flow velocity waveforms from the uterine artery at 24 weeks of gestation demonstrating 
high diastolic flow (right). 
Impedance to flow in the uterine arteries decreases with gestation (Figure 3). The initial fall until 24–26 weeks is 
thought to be due to trophoblastic invasion of the spiral arteries, but a continuing fall in impedance may be explained 
in part by a persisting hormonal effect on elasticity of arterial walls. Impedance in the uterine artery on the same site 
as the placenta is lower, which is thought to be due to the trophoblastic invasion only taking place in placental spiral 
arteries and the fall in impedance engendered by this being transmitted to other parts of the uterine circulation 
through collaterals. The intra- and interobserver coefficients of variation in the measurement of impedance to flow 
from the uterine arteries are both 5–10%. 

.. 
Figure 3: Pulsatility index in the uterine artery with gestation (mean 95th and 5th centiles) 
UMBILICAL ARTERY FLOW 
The umbilical artery was the first fetal vessel to be evaluated by Doppler velocimetry. Flow velocity waveforms from 
the umbilical cord have a characteristic saw-tooth appearance of arterial flow in one direction and continuous 
umbilical venous blood flow in the other. Continuous wave Doppler examination of the umbilical artery is simple. The 
transducer, usually a pencil-shaped probe, is placed on the mother’s abdomen overlying the fetus and is 
systematically manipulated to obtain the characteristic waveforms from the umbilical artery and vein. With a pulsed 
wave Doppler system, an ultrasound scan is first carried out, a free-floating portion of the cord is identified and the 
Doppler sample volume is placed over an artery and the vein (Figure 4). 
Normal Pregnancy - Development of the uterine artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in 
1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in early 2º 
trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in late 2º and 3º 
trimester

.. 
The location of the Doppler sampling site in the umbilical cord affects the Doppler waveform and the impedance 
indices are significantly higher at the fetal end of the cord than at the placental end. A possible explanation for this 
finding is that the fetal placental vascular bed is a low impedance system associated with minimal wave reflection, 
which explains the presence of continuing forward flow in the umbilical artery during diastole. The closer the 
measurement site is to the placenta, the less is the wave reflection and the greater the end-diastolic flow. 
Consequently, the Doppler waveform that represents arterial flow velocity demonstrates progressively declining 
pulsatility and the indices of pulsatility from the fetal to the placental end of the cord13. 
Figure 4a: Ultrasound image with color Doppler showing the umbilical cord, red umbilical artery and blue 
umbilical vein (left). Normal flow velocity waveforms from the umbilical vein (bottom) and artery (top) at 32 
weeks of gestation (right). 
Normal Pregnancy - Development of the umbilcal artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and normal 
pattern of pulsatility at the umbilical vein in 1º trimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and umbilical 
vein in early 2ºtrimester 
Normal impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and umbilcal vein 
in late 2º and 3º trimester

Figure 4b: Normal flow velocity waveforms from the umbilical vein (top) and artery (bottom) at 32 weeks of 
gestation. 
There are no appreciable diurnal changes or significant day-to-day variations in pregnancies with normal umbilical 
arterial Doppler waveforms. Umbilical venous blood flow increases with fetal inspiration (during which the fetal 
abdominal wall moves inward) and decreases with expiration (during which the wall moves outward). There is also a 
breathing-related modulation of arterial pulsatility, and umbilical artery Doppler studies should be avoided during fetal 
breathing. Maternal exercise may cause an increase in fetal heart rate but mild to moderate exercise does not affect 
flow impedance in the umbilical artery. Umbilical arterial flow waveforms are not affected by fetal behavioral states 
(sleep or wakefulness). Although, in certain pregnancy disorders (such as pre-eclampsia), fetal blood viscosity is 
increased, the contribution to the increased impedance in the umbilical artery from viscosity is minimal compared to 
the coexisting placental pathology. Therefore, the viscosity of fetal blood need not be considered when interpreting 
the umbilical Doppler indices. 
With advancing gestation, umbilical arterial Doppler waveforms demonstrate a progressive rise in the end-diastolic 
velocity and a decrease in the impedance indices (Figure 5). When the high-pass filter is either turned off or set at the 
lowest value, end-diastolic frequencies may be detected from as early as 10 weeks and in normal pregnancies they 
are always present from 15 weeks. Human placental studies have demonstrated that there is continuing expansion of 
the fetoplacental vascular system throughout the pregnancy. Furthermore, the villous vascular system undergoes a 
transformation, resulting in the appearance of sinusoidal dilatation in the terminal villous capillaries as pregnancy 
approaches term, and more than 50% of the stromal volume may be vascularized. The intra-and interobserver 
variations in the various indices are about 5% and 10%, respectively 14. 

Figure 5: Pulsatility index in the umbilical artery with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
FETAL ARTERIAL FLOW 
Descending aorta 
Velocity waveforms from the fetal descending aorta are usually recorded at the lower thoracic level just above the 
diaphragm, keeping the angle of insonation of the Doppler beam below 45° (Figure 6). It may be difficult to obtain a 
low angle because the aorta runs anterior to the fetal spine and, therefore, parallel to the surface of the maternal 
abdomen. This problem can be overcome, by moving the transducer either toward the fetal head or toward its breech 
and then tilting the transducer. 
Diastolic velocities are always present during the second and third trimesters of normal pregnancy, and the pulsatility 
index (PI) remains constant throughout gestation (Figure 7) 15. 
Flow velocity waveforms in the descending aorta represent the summation of blood flows to and resistance to flow in 
the kidneys, other abdominal organs, femoral arteries (lower limbs) and placenta. Approximately 50% of blood flow in 
the descending thoracic aorta is distributed to the umbilical artery. With advancing gestation, the PI in the umbilical 
artery decreases, due to reduced resistance in the placental compartment, whereas, in the aorta, the PI remains 
constant. The absence of a change in PI suggests the presence of a compensatory vasoconstrictive mechanism in the 
other major branches of the aorta distribution, such as the extremities. The mean blood velocity increases with 
gestation up to 32 weeks and then remains constant up to 40 weeks, when there is a small fall (Figure 7) 15. 

Figure 6: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with superimposed color Doppler showing the descending aorta 
(left). Flow velocity waveforms from the fetal descending aorta at 32 weeks of gestation demonstrating 
positive end-diastolic velocities (right). 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Descending Aorta 
Color Doppler energy with visualization of the aortic arch and 
descending thoracic aorta 
Normal flow of the descending thoracic aorta in 2º and 3º 
trimesters 
Figure 7: Pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the fetal aorta with gestation (mean, 95th 
and 5th centiles). 

Renal Artery 
Color Doppler allows easy identification in a longitudinal view of the fetal renal artery from its origin as a lateral 
branch of the abdominal aorta to the hilus of the kidney (Figure 8). Diastolic velocities may be physiologically absent 
until 34 weeks, and then increase significantly with advancing gestation. The PI decreases linearly with gestation, 
indicating a fall in impedance to flow, and presumably an increase in renal perfusion 16,17. This may offer an 
explanation for the increase of fetal urine production that occurs with advancing gestation 18. 
Figure 8a: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with Power Color Doppler showing the renal artery originating 
from the descending aorta (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the renal artery and vein at 32 weeks of 
gestation with physiologically absent end-diastolic velocities (right). 
Figure 8b: Flow velocity waveforms from the renal artery and vein at 32 weeks of gestation with 
physiologically absent end-diastolic velocities (right). 

Cerebral Arteries 
With the color Doppler technique, it is possible to investigate the main cerebral arteries such as the internal carotid 
artery, the middle cerebral artery, and the anterior and the posterior cerebral arteries and to evaluate the vascular 
resistances in different areas supplied by these vessels. 
A transverse view of the fetal brain is obtained at the level of the biparietal diameter. The transducer is then moved 
towards the base of the skull at the level of the lesser wing of the sphenoid bone. Using color flow imaging, the 
middle cerebral artery can be seen as a major lateral branch of the circle of Willis, running anterolaterally at the 
borderline between the anterior and the middle cerebral fossae (Figure 9). The pulsed Doppler sample gate is then 
placed on the middle portion of this vessel to obtain flow velocity waveforms. Due to the course of this blood vessel, it 
is almost always possible to obtain an angle of insonation which is less than 10°. During the studies, care should be 
taken to apply minimal pressure to the maternal abdomen with the transducer, as fetal head compression is 
associated with alterations of intracranial arterial waveforms 19. 
Figure 9: Transverse view of the fetal head with color Doppler showing the circle of Willis (left). Flow velocity 
waveforms from the middle cerebral artery at 32 weeks of gestation (right). 
Normal Pregnancy -Development of the Middle Cerebral Artery 
Color Doppler energy with visualization of the circle of Willis and the 
middle cerebral artery 
Normal flow of the middle cerebral artery in 1º trimester 
Normal flow of the middle cerebral artery in 2º and 3º trimester 
In healthy fetuses, impedance to flow in the fetal aorta does not change with gestation during the second and early 
third trimesters of pregnancy, but it subsequently decreases (Figure 7) 15,20–22. The PI is significantly higher in the 
middle cerebral artery than in the internal carotid artery or in the anterior and posterior cerebral arteries. It is, 
therefore, important to know exactly which cerebral vessel is sampled during a Doppler examination, as a PI value 
that might be normal for the internal carotid artery may be abnormal for the middle cerebral artery. The use of color 
Doppler greatly improves the identification of the cerebral vessels, thus limiting the possibility of sampling errors. The 

blood velocity increases with advancing gestation, and this increase is significantly associated with the decrease in PI 
(Figure 10). 
Figure 10: Pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the fetal middle cerebral artery with 
gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
Figure 11: Transverse view of the fetal head color 3D power Doppler showing the circle of Willis with digital 
subtraction of the grayscale. 
.. 

Other arterial vessels 
Improvements in flow detection with the new generation of color Doppler equipment have made it possible to 
visualize and record velocity waveforms from several fetal arterial vessels, including those to the extremities 
(femural, tibial and brachial arteries), adrenal, splenic (Figure 12), mesenteric, lung, and coronary vessels. Although 
study of these vessels has helped to improve our knowledge of fetal hemodynamics, there is no evidence at present 
to support their use in clinical practice. 
Figure 12: Flow velocity waveforms from the fetal splenic artery/vein at 32 weeks of gestation in a normal 
fetus. 
Figure 13: Color Doppler showing the femural flow (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the femural artery at 
26 weeks of gestation in a normal fetus (right). 
.. 

FETAL CARDIAC FLOW 
Examination of the fetal heart using Doppler ultrasound is achieved similarly to the examination in gray-scale mode. 
Several planes including the abdominal view, four-chamber, five-chamber, short-axis and three-vessel views have to 
be assessed in order to get spatial information on different cardiac chambers and vessels, as well as their connections 
to each other. The difference in the application of color Doppler is the insonation angle, which should be as small as 
possible to permit optimal visualization of flow. 
Figure 14: Flow velocity waveform across the tricuspid valve at 28 weeks of gestation (left).
(E-wave = early ventricular filling and A-wave = atrial ventricular filling).
In the abdominal plane, the position of the aorta and inferior vena cava are first checked as well as the correct 
connection of the vein to the right atrium. Pulsed Doppler sampling from the interior vena cava, the ductus venosus 
or the hepatic veins can be achieved in longitudinal planes. The next plane, the four-chamber view, is considered as 
the most important, since it allows an easy detection of numerous severe heart defects. Using color Doppler in an 
apical or basal approach, the diastolic perfusion across the atrioventricular valves can be assessed (Figure 14). The 
separate perfusion of both inflow tracts is characteristic. The sampling of diastolic flow using pulsed Doppler will show 
the typical biphasic shape of diastolic flow velocity waveform with an early peak diastolic velocity (E) and a second 
peak during atrial contraction (A-wave). E is smaller than A and the E/A ratio increases during pregnancy toward 1, to 
be inversed after birth (Figure 15). In this plane, regurgitations of the atrioventricular valves, which are more 
frequent at the tricuspid valve, are easily detected during systole using color Doppler. 
Figure 15: Ratio of early peak diastolic velocity (E) to second peak during atrial contraction (A-wave) across 
the mitral valve (left) and tricuspid valve (right) with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 

Flow across the foramen ovale is visualized in a lateral approach of the four-chamber-view. Color Doppler allows the 
confirmation of the physiological right–left shunt. Furthermore, careful examination of the left atrium allows the 
imaging of the correct connections of pulmonary veins entering the left atrium. 
The transducer is then tilted to obtain, first, the five-chamber and then the short-axis view. Using color Doppler, flow 
during systole is visualized. In these planes, the correct ventriculo-arterial connections, the non-aliased flow and the 
continuity of the interventricular septum with the aortic root are checked. The sampling of flow velocity waveforms 
with pulsed Doppler will demonstrate, for the aortic and pulmonary valves, a single peak flow velocity waveform. The 
peak systolic velocity increases from 50 to 110 cm/s during the second half of gestation and is higher across the 
aortic than the pulmonary valve. Time to peak velocity in the aorta is longer than in the pulmonary trunk. The three-
vessel view will enable the assessment of the aortic arch and the ductus arteriosus. In the last trimester of 
pregnancy, an aliased flow is found within the ductus as a sign of beginning constriction. In the case of optimal fetal 
position, the aortic and ductus arteriosus arch can be seen in a longitudinal plane, allowing the visualization of the 
neck vessels. 
The parameters used to describe fetal cardiac velocity waveforms differ from those used in fetal peripheral vessels. 
Indices such as PI and resistance index, used for peripheral vessels, are derived from relative ratios between systolic, 
diastolic and mean velocity and are, therefore, independent of the absolute velocity values and from the angle of 
insonation between the Doppler beam and the direction of the blood flow 23. At the cardiac level, all the 
measurements represent absolute values. Measurements of absolute flow velocities require knowledge of the angle of 
insonation, which may be difficult to obtain with accuracy. The error in the estimation of the absolute velocity 
resulting from the uncertainty of angle measurement is strongly dependent on the magnitude of the angle itself. For 
angles less than about 20°, the error will be reduced to practical insignificance. For larger angles, the cosine term in 
the Doppler equation changes the small uncertainty in the measurement of the angle to a large error in velocity 
equations 23. As a consequence, recordings should be obtained always keeping the Doppler beam as parallel as 
possible to the bloodstream and all the recordings with an estimated angle greater than 20° should be rejected. 
Color Doppler solves many of these problems because visualization of the direction of flow allows alignment of the 
Doppler beam in the direction of the blood flow. 
To record velocity waveforms, pulsed Doppler is generally preferred to continuous wave Doppler because of its range 
resolution. During recordings, the sample volume is placed immediately distal to the locations being investigated (e.g. 
distal to the aortic semilunar valves to record the left ventricle outflow). However, in conditions of particularly high 
velocities (such as the ductus arteriosus), continuous Doppler may be useful because it avoids the aliasing effect. 
Parameters measured 
The parameters most commonly used to describe the cardiac velocity waveforms are 24: 
(1) Peak velocity (PV), expressed as the maximum velocity at a given moment (such as systole or diastole) on the 
Doppler spectrum; 
(2) Time to peak velocity (TPV) or acceleration time, expressed by the time interval between the onset of the 
waveform and its peak; 
(3) Time velocity integral (TVI), calculated by planimetering the area underneath the Doppler spectrum. 
It is also possible to calculate absolute cardiac flow from both the atrioventricular valve and outflow tracts by 
multiplying TVI by the valve area and fetal heart rate. These measurements are particularly prone to errors, mainly 
due to inaccuracies in valve area. Area is derived from the valve diameter, which is near the limits of ultrasound 
resolution, and is then halved and squared in its calculation, thus amplifying potential errors. However, they can be 
used properly in longitudinal studies over a short period of time during which the valve dimensions are assumed to 
remain constant. Furthermore, it is also possible to accurately calculate the relative ratio between the right and left 
cardiac output (RCO/LCO) avoiding the measurements of the cardiac valve, because, in the absence of cardiac 
defects, the relative dimensions of the aorta and pulmonary valves remain constant through gestation 25. 
Evaluation of ventricular ejection force (VEF) has also been used to assess fetal cardiac function 26,27. This index 
estimates the energy transferred from right and left ventricular myocardial shortening to work done by accelerating 
blood into the pulmonary and systemic circulations, respectively 28. This index appears to be less influenced by 
changes in preload and afterload than other Doppler indices 28 and may be more accurate than other Doppler 

variables, such as peak velocities, for the assessment of ventricular function in adults with chronic congestive heart 
failure. VEF is calculated according to Newton’s second law of motion. The force developed by ventricular contraction, 
to accelerate a column of blood into the aorta or pulmonary artery, represents transfer of energy of myocardial 
shortening to work done on the pulmonary and systemic circulation. Newton’s second law estimates the force as the 
product of mass and acceleration. The mass component in this model is the mass of blood accelerated into the 
outflow tract over a time interval, and may be calculated as the product of the density of blood (1.055), the valve 
area and the flow velocity time integral during acceleration (FVI AT), which is the area under the Doppler spectrum 
envelope up to the time of peak velocity. The acceleration component of the equation is estimated as the PV divided 
by the TPV [VEF = (1.055 x valve area x FVIAT) x (PV/TPV)]. 
Doppler depiction of fetal cardiac circulation 
In the human fetus, blood flow velocity waveforms can be recorded at all cardiac levels, including venous return, 
foramen ovale, atrioventricular valves, outflow tracts, pulmonary arteries and ductus arteriosus. The factors affecting 
the shape of the velocity waveforms include preload 29,30, afterload 30,31, myocardial contractility 32, ventricular 
compliance 33 and fetal heart rate 34. These factors differ in their effect on waveforms recorded from different sites 
and parts of the cardiac cycle. 
Atrioventricular valves 
Flow velocity waveforms at the level of the mitral and tricuspid valves are recorded from the apical four-chamber view 
of the fetal heart and are characterized by two diastolic peaks, corresponding to early ventricular filling (E-wave) and 
to active ventricular filling during atrial contraction (A-wave) (Figure 14). The ratio between the E and A waves (E/A) 
is a widely accepted index of ventricular diastolic function and is an expression of both the cardiac compliance and 
preload conditions 24,29,35. 
Outflow tracts 
Flow velocity waveforms from the aorta and pulmonary arteries are recorded respectively from the five-chamber and 
short-axis views of the fetal heart (Figure 13). PV and TPV are the most commonly used indices. The former is 
influenced by several factors, including valve size, myocardial contractility and afterload 24,30,31, while the latter is 
believed to be secondary to the mean arterial pressure 36. 
Coronary blood flow 
Coronary blood flow may be visualized with the use of high-resolution ultrasound equipment and color Doppler 
echocardiography. In normal fetuses, both right and left coronary arteries may be identified after 31 weeks of 
gestation under optimal conditions of fetal imaging 37. In compromised fetuses, these vessels may be identified at an 
earlier gestational age, probably due to an increased coronary blood flow 37. 
Pulmonary vessels 
Velocity waveforms may be recorded from the right and left pulmonary arteries or from peripheral vessels within the 
lung 38–41. The morphology of the waveforms is different according to the site of sampling and there is a progressive 
increase in the diastolic component in the more distal vessels 40,41 (Figure 17). Their analysis may be used to study 
the normal development of lung circulation. 
Ductus arteriosus 
Ductal velocity waveforms are recorded from a short-axis view showing the ductal arch and are characterized by a 
continuous forward flow through the entire cardiac cycle 42. The parameter most commonly analyzed is the PV during 
systole or, similarly to peripheral vessels, the pulsatility index: 
[PI = (systolic velocity -diastolic velocity)/ time averaged maximum velocity] 42,43. 

Figure 16: Five-chamber view of the fetal heart with superimposed color Doppler showing the aorta (blue) 
originating from the left ventricle (top). Short-axis view of the fetal heart with superimposed color Doppler 
showing the pulmonary artery originating from the right ventricle (bottom). 
.. 
Errors in Doppler blood flow velocity waveforms 
A major concern in obtaining absolute measurements of velocities or flow is their reproducibility. To obtain reliable 
recordings, it is particularly important to minimize the angle of insonation, to verify in real-time and color flow 
imaging the correct position of the sample volume before and after each Doppler recording, and to limit the 
recordings to periods of fetal rest and apnea, as behavioral states greatly influence the recordings44,45. In these 
conditions, it is necessary to select a series of at least five consecutive velocity waveforms characterized by uniform 
morphology and high signal to noise ratio before performing the measurements. Using this technique of recording and 
analysis, it is possible to achieve a coefficient of variation below 10% for all the echocardiographic indices with the 
exception of those needing the valve dimensions 46–48. 

Figure 17a: Flow velocity waveform from the pulmonary artery at 32 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 17b: Flow velocity waveform from the pulmonary vein at 32 weeks of gestation. 

.. 
Normal ranges of Doppler echocardiographic indices 
It is possible to record cardiac flow velocity waveforms from as early as 8 weeks of gestation by transvaginal color 
Doppler 49,50. In early pregnancy (8–20 weeks), there are major changes at all cardiac levels. The E/A ratio at both 
atrioventricular levels increases 49–51. PV and TVI in outflow tracts increase and this is particularly evident at the level 
of the pulmonary valve 49. These changes suggest a rapid development of ventricular compliance and a shift of 
cardiac output towards the right ventricle; this shift is probably secondary to decreased right ventricle afterload 
which, in turn, is due to the fall in placental resistance. 
At the level of the atrioventricular valves, the E/A ratios increase 52,53, while PV values linearly increase at the level 
of both pulmonary and aortic valves 54. Small changes are present in TPV values during gestation 55. TPV values at 
the level of the pulmonary valve are lower than at aortic level, suggesting a slightly higher blood pressure in the 
pulmonary artery than in the ascending aorta 56. Quantitative measurements have shown that the right cardiac 
output (RCO) is higher than the left cardiac output (LCO) and that, from 20 weeks onwards, the RCO to LCO ratio 
remains constant, with a mean value of 1.3 57,58. This value is lower than that reported in fetal sheep (RCO/LCO = 
1.8), and this difference may be explained by the higher brain weight in humans which necessitates an increase in left 
cardiac output 59. 
In normal fetuses, VEF exponentially increases with advancing gestation, both at the level of the right and left 
ventricles 27. No significant differences are present between right and left VEF values and the ratio between right and 
left VEF values remains stable with advancing gestation (mean value = 1.09) 27. 
Ductal PV increases linearly with gestation and its values represent the highest velocity in the fetal circulation 
occurring in normal conditions while the PI is constant 42,43. Values of systolic velocity above 140 cm/s, in 
conjunction with a diastolic velocity greater than 35 cm/s or a PI of less than 1.9, are considered to be an expression 
of ductal constriction 42. 
FETAL VENOUS FLOW 
Anatomy 
The fetal liver with its venous vasculature – umbilical and portal veins, ductus venosus and hepatic veins – and the 
inferior vena cava are the main areas of interest in the investigation of venous blood return to the fetal heart. The 
intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein ascends relatively steeply from the cord insertion in the inferior part of the 
falciform ligament. Then the vessel continues in a more horizontal and posterior direction and turns to the right to the 
confluence with the transverse part of the left portal vein, which joins the right portal vein with its division into an 
anterior and a posterior branch. 
The ductus venosus originates from the umbilical vein before it turns to the right (Figure 18). The diameter of the 
ductus venosus measures approximately one-third of that of the umbilical vein. It courses posteriorly and in a 
cephalad direction, with increasing steepness in the same sagittal plane as the original direction of the umbilical vein, 
and enters the inferior vena cava in a venous vestibulum just below the diaphragm. The three (left, middle, and right) 
hepatic veins reach the inferior vena cava in the same funnel-like structure 60. 
The ductus venosus can be visualized in its full length in a mid-sagittal longitudinal section of the fetal trunk (Figure 
15). In an oblique transverse section through the upper abdomen, its origin from the umbilical vein can be found 
where color Doppler indicates high velocities compared to the umbilical vein, and sometimes this produces an aliasing 
effect (Figure 15). The blood flow velocity accelerates due to the narrow lumen of the ductus venosus, the maximum 
inner width of the narrowest portion being 2 mm 61. The best ultrasound plane to depict the inferior vena cava is a 
longitudinal or coronal one, where it runs anterior, to the right of and nearly parallel to the descending aorta (Figure 
16). The hepatic veins can be visualized, either in a transverse section through the upper abdomen or in a sagittalcoronal 
section through the appropriate lobe of the liver. 

Figure 18: Sagittal view of the fetal thorax and abdomen showing the ductus venosus originating from the 
umbilical vein, inferior vena cava and descending aorta. (Color Doppler -Amplitude Mode) 
Figure 19: Parasagittal view of the fetal trunk with superimposed color Doppler showing the descending aorta 
(red) and the inferior vena cava (blue). 
Physiology 
The ductus venosus plays a central role in the return of venous blood from the placenta. Well-oxygenated blood flows 
via this shunt directly towards the heart. Approximately 40% of umbilical vein blood enters the ductus venosus and 
accounts for 98% of blood flow through the ductus venosus, because portal blood is directed almost exclusively to the 
right lobe of the liver 62. Oxygen saturation is higher in the left hepatic vein compared to the right hepatic vein. This 
is due to the fact that the left lobe of the liver is supplied by branches from the umbilical vein. 
Animal studies have shown that there is a streamlining of blood flow within the thoracic inferior vena cava 63. Blood 
from the ductus venosus and the left hepatic vein flows in the dorsal and leftward part, whereas blood from the distal 
inferior vena cava and the right lobe of the liver flows in the ventral and rightward part of the inferior vena cava. The 
ventral and rightward stream, together with blood from the superior vena cava, is directed towards the right atrium 
and through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle. From there the blood is ejected into the main pulmonary 
artery and most of it is shunted through the ductus arteriosus into the descending aorta. The dorsal and leftward 
stream is directed towards the foramen ovale, thereby delivering well-oxygenated blood directly to the left heart and 
from there via the ascending aorta to the myocardium and the brain. In sheep, the two bloodstreams show different 
flow velocities, with the higher velocity found in the stream that originates from the ductus venosus 64. Color Doppler 
studies in human fetuses confirm these findings. The crista dividens, which forms the upper edge of the foramen 
ovale, separates the two pathways, and the blood delivered to the left atrium circumvents the right atrium 65. 
The typical waveform for blood flow in venous vessels consists of three phases (Figure 20). The highest pressure 

gradient between the venous vessels and the right atrium occurs during ventricular systole (S), which results in the 
highest blood flow velocities towards the fetal heart during that part of the cardiac cycle. Early diastole (D), with the 
opening of the atrioventricular valves and passive early filling of the ventricles (E-wave of the biphasic atrioventricular 
flow waveform), is associated with a second peak of forward flow. The nadir of flow velocities coincides with atrial 
contraction (a) during late diastole (A-wave of the atrioventricular flow waveform). During atrial contraction, the 
foramen ovale flap and the crista dividens meet, thereby preventing direct blood flow from the ductus venosus to the 
left atrium during that short period of closure of the foramen ovale. 
Figure 20: Normal flow velocity waveforms of the ductus venosus visualized in a sagittal section through the 
fetal abdomen. The first peak indicates systole, the second early diastole and the nadir of the waveform 
occurs during atrial contraction. 
Normal Doppler findings -Venous Blood Flow 
The easiest vessel in which to investigate venous blood flow is the umbilical vein. Investigation of fetal venous 
umbilical blood flow by Doppler ultrasound was published in 1980 by Eik-Nes and colleagues 66 and in 1981 by Gill et 
al. 67. They reported on mean volume flow in the intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein, which averaged 110–120 
ml/kg/min in uncomplicated third-trimester pregnancies. Continuous forward flow without pulsations is seen in most 
pregnancies after the first trimester. It is interesting that there seems to be an intrinsic inhibition of retrograde flow in 
the umbilical vein. This was concluded from a study comparing flow volume and velocity measurements of test fluid 
pumped through the cord under standardized conditions in antegrade and retrograde directions 68. This was 
attributed to the orientation of the endothelial cells within the vessel wall. 
In a study during early gestation, pulsations were always seen until 8 weeks and they progressively disappeared 
between 9 and 12 weeks 69. Other investigators observed them up to 15 weeks and no relation between the 
pulsatility of venous waveforms and the descending aorta and umbilical artery could be established 70. Changes in 
cardiac filling patterns were thought to be responsible for these findings. Other studies reported umbilical venous 
pulsations synchronous with the fetal heart rate in normal fetuses between 34 and 38 weeks 71. They were present in 
20% of measurements in a freefloating loop of the cord, in 33% of intra-abdominal umbilical venous measurements, 
and in 78% of waveforms from the umbilical sinus and left portal vein. These mild pulsations and the sinusoidal 
waveforms occurring during fetal breathing movements must be distinguished from severe pulsations showing a sharp 
decrease in blood flow, corresponding to the fetal heart rate in cases of fetal compromise. 
There is an abrupt change in the blood flow waveforms at the origin of the ductus venosus from continuous to 
pulsatile flow and an approximately three-to four-fold increase in maximum velocities. An abrupt pressure drop is 
present at the entrance of the ductus venosus and there is a high-velocity jet from the inlet throughout the lower 
portion of the ductus, with a decrease of velocities toward its outlet due to its conicity72. Flow in the ductus venosus 
is directed toward the heart throughout the whole cycle. Even in early pregnancy, there is no retrograde flow during 

atrial contraction (Figure 21) 73. The high velocities probably support the preferential direction of blood flow towards 
the foramen ovale, and avoid mixing with blood with lower oxygen saturation from the inferior vena cava and right 
hepatic vein. The mean peak velocities increase from 65 cm/s at 18 weeks to 75 cm/s at term 61. 
In contrast to the ductus venosus waveform, atrial contraction can cause absence or reversal of blood flow in the 
inferior vena cava and this is almost always the case in the hepatic veins (Figure 21 and 22). 
Figure 21(a): Normal ductus venosus waveform at 12 weeks of gestation with positive flow during atrial 
contraction. 
Figure 21(b): Normal ductus venosus waveform at 25 weeks of gestation with positive flow during atrial 
contraction. 

Figure 22: Ductus venosus flow velocity waveform with low but positive forward flow during atrial 
contraction. 
The percentage of reverse flow in the inferior vena cava decreases with advancing gestational age. At 12–15 weeks, it 
is four-to five-fold of that seen near term. Studies attempting to describe the pulsatility of flow velocity waveforms 
have used the S/D ratio in the inferior vena cava or ductus venosus 74–77, the preload index (a/S) in the inferior vena 
cava 78, and the resistance index [(S -a)/S] and the S/a ratio in the ductus venosus 79,80. With one exception 76, no 
significant change with gestational age has been found for the S/D ratio. Similarly, no relationship has been found 
between the preload index and gestational age, which is inconsistent with the finding of a decrease in percentage of 
reverse flow with advancing gestation 78. The ductus venosus index [(S -a)/S], which is equivalent to the resistance 
index, decreases significantly with gestational age 79. This is in agreement with a decrease of the S/a ratio with 
gestational age, which also shows a significant relationship with the percentage of reverse flow in the inferior vena 
cava . 

Figure 23: Flow velocity waveform from the middle hepatic vein. Compared to the ductus venosus (see 
Figure 19), the velocities are significantly lower and there is reversal of blood flow during atrial contraction. 
A study of blood flow in the ductus venosus, inferior vena cava and right hepatic vein in 143 normal fetuses during 
the second half of pregnancy established reference ranges for mean and maximum velocities and two indices for 
venous waveform analysis 81. The first one was the peak velocity index [(S -a)/D] and the second one the equivalent 
to the PI [(S -a)/time-averaged maximum velocity]. Mean and peak blood velocities increased, whereas the indices 
decreased with advancing gestation (Figure 21). Velocities were highest in the ductus venosus and lowest in the right 
hepatic vein, whereas the lowest indices were found in the ductus venosus and highest indices in the right hepatic 
vein. The finding that the degree of pulsatility decreases with gestation is consistent with a decrease in cardiac 
afterload due to a decrease in placental resistance, and may also reflect increased ventricular compliance and 
maturation of cardiac function. A decrease in end-diastolic ventricular pressure causes an increase in venous blood 
flow velocity towards the heart during atrial contraction. 

Figure 24: PIV, which is the equivalent of pulsatility index (left) and mean blood velocity (right) in the ductus 
venosus with gestation (mean, 95th and 5th centiles). 
The sampling site (Figure 25) is of crucial importance in venous Doppler studies. Velocities at the inlet of the ductus 
venosus, immediately above the umbilical vein, are higher than at the outlet into the inferior vena cava and the 
sampling site should be standardized at the inlet 82. There are relatively wide limits of agreement for intraobserver 
variation for velocity measurements. Inferior vena cava signals at the entrance to the right atrium show a large 
standard deviation for various waveform parameters 74. To avoid a mixture of overlapping signals from different 
bloodstreams, flow velocity waveforms from the inferior vena cava should be obtained more distally. The highest 
reproducibility of inferior vena cava waveforms is achieved by placing the sample volume between the entrance of the 
renal vein and the ductus venosus 83. 
Figure 25: the sampling site of the ductus venousus (yellow circle). 
Generally, flow volume measurements and absolute velocity measurements seem to have considerably higher 
inaccuracies and intra-patient variations compared to velocity ratios. This is due to problems caused by a high or 
unreliable angle of insonation and the fact that vessel diameter measurements are very vulnerable to errors. Ratios 
and indices of velocities, on the other hand, are to a large extent independent of the angle of insonation. 
Furthermore, fetal behavioral states have to be taken into account when measuring blood flow velocities in the ductus 
venosus. A 30% decrease of velocities was found during fetal behavioral state 1F compared to 2F, but no change in 
S/D ratio 84. 
Waveforms of the ductus venosus with very little or even without pulsatility seem to be normal variants. They were 
found in 3% of measurements in a longitudinal study of normal pregnancies 82. There are conflicting reports on the 

existence of a sphincter regulating blood flow through the ductus venosus. Autonomous innervation may have an 
influence on ductal blood flow, but it is questionable whether there is an isolated muscular structure functioning as a 
sphincter. Apparent ductus venosus dilatation has been reported in two cases with growth-restricted fetuses, causing 
modifications of flow velocity waveforms with a reduction of velocities during atrial contraction and, consequently, an 
increase in pulsatility 85. These findings were confirmed in a simulation of ductal dilatation by means of a 
mathematical model. 
During Doppler studies of the fetal circulation, it is essential to avoid measurements during fetal breathing 
movements. This is well described for the arterial side but it is even more important for venous flow, because the 
changes in intrathoracic pressure during breathing movements have a profound influence on flow velocity waveforms. 
A raised abdomino–thoracic pressure gradient seems to be responsible for this phenomenon. By applying the Bernoulli 
equation, the pressure gradient across the ductus venosus ranges between 0 and 3 mmHg during the heart cycle, but 
increases to 22 mmHg during fetal inspiratory movements 86. As the shape of velocity waveforms during breathing 
movements shows persistent changes, velocity ratios or indices should only be calculated during fetal apnea. 
On the other hand, comparison between umbilical arterial and venous waveforms during fetal breathing movements 
offers an interesting model to investigate the interdependence between fetal cardiovascular and placental blood flow 
87. Variation in umbilical venous velocity may alter placental filling and thereby affect umbilical arterial diastolic 
velocity. It may also alter ventricular filling and thereby affect umbilical arterial systolic velocity through the Frank– 
Starling mechanism, which results in limited changes in stroke volume. Therefore, changes in velocity of venous blood 
flow returning to the heart have an influence on velocities of arterial blood flow returning to the placenta and vice 
versa . In other words, cardiac preload influences afterload and is influenced by afterload itself. 
Recent studies have investigated the venous circulation of the fetal brain and various sinuses 88,89. The increase of 
flow velocities and decrease of pulsatility with gestational age and the increase of the pulsatility of waveforms from 
the periphery toward the proximal portion of the venous vasculature is in accordance with findings in precardial 
venous vessels. 

REFERENCES 
1. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Paimer AA. Umbilical cord whole blood viscosity and the umbilical artery flow velocity 
time waveforms: a correlation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1986;93:466 
2. Boyd JD, Hamilton WJ. The Human Placenta. Cambridge: Heffer & Sons, 1970:207–74 
3. Ramsey EM, CornerGW, DonnerMW. Serial and cineradioangiographic visualization of maternal circulation in 
the primate (hemochorial) placenta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1963;86:213–25 
4. Brosens I, Robertson WB, Dixon HG. The physiological response of the vessels of the placental bed to normal 
pregnancy. J Pathol Bacteriol 1967;93:569–79 
5. Pijnenborg R, Bland JM, Robertson WB, Brosens I. Uteroplacental arterial changes related to interstitial 
trophoblast migration in early human pregnancy. Placenta 1983;4:387–414 
6. Assali NS, Rauramo L, Peltonen T. Measurement of uterine blood flow and uterine metabolism. VIII. Uterine 
and fetal blood flow and oxygen consumption in early human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1960;79:86– 
98 
7. Browne JCM, Veall N. The maternal placental blood flow in normotensive and hypertensive women. J Obstet 
Gynaecol Br Empire 1953;60:141–7 
8. Campbell S, Diaz-Recasens J, Griffin DR, Cohen-Overbeek TE, Pearce JM, Willson K, Teague MJ. New Doppler 
technique for assessing uteroplacental blood inflow. Lancet 1983;i:675–7 
9. Trudinger BJ,Giles WB, Cook CM. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity-time waveforms in normal and 
complicated pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:39–45 
10. Schulman H, Fleischer A, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Rochelson B, Grunfeld L. Development of uterine artery 
compliance in pregnancy as detected by Doppler ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;155:1031–6 
11. Bewley S, Campbell S, Cooper D. Uteroplacental Doppler flow velocity waveforms in the second trimester. A 
complex circulation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1040–6 
12. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Boccolini MR, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Functional assessment of uteroplacental and fetal 
circulations by means of color Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1990;9: 249–53 
13. Maulik D, Yarlagadda P, Downing G. Doppler velocimetry in obstetrics. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 
1990;17:163–86 
14. Maulik D. Basic principles of Doppler ultrasound as applied in obstetrics. Clin Obstet Gynecol 1989;32:628 .. – 
44 
15. Bilardo CM, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Mean blood velocities and flow impedance in the fetal descending 
thoracic aortic and common carotid artery in normal pregnancy. Early Hum Dev 1988; 18:213–21 
16. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Renal artery flow-velocity waveforms in normal and hypoxemic fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:168–72 
17. Hecher K, Spernol R, Szalay S. Doppler blood flow velocity waveforms in the fetal renal artery. Arch Gynecol 
Obstet 1989;246:133–7 
18. Rabinowitz R, Peters MT, Vyas S, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Measurement of fetal urine production in 
normal pregnancy by real-time ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1264–6 
19. Vyas S, Campbell S, Bower S, Nicolaides KH. Maternal abdominal pressure alters fetal cerebral blood flow. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:740–2 
20. Kirkinen P, Muller R, Huch R, Huch A. Blood flow velocity waveforms in human fetal intracranial arteries. 
Obstet Gynecol 1987,70:617–21 
21. van den Wiingaard JAGW, Groenenberg IAL, Wiadimiroff JW, Hop WCJ. Cerebral Doppler ultrasound in the 
human fetus. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:845–9 
22. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Bower S, Campbell S. Middle cerebral artery flow velocity waveforms in fetal 
hypoxaemia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:797–803 

23. Burns PN. Doppler flow estimations in the fetal and maternal circulations: principles, techniques and some 
limitations. In Maulik D, McNellis D, eds. Doppler Ultrasound Measurement of Maternal-Fetal Hemodynamics. 
Ithaca, New York, USA: Perinatology Press, 1987:43–78 
24. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of fetal cardiac function. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:434–45 
25. Comstock CH, Riggs T, LeeW, Kirk J. Pulmonary to aorta diameter ratio in the normal and abnormal fetal 
heart. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;165:1038–43 
26. St John Sutton M, Gill T, Plappert T, Saltzman DH, Doubilet P. Assessment of right and left ventricular 
function in term of force development with gestational age in the normal human fetus. Br Heart J 
1991,61:285–9 
27. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Rinaldo D, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ventricular ejection force in growthretarded fetuses. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:247–52 
28. Isaaz K, Ethevenot G, Admant P, Brembilla B, Pernot C. A new Doppler method of assessing left ventricular 
ejection force in chronic congestive heart failure. Am J Cardiol 1989; 64:81–7 
29. Stottard MF, Pearson AC, Kern MJ, Ratcliff J, Mrosek DG, Labovitz AJ. Influence of alteration in preload of left 
ventricular diastolic filling as assessed by Doppler echocardiography in humans. Circulation 1989;79:1226– 
36 
30. Gardin JM. Doppler measurements of aortic blood velocity and acceleration: load-independent indexes of left 
ventricular performance. Am J Cardiol 1989;64:935–6 
31. Bedotto JB, Eichorn EJ, Grayburn PA. Effects of left ventricular preload and afterload on ascending aortic 
blood velocity and acceleration in coronaric artery disease. Am J Cardiol 1989:64:856–9 
32. Brownwall E, Ross J, Sonnenblick EH. Mechanism of Contraction in the Normal and Failing Heart, 2nd edn. 
Boston: Little Brown, 1976, 92–129 
33. Takaneka K, Dabestani A, Gardin JM, Russel D, Clark S, Allfie A, Henry WL. Left ventricular filling in 
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a pulsed Doppler echocardiographic study. J Am Coll Cardiol 1986;7:1263–71 
34. Kenny J, Plappert T, Doubilet P, Saltzam D, St John Sutton MG. Effects of heart rate on ventricular size, 
stroke volume and output in the normal human fetus: a prospective Doppler echocardiographic study. 
Circulation 1987;76:52–8 
35. Labovitz AJ, Pearson C. Evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function: clinical relevance and recent Doppler 
echocardiographic insights. Am Heart J 1987;114:836–51 
36. Kitabatake A, Inoue M, Asao M, et al. Noninvasive evaluation of pulmonary hypertension by a pulsed Doppler 
technique. Circulation 1983;68:302–9 
37. Baschat AA, Gembruch U, Reiss I, Gortner L, Diedrich K. Demonstration of fetal coronary blood flow by 
Doppler ultrasound in relation to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms and perinatal outcome. The 
heart sparing effect. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:162–72 
38. Laudy JAM, De Riddler MA, Wladimiroff J. Doppler velocimetry in branch pulmonary arteries of normal human 
fetuses during the second half of pregnancy. Pediatr Res 1997;41:897–901 
39. Rasanen J, Huhta JC,Weiner S,Wood DC, Ludormisky A. Fetal branch pulmonary arterial vascular impedance 
during the second half of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1441–9 
40. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Chaoui R, Taddei F, Arduini D, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in normally grown and growth-retarded fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1996;8:87–92 
41. Chaoui R, Taddei F, Rizzo G, Bast C, Lenz F, Bollmann R. Doppler echocardiography of the main stems of the 
pulmonary arteries in the normal human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 173–9 
42. Huhta JC, Moise KJ, Fisher DJ, Sharif DF,Wasserstrum N, Martin C. Detection and quantitation of constriction 
of the fetal ductus arteriosus by Doppler echocardiography. Circulation 1987;75, 406–12 
43. Van de Mooren K, Barendregt LG, Wladimiroff J. Flow velocity waveforms in the human fetal ductus 
arteriosus during the normal second trimester of pregnancy. Pediatr Res 1991;30:487–90 

44. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Valensise H, Romanini C. Effects of behavioural states on cardiac output in the healthy 
human fetus at 36–38 weeks of gestation. Early Hum Dev 1990;23:109–15 
45. Huisman TW, Brezinka C, Stewart PA, StijenT, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus flow velocity waveforms in 
relation to fetal behavioural states. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1994;101:220–4 
46. Groenenberg IAL, Hop WCJ, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler flow velocity waveforms in the fetal cardiac outflow 
tract; reproducibility of waveformrecording and analysis. Ultrasound Med Biol 1991; 17:583–7 
47. Al-GhazaliW, Chita SK, Chapman MG, Allan LD. Evidence of redistribution of cardiac output in asymmetrical 
growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989; 96:697–704 
48. Reed KL, Meijboom EJ, Sahn DJ, Scagnelli SA, Valdes-Cruz LM, Skenker L. Cardiac Doppler flow velocities in 
human fetuses. Circulation 1986;73:41–56 
49. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Fetal cardiac and extra-cardiac circulation in early gestation. J Maternal-Fetal 
Invest 1991;1:73–8 
50. van Splunder P, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal atrioventricular flow-velocity waveforms and their 
relationship to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms at 8 to 20 weeks of gestation. Circulation 
1996;94:1372–8 
51. Wladimiroff JW, HuismanTWA, Stewart PA, Stijnen Th. Normal fetal Doppler inferior vena cava, transtricuspid 
and umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms between 11 and 16 weeks’ gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1992;166:46–9 
52. Reed KL, Sahn DJ, Scagnelli S, Anderson CF, Shenker L. Doppler echocardiographic studies of diastolic 
function in the human fetal heart: changes during gestation. J Am Coll Cardiol 1986;8: 391–5 
53. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of atrioventricular 
velocity waveforms in normal and small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:65–9 
54. Kenny JF, Plappert T, Saltzman DH, Cartire M, Zollars L, Leatherman GF, St John Sutton MG. Changes in 
intracardiac blood flow velocities and right and left ventricular stroke volumes with gestational age in the 
normal human fetus: a prospective Doppler echocardiographic study. Circulation 1986;74:1208–16 
55. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of time to peak velocity in 
the aorta and pulmonary artery of small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:603–7 
56. Machado MVL, Chita SC, Allan LD. Acceleration time in the aorta and pulmonary artery measured by Doppler 
echocardiography in the midtrimester normal human fetus. Br Heart J 1987;58:15–18 
57. Allan LD, Chita SK, Al-GhazaliW, Crawford DC, Tynan M. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of the normal 
human fetal heart. Br Heart J 1987;57:528–33 
58. De Smedt MCH, Visser GHA, Meijboom EJ. Fetal cardiac output estimated by Doppler echocardiography 
during mid-and late gestation. Am J Cardiol 1987;60:338–42 
59. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Cardiac output in anencephalic fetuses. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1991;32:33–5 
60. HuismanTWA, Gittenberger-De Groot AC, Wladimiroff JW. Recognition of a fetal subdiaphragmatic venous 
vestibulum essential for fetal venous Doppler assessment. Pediatr Res 1992;32:338–41 
61. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HGK, Hellevik LR. Ultrasonographic velocimetry of the fetal ductus venosus. 
Lancet 1991;338:1412–14 
62. Edelstone DI, Rudolph AM, Heymann MA. Liver and ductus venosus blood flows in fetal lambs in utero. Circ 
Res 1978;42:426–33 
63. Edelstone DI, Rudolph AM. Preferential streaming of ductus venosus blood to the brain and heart in fetal 
lambs. Am J Physiol 1979;237:H724–9 
64. Schmidt KG, Silverman NH, Rudolph AM. Assessment of flow events at the ductus venosus–inferior vena 
cava junction and at the foramen ovale in fetal sheep by use of multimodal ultrasound. Circulation 
1996;93:826–33 
65. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HG, Hellevik LR. Foramen ovale: an ultrasonographic study of its relation to the 
inferior vena cava, ductus venosus and hepatic veins. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:389–96 
66. Eik-Nes SH, Brubakk AO, Ulstein MK. Measurement of human fetal blood flow. Br Med J 1980; 280:283–4 

67. Gill RW, Trudinger BJ, Garrett WJ, Kossoff G,Warren, PS. Fetal umbilical venous flow measured in utero by 
pulsed Doppler and B-mode ultrasound. I. Normal pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;139:720–5 
68. Potter PL. In vitro demonstration of inhibition of retrograde flow in the human umbilical vein. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:319–23 
69. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Umbilical vein pulsations: a physiologic finding in early gestation. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:675–7 
70. van Splunder P, Huisman TWA, de Ridder MAJ, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal venous and arterial flow velocity wave 
forms between eight and twenty weeks of gestation. Pediatr Res 1996;40:158–62 
71. van Splunder IP, Huisman TWA, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Presence of pulsations and reproducibility of 
waveform recording in the umbilical and left portal vein in normal pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1994;4:49–53 
72. Pennati G, Bellotti M, Ferrazzi E, Rigano S, Garberi A. Hemodynamic changes across the human ductus 
venosus: a comparison between clinical findings and mathematical calculations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1997;9:383–91 
73. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW, Stijnen T. Flow velocity waveforms in the ductus venosus, 
umbilical vein and inferior vena cava in normal human fetuses at 12–15 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Med 
Biol 1993;19:441–5 
74. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW. Flow velocity waveforms in the fetal inferior vena cava during 
the second half of normal pregnancy. Ultrasound Med Biol 1991;17:679–82 
75. Huisman TWA, Stewart PA, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus blood flow velocity waveforms in the human 
fetus – a Doppler study. Ultrasound Med Biol 1992;18:33–7 
76. Reed KL, Appleton CP, Anderson CF, Shenker L, Sahn DJ. Doppler studies of vena cava flows in human 
fetuses. Insights into normal and abnormal cardiac physiology. Circulation 1990;81:498–505 
77. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Inferior vena cava flow velocity waveforms in appropriate-and small-for-
gestational-age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1271–80 
78. Kanzaki T, Chiba Y. Evaluation of the preload condition of the fetus by inferior vena caval blood flow pattern. 
Fetal Diagn Ther 1990;5:168–74 
79. DeVore GR, Horenstein J. Ductus venosus index: a method for evaluating right ventricular preload in the 
second-trimester fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:338–42 
80. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ductus venosus velocity waveforms in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Early Hum Dev 1994;39:15–26 
81. Hecher K, Campbell S, Snijders R, Nicolaides K. Reference ranges for fetal venous and atrioventricular blood 
flow parameters. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:381–90 
82. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Hellevik LR, Blaas HG. Ductus venosus – a longitudinal Doppler velocimetric study of 
the human fetus. J Matern Fetal Invest 1992;2:5–11 
83. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Caforio L, Romanini C. Effects of sampling sites on inferior vena cava f low velocity 
waveforms. J Matern Fetal Invest 1992;2:153–6 
84. HuismanTWA, Brezinka C, Stewart PA, Stijnen T, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus venosus flow velocity waveforms in 
relation to fetal behavioural states. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1994;101: 20–4 
85. Bellotti M, Pennati G, Pardi G, Fumero R. Dilatation of the ductus venosus in human fetuses: 
ultrasonographic evidence and mathematical modeling. Am J Physiol 1998; 275:H1759–67 
86. Kiserud T, Hellevik LR, Eik-Nes SH, Angelsen BAJ, Blaas HG. Estimation of the pressure gradient across the 
fetal ductus venosus based on Doppler velocimetry. Ultrasound Med Biol 1994;20:225–32 
87. Indik J, Reed KL. Variation and correlation in human fetal umbilical Doppler velocities with fetal breathing: 
evidence of the cardiac–placental connection. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1792–6 
88. Laurichesse-Delmas H, Grimaud O, Moscoso G, Ville Y. Color Doppler study of the venous circulation in the 
fetal brain and hemodynamic study of the cerebral transverse sinus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;13:34–42 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
89. Pooh RK, Pooh KH, Nakagawa Y, Maeda K, Fukui R, Aono T. Transvaginal Doppler assessment of fetal 
intracranial venous flow. Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:697–701 

Chapter 4 
Doppler studies in fetal hypoxemic hypoxia 
FETAL OXYGENATION 
Oxygenation is the process of transporting molecular oxygen from air to the tissues of the body. In the fetus, this 
involves, first, oxygen transfer across the placenta, second, reversible binding of oxygen to fetal hemoglobin and fetal 
blood flow, and, third, oxygen consumption for growth and metabolism. Energy is derived from the combination of 
oxygen and glucose to form carbon dioxide and water. Removal of carbon dioxide and protection against acidosis is 
by the reverse of the mechanisms for oxygen delivery and is helped by the rapid diffusion, high solubility and 
volatility of this gas. In the adult, carbon dioxide is excreted in the lungs while bicarbonate and hydrogen ions are 
removed by the kidney. In the fetus, both these functions are carried out by the placenta. 
When there is inadequate oxygen supply, the Krebs cycle cannot operate and pyruvate is converted to lactic acid. This 
enters the blood, leading to systemic acidosis unless it is either metabolized or excreted. The amount of oxygen 
bound to hemoglobin is not linearly related to oxygen tension (pO2). Each type of hemoglobin has a characteristic 
oxygen dissociation curve which can be modified by environmental factors, such as pH and the concentration of 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG). For example, when 2,3-DPG rises, in response to anemia or hypoxia, it binds to and 
stabilizes the deoxygenated form of hemoglobin, resulting in a shift of the oxygen dissociation curve to the right and 
therefore release ofoxygen to the tissues. Although, in vitro , both adult (HbA) and fetal (HbF) hemoglobins have the 
same oxygen dissociation curves, human adult blood has a lower affinity for oxygen than fetal because of its greater 
binding of 2,3-DPG. The higher affinity of fetal blood helps placental transfer of oxygen. Furthermore, since the P50 of 
fetal blood is similar to the umbilical arterial pO2, the fetus operates over the steepest part of the hemoglobin oxygen 
dissociation curve and, therefore, a relatively large amount of oxygen is released from the hemoglobin for a given 
drop in pO2. 
Normal fetal oxygenation 
In normal fetuses, the blood oxygen tension is much lower than the maternal, and it has been suggested that this is 
due either to incomplete venous equilibration of uterine and umbilical circulations and/or to high placental oxygen 
consumption 1,2. Studies in a variety of animals have also demonstrated that the umbilical venous blood pO2 is less 
than half the maternal arterial pO2 and this observation led to the concept of ‘Mount Everest in utero'. However, the 
high affinity of fetal hemoglobin for oxygen, together with the high fetal cardiac output in relation to oxygen demand, 
compensates for the low fetal pO2 
3. The umbilical venous and arterial pO2 and pH decrease, while pCO2 increases, 
with gestation 1,2. The blood oxygen content increases with gestational age because of the rise in fetal hemoglobin 
concentration 2. Fetal blood lactate concentration does not change with gestation and the values are similar to those 
in samples obtained at elective Cesarean section at term 2. The umbilical venous concentration is higher than the 
umbilical arterial, suggesting that the normoxemic human fetus is, like the sheep fetus, a net consumer of lactate 4. 
Furthermore, the concentration of lactate in umbilical cord blood is higher than in the maternal blood and the two are 
correlated significantly. This suggests a common source of lactate, which is likely to be the placenta. 
Fetal hypoxia 
Fetal hypoxia, oxygen deficiency in the tissues, of any cause leads to a conversion from aerobic to anaerobic 
metabolism, which produces less energy and more acid. If the oxygen supply is not restored, the fetus dies. Hypoxia 
may result from: 
(1) Reduced placental perfusion with maternal blood and consequent decrease in fetal arterial blood oxygen content 
due to low pO2 (hypoxemic hypoxia); 
(2) Reduced arterial blood oxygen content due to low fetal hemoglobin concentration (anemic hypoxia); 

(3) Reduced blood flow to the fetal tissues (ischemic hypoxia). 
Hypoxemic hypoxia (uteroplacental insufficiency) 
Small-for-gestational age fetuses may be constitutionally small, with no increased perinatal death or morbidity, or 
they may be growth-restricted due to either low growth potential, the result of genetic disease or environmental 
damage, or due to reduced placental perfusion and ‘uteroplacental insufficiency’. 
Analysis of samples obtained by cordocentesis has demonstrated that some small-for-gestation fetuses are 
hypoxemic, hypercapnic, hyperlacticemic and acidemic 2,5. Furthermore, both respiratory and metabolic acidemia 
increase with hypoxemia. In umbilical venous blood, mild hypoxemia may be present in the absence of hypercapnia 
or acidemia. In severe uteroplacental insufficiency, the fetus cannot compensate hemodynamically and hypercapnia 
and acidemia increase exponentially 2. The carbon dioxide accumulation is presumably the result of reduced exchange 
between the uteroplacental and fetal circulations due to reduced blood flow. The association between hypoxemia and 
hyperlacticemia supports the concept of reduced oxidative metabolism of lactate being the cause of hyperlacticemia, 
and, under these circumstances, the fetus appears to be a net producer of lactate. Hypoxemic growth-restricted 
fetuses also demonstrate a whole range of hematological and metabolic abnormalities, including erythroblastemia, 
thrombocytopenia, hypoglycemia, deficiency in essential amino acids, hypertriglyceridemia, hypoinsulinemia and 
hypothyroidism 5-10 . 
Cross-sectional studies in pregnancies with growth-restricted fetuses have shown that increased impedance to flow in 
the uterine and umbilical arteries is associated with fetal hypoxemia and acidemia 11,12 . These data support the 
findings from histopathological studies that, in some pregnancies with small-for-gestation fetuses, there are: 
(1) Failure of the normal development of maternal placental arteries into low-resistance vessels and therefore 
reduced oxygen and nutrient supply to the intervillous space 13; 
(2) Reduction in the number of placental terminal capillaries and small muscular arteries in the tertiary stem villi and 
therefore impaired maternal–fetal transfer 14. 
Animal studies have demonstrated that, in fetal hypoxemia, there is a redistribution in blood flow, with increased 
blood supply to the brain, heart and adrenals and a simultaneous reduction in the perfusion of the carcase, gut and 
kidneys 15. Doppler ultrasound has enabled the non-invasive confirmation of the so-called ‘brain-sparing’ effect in 
human fetuses. 
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS IN PRE-ECLAMPSIA AND INTRAUTERINE GROWTH 
RESTRICTION 
Pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction are associated with an inadequate quality and quantity of the 
maternal vascular response to placentation. In both conditions, there are characteristic pathological findings in the 
placental bed. Brosens et al. examined placental bed biopsies from pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and 
reported absence of physiological changes in the spiral arteries beyond the decidual– myometrial junction in more 
than 80% of the cases 13. Robertson et al. examined placental bed biopsies from hypertensive women and found a 
difference between the lesions seen in women with pre-eclampsia and those with essential hypertension 16. In preeclampsia, 
there was a necrotizing lesion with foam cells in the wall of the basal and spiral arteries, which was 
referred to as ‘acute atherosis’. In essential hypertension, there were hyperplastic lesions in the basal and spiral 
arteries. 
Sheppard and Bonnar reported that, in pregnancies with intrauterine growth restriction (irrespective of whether there 
is coexistent pre-eclampsia or not), there are atheromatous-like lesions that completely or partially occlude the spiral 
arteries; these changes are not present in pregnancies with pre-eclampsia in the absence of intrauterine growth 
restriction 17. In contrast, Brosens et a. reported lack of physiological changes in all cases of pre-eclampsia, 
irrespective of the birth weight, and in most cases of intrauterine growth restriction; however, acute atherosis was 
found only in preeclampsia 18. Khong et al. reviewed some of the archived biopsies of Brosens et al. 18,19. They 
assessed the proportion of spiral arteries converted to uteroplacental arteries. In all cases of pre-eclampsia and in 
two-thirds of those with intrauterine growth restriction (defined as birth weight < 10th centile), there was no 
evidence of physiological change in the myometrial segments. Furthermore, complete absence of physiological change 
throughout the entire length of some spiral arteries was seen in approximately half the cases of pre-eclampsia and 
intrauterine growth restriction. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Uterine arteries 
In pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction, impedance to flow in the uterine 
arteries is increased (Figure 1). Studies in women with hypertensive disease of pregnancy have reported that, in 
those with increased impedance (increased resistance index or the presence of an early diastolic notch), compared to 
hypertensive women with normal flow velocity waveforms, there is a higher incidence of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine 
growth restriction, emergency Cesarean delivery, placental abruption, shorter duration of pregnancy and poorer 
neonatal outcome 20-23. 
Site of insonation of uterine artery ("crossing over") 
Figure 1: Normal (left) and abnormal (right) flow velocity waveforms from the uterine arteries at 24 weeks of 
gestation. (S= peak systolic; D= End diastolic) 
.. 

Abnormal Development of the uterine artery 
Normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the 
characteristic waveform of early diastolic notching) 
Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries (with the 
characteristic waveform of early diastolic notching) 
Very high resistance to flow in the uterine arteries (with reverse 
diastolic flow) 
Umbilical arteries 
Pathological studies have demonstrated that increased impedance in the umbilical arteries becomes evident only 
when at least 60% of the placental vascular bed is obliterated 14. In pregnancies with reversed or absent end-
diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery, compared to those with normal flow, mean placental weight is reduced 
and the cross-sectional diameter of terminal villi is shorter 24. 
In pregnancies with fetal growth restriction, those with absent end-diastolic frequencies, compared to those with 
normal Doppler, have more fetal stem vessels with medial hyperplasia and luminal obliteration, and those with 
reversed end-diastolic flow have more poorly vascularized terminal villi, villous stromal hemorrhage, ‘hemorrhagic 
endovasculitis’ and abnormally thin-walled fetal stem vessels 25. In pregnancies with absent end-diastolic frequencies 
in the Doppler waveform from the umbilical arteries, the capillary loops in placental terminal villi are decreased in 
number, they are longer and they have fewer branches than in normal pregnancies 27. 
The reduced number and maldevelopment of peripheral villi result in a marked impairment of oxygen extraction from 
the intervillous space. In contrast, placentas from growth-restricted fetuses with positive end-diastolic frequencies 
have a normal pattern of stem artery development, increased capillary angiogenesis and development of terminal 
villi, as signs of an adaptative mechanism 28. Clinical studies of umbilical arterial flow velocity waveforms in 
intrauterine growth restriction have reported progressive increase in impedance to flow until absence and, in extreme 
cases, reversal of end-diastolic frequencies (Figure 2) 28–32. The latter represents the extreme end of the spectrum 
and this finding is associated with a high perinatal mortality, as well as an increased incidence of lethal fetal structural 
and chromosomal defects 33,34. 
Nicolaides et al. measured blood gases in umbilical cord blood samples obtained by cordocentesis in 39 growth-
restricted fetuses 12. End-diastolic frequencies were absent in 22 cases; 80% of these fetuses were found to be 
hypoxemic and 46% also acidemic. In contrast, only 12% of the fetuses with positive end-diastolic frequencies were 
hypoxemic and none was acidemic. In a multicenter study involving high-risk pregnancies, the patients were 
subdivided into three groups depending on the flow velocity waveforms in the umbilical artery (positive end-diastolic 
frequencies, n = 214; absent end-diastolic frequencies, n = 178); and reversed end-diastolic frequencies, n = 67) 35. 
The overall perinatal mortality rate was 28% and the relative risk was 1.0 for patients with present frequencies, 4.0 
for those with absent frequencies and 10.6 for those with reversed frequencies. Significantly more neonates in the 
groups with absent or reversed frequencies needed admittance to the neonatal intensive care unit and they had a 
higher risk of cerebral hemorrhage, anemia or hypoglycemia 35. In addition to increased fetal and neonatal mortality, 
gowth restriction with absent or reversed end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery is associated with increased 
incidence of long-term permanent neurological damage 36. 

Abnormal Development of the umbilical artery 
Umbilical arteries 
-high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
-high pulsatility index 
Umbilical arteries 
-very high pulsatility index. 
-end diastolic velocity 
-pulsation in the umbilical vein 
Umbilical arteries 
Severe cases absence of reversal of end diastolic frequencies 
Figure 2: Abnormal Development of the umbilical artery 
A review of 12 randomized, controlled trials of Doppler ultrasonography of the umbilical artery in high-risk 
pregnancies reported that, in the Doppler group, there was a significant reduction in the number of antenatal 
admissions (44%, 95% confidence interval (CI) 28–57%), induction of labor (20%, 95% CI 10–28%), and Cesarean 
section for fetal distress (52%, 95% CI 24–69%) 37. Furthermore, the clinical action guided by Doppler 
ultrasonography reduced the odds of perinatal death by 38% (95% CI 15–55%). Post hoc analyses revealed a 
statistically significant reduction in elective delivery, intrapartum fetal distress, and hypoxic encephalopathy in the 
Doppler group. It was concluded that there is now compelling evidence that women with high-risk pregnancies, 
including pre-eclampsia and suspected intrauterine growth restriction, should be offered Doppler ultrasonographic 
study of umbilical artery waveforms 37. 
In terms of monitoring growth-restricted pregnancies, abnormal waveforms in the umbilical artery are an early sign of 
fetal impairment. For example, Bekedam et al. followed up growth-restricted fetuses longitudinally and reported that 
abnormalities in the umbilical artery preceded the occurrence of cardiotocographic signs of fetal hypoxemia in more 
than 90% of cases 38. The median time interval between absence of end-diastolic frequencies and the onset of late 
decelerations was 12 days (range 0–49 days). 
Fetal arterial blood flow redistribution 
In fetal hypoxemia, there is an increase in the blood supply to the brain, myocardium and the adrenal glands and 
reduction in the perfusion of the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract and the lower extremities (Figure 3 and 4, Table 1 ) 
39–66. Although knowledge of the factors governing circulatory readjustments and their mechanism of action is 
incomplete, it appears that partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide play a role, presumably through their 
action on chemoreceptors. This mechanism allows preferential delivery of nutrients and oxygen to vital organs, 
thereby compensating for diminished placental resources. However, compensation through cerebral vasodilatation is 
limited and a plateau corresponding to a nadir of pulsatility index (PI) in cerebral vessels is reached at least 2 weeks 
before the development of the fetus is jeopardized. Consequently, arterial vessels are unsuitable for longitudinal 
monitoring of growth-restricted fetuses. Cardiac and venous velocity waveforms give more information regarding fetal 
well-being or compromise. 

Figure 3: Color Doppler examination of the circle of Willis (left). Flow velocity waveforms from the middle 
cerebral artery in a normal fetus with low diastolic velocities (right, top) and in a growth-restricted fetus with 
high diastolic velocities (right, bottom). 
Arduini et al. examined growth-restricted fetuses longitudinally and described a curvilinear relationship between 
impedance in cerebral vessels and the state of fetal oxygenation; the progressive fall in impedance reached a nadir 2 
weeks before the onset of late fetal heart rate decelerations 55. This suggests that the maximum degree of vascular 
adaptation to hypoxemia precedes the critical degree of impairment of fetal oxygenation. Similarly, Potts et al. 
described a curvilinear relationship between cerebral vascular response and hypercapnia 56. Vyas et al. reported that, 
concomitant to severe oxygen deficit, there was a sudden rise in middle cerebral artery PI; they suggested that 
vascular dilatation may be suppressed by the development of cerebral edema 53. An alternative explanation may be 
that, in severe hypoxemia, an increase in PI may be the consequence of alterations in flow due to reduced cardiac 
contractility and to a fall in absolute cardiac output. Moreover, in fetal sheep, chronic hypoxemia was found to alter 
cerebral vascular contractility through changes in vascular smooth muscle and endothelial cells, with the net result of 
a relative decrease in cerebral blood flow 57. 
.. 
Fetal arterial Doppler studies are useful in the differential diagnosis of small-forgestation fetuses. In the hypoxemic 
group, due to impaired placental perfusion, the PI in the umbilical artery is increased and, in the fetal middle cerebral 
artery, the PI is decreased; consequently, the ratio in PI between the umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery 
(UA/MCA) is increased 58–61. Bahado-Singh et al. reported that an abnormally low cerebroplacental ratio is associated 
Table 1 - Hemodynamic changes occurring in fetal arterial vessels during hypoxemia and 
acidemia induced by uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Vessel Impedance to flow 
Descending aorta increased 
Renal artery increased 
Femoral artery increased 
Peripheral pulmonary artery increased 
Mesenteric arteries increased 
Cerebral arteries decreased 
Adrenal arteries decreased 
Splenic arteries decreased 
Coronary arteries decreased 

with increased perinatal morbidity and mortality and that the ratio improves the prediction of perinatal outcome 
compared with umbilical artery PI alone 65. However, the cerebroplacental ratio did not appear to correlate 
significantly with outcome after 34 weeks. In third-trimester fetuses, the ratio in PI between the fetal descending 
thoracic aorta and the middle cerebral artery may be more useful 66. 
There is no evidence that the use of other peripheral arterial fetal vessels, such as renal artery 51, splenic artery 64 or 
peripheral pulmonary arteries 63provides any advantage in the identification of intrauterine growth-restricted fetuses. 
Figure 4: Color Doppler examination of the descending thoracic aorta (left) with normal flow velocity 
waveforms showing positive flow velocities during diastole (right, top) and in a growth-restricted fetus with 
reversed end-diastolic velocities (right, bottom). 
Fetal cardiac Doppler 
Cardiac flow is greatly influenced by the modifications of arterial impedance to flow. Cerebral vasodilatation produces 
a decrease in left ventricle afterload, whereas increased placental and systemic resistance produce increased right 
ventricle afterload. Hypoxemia may also impair cardiac contractility directly, while changes in blood viscosity due to 
polycythemia may alter preload 5. Consequently, growth-restricted fetuses show, at the level of the atrioventricular 
valves, impaired ventricular filling (lower ratio of early passive to late active ventricular filling phase – E/A ratio) 67, 
lower peak velocities in the aorta and pulmonary arteries. These hemodynamic intracardiac changes are compatible 
with a preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle, leading to improved cerebral perfusion. Thus, in 
the first stages of the disease, the supply of substrates and oxygen can be maintained at near normal levels despite 
any absolute reduction of placental transfer 71. 
Longitudinal studies of deteriorating growth-restricted fetuses have shown that peak velocity and cardiac output 
gradually decline, suggesting a progressive worsening in cardiac function 71. Similarly, there is a symmetrical 
decrease in ventricular ejection force at the level of both ventricles, despite the dramatically different hemodynamic 
conditions present in the vascular district of ejection of the two ventricles (i.e. reduced cerebral resistances for the 
left ventricle and increased splachnic and placental resistance for the right ventricle) 72. This supports a pivotal role of 
the intrinsic myocardial function in the compensatory mechanism of the growth-restricted fetus following the 
establishment of the brain-sparing effect. Ventricular ejection force dramatically decreases in a short time interval 
(about 1 week), showing an impairment of ventricular force close to fetal distress. As a consequence, cardiac filling 
also is impaired. 
Fetal venous Doppler 
Animal studies have shown that, in severe hypoxemia, there is redistribution in the umbilical venous blood towards 
the ductus venosus at the expense of hepatic blood flow. Consequently, the proportion of umbilical venous blood 
contributing to the fetal cardiac output is increased. There is a doubling of umbilical venous-derived oxygen delivery 
to the myocardium and an increase in oxygen delivery to the fetal brain 73,74. In vitro perfusion studies have shown 
that, at reduced umbilical venous pressures, a proportionally greater fraction of umbilical venous flow is directed 
through the ductus venosus in comparison to blood flow through the liver 75. 

The same is true during perfusion with blood of high hematocrit. Mechanical forces seem to play a key role in the 
regulation of umbilical venous flow distribution between the liver and the ductus venosus. Under unfavorable 
conditions, the ductus venosus seems to ensure blood flow directly to the fetal heart and, in extreme conditions, 
umbilical blood may pass exclusively through the ductus venosus. This may lead to an impaired perfusion of the liver 
with potential impact on its metabolic properties. Blood flow measurements with chronically implanted 
electromagnetic flow transducers in fetal sheep have shown an increase of the amplitude of vena caval pulsations 
during hypoxemia and increased afterload 76. Flow waveforms show an increase in peak systolic forward flow, and 
during atrial contraction retrograde flow occurs. In contrast, reductions in afterload are associated with an increase in 
peak diastolic forward flow, indicating that fetal systemic vascular resistance has a major influence on venous return 
and filling patterns of the right heart. Increased placental resistance and peripheral vasoconstriction, as seen in fetal 
arterial redistribution, cause an increase in right ventricular afterload, and thus ventricular end-diastolic pressure 
increases. This may result in highly pulsatile venous blood flow waveforms and umbilical venous pulsations due to 
transmission of atrial pressure waves through the ductus venosus 77. 
Studies in growth-restricted human fetuses have demonstrated that, in the inferior vena cava, an increase of reverse 
flow during atrial contraction occurs with progressive fetal deterioration, suggesting a higher pressure gradient in the 
right atrium (Figure 5) 78,79. 
Figure 5: Color Doppler examination of the inferior vena cava with normal flow velocity waveforms (top). 
Abnormal waveform with increase in reversed flow during atrial contraction in a growth-restricted fetus 
(bottom). 
The next step of the disease is the extension of the abnormal reversal of blood velocities in the inferior vena cava to 
the ductus venosus, inducing an increase of the S/A ratio, mainly due to a reduction of the A component of the 
velocity waveforms (Figure 6). 

Figure 6: Color Doppler examination of the ductus venosus with normal flow velocity waveforms (top). 
Abnormal waveformwith reversal of flow during atrial contraction and markedly increased pulsatility in a 
growth-restricted fetus (bottom). 
Finally, the high venous pressure induces a reduction of velocity at end-diastole in the umbilical vein, causing typical 
end-diastolic pulsations (Figure 7) 80. The development of these pulsations is close to the onset of abnormal fetal 
heart rate patterns and is frequently associated with acidemia and fetal endocrine changes81,82. At this stage, 
coronary blood flow may be visualized with higher velocity than in normally grown third-trimester fetuses and, if 
fetuses are not delivered, intrauterine death may occur within a few days 83. In a study of 37 fetuses with absent 
end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery, the main factors determining the length of the interval between the 
first occurrence of absent end-diastolic frequencies were gestational age (the lower the gestation, the longer was the 
interval), pre-eclampsia (shorter interval) and the presence of pulsations in the umbilical vein; the neonatal mortality 
in this group with pulsatile venous flow was 63%, compared to 19% in fetuses without pulsations 84. 
Fetal venous Doppler studies are useful in monitoring the growth-restricted redistributing fetus. Normal venous flow 
suggests continuing fetal compensation, whereas abnormal flow indicates the breakdown of hemodynamic 
compensatory mechanisms 79. Hecher et al. compared fetal venous and arterial blood flow with biophysical 
assessment in 108 high-risk pregnancies after 23 weeks of gestation 85. The results of this study suggest that venous 
Doppler findings in the late third-trimester fetus may not be as reliable as during the late second and early third 
trimesters. However, the most interesting results were found in a group of 41 fetuses displaying arterial blood flow 
redistribution. There were no significant differences in arterial PI values between fetuses with normal and abnormal 
biophysical assessment parameters (except for the aorta and abnormal fetal heart rate trace), whereas venous 
pulsatility was significantly increased in compromised fetuses compared to the non-compromised group. 

Figure 7: Pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein of a severely compromised growth-restricted fetus. 
Fetal hypoxemia is associated with a reduction in umbilical venous blood flow, but, despite this decrease, a normal 
peak velocity in the ductus venosus is maintained 86. In the growth-restricted fetus, the percentage of umbilical 
venous blood passing through the ductus venosus is increased from about 40% (in normal fetuses) to about 60% 87. 
Therefore, there is a redistribution in venous blood flow in favor of the ductus venosus at the expense of hepatic 
blood flow. Unlike peak velocity during ventricular systole, there were reduced or even reversed flow velocities during 
atrial contraction. One may speculate that increased end-diastolic right ventricular pressure would not influence 
ductus venosus blood flow velocities during atrial contraction, as flow is preferentially directed through the foramen 
ovale to the left atrium. However, the foramen ovale is closed during atrial contraction and blood flow velocity 
through the foramen ovale decreases to zero. 
Alterations of venous flow velocity waveforms are in a closer temporal relationship to intrauterine fetal jeopardy, 
compared to changes in arterial flow, which may occur quite early during the course of impaired placental function. 
The degree of fetal acidemia can be estimated from Doppler measurements of pulsatility in both the arterial system 
and the ductus venosus. This was shown in a cross-sectional study of 23 severely growth-retstricted fetuses, 
examining the relationship between Doppler measurements and umbilical venous blood gases obtained at 
cordocentesis 88. With moderate acidemia (pH between -2 and -4 standard deviations from the normal mean for 
gestational age), almost all fetuses had a middle cerebral artery PI below two standard deviations, whereas there was 
a wide scatter of individual results for the ductus venosus, with the majority of measurements being still within the 
reference ranges. With increasing severity of hypoxemia and acidemia, ductus venosus PIs increased and, in the most 
severe cases, velocities with atrial contraction were reduced to zero or even became negative. In a study 
investigating the association of arterial and venous Doppler findings with adverse perinatal outcome in severe fetal 
growth restriction, abnormal Doppler velocimetry of the ductus venosus was the only significant parameter associated 
with perinatal death and low 5-min Apgar scores 89. 
There are two possible mechanisms for abnormal venous blood flow waveforms: increasing right ventricular afterload 
and myocardial failure. As long as the fetus is able to compensate for a reduced placental supply by arterial 
redistribution, there is preferential myocardial oxygenation, which delays development of right heart failure, despite 
an increasing afterload. Therefore, fetal Doppler measurements show high placental resistance and arterial 
redistribution in the presence of normal venous waveforms. At this stage, the majority of fetuses have normal, 
reactive heart rate traces and biophysical profiles. Progressive changes in the venous circulation may indicate failure 
of the compensatory mechanism and herald the development of right heart failure due to myocardial hypoxia. 
Another interesting aspect has been raised by a study examining fetal central venous pressure. The pressure 
waveform from the inferior vena cava was recorded by following the movement of the vessel wall and thereby 
recording changes in the vessel lumen diameter 90. There were two groups of abnormal waveforms: one with a high 
pulsatile pattern and the other with a shallow and low pulsatile pattern. Both groups had significantly worse clinical 
outcomes compared to the normal waveform group. However, fetuses in the low pulsatile group were the most 
severely compromised, all of them showing an abnormal heart rate pattern. It was postulated that impaired 
contractility and reduced ventricular output, with a concomitantly reduced ventricular filling, were responsible for this 
waveform pattern. 

Timing of delivery 
In the management of the very preterm (before 33 weeks of gestation) growth-restricted fetus, there is uncertainty 
as to whether iatrogenic delivery should be undertaken before the development of signs of severe hypoxemia, with a 
consequent risk of prematurity-related neonatal complications, or whether delivery should be delayed, but with the 
risks of prolonged exposure to hypoxia and malnutrition imposed by a hostile intrauterine environment. A growth-
restricted fetus leading an ascetic existence from chronic starvation during the late second or early third trimester is 
capable of tolerating chronic hypoxemia without damage for much longer than a well-nourished late third-trimester 
fetus with a high energy consumption. 
Postnatal follow-up studies, at the age of 7 years, have reported that growth-restricted fetuses with abnormal aortic 
velocity waveforms had minor neurological dysfunction and impaired intellectual outcome 91,92. If these findings are 
confirmed in prospective studies with adequate controls for confounding variables, such as degrees of prematurity, 
smallness, and management, it may be advisable to deliver growth-restricted fetuses before these blood flow 
alterations occur. On the other hand, fetuses showing the brain-sparing effect did not have an increased risk for 
moderate or severe neurological handicap at the age of 2 years 93. It will always be a challenge to weigh the risks 
and benefits of early interventions against each other and it is a dynamic process, in which advancements in both 
fetal and neonatal medicine are of crucial importance for the counselling of parents and the management of these 
pregnancies. 
In the growth-restricted hypoxemic fetus, redistribution of well-oxygenated blood to vital organs, such as the brain, 
heart and adrenals, represents a compensatory mechanism to prevent fetal damage. When the reserve capacities of 
the circulatory redistribution reach their limits, fetal deterioration may occur rapidly. In clinical practice, it is 
necessary to carry out serial Doppler investigations to estimate the duration of fetal blood flow redistribution. The 
onset of abnormal venous Doppler results indicates deterioration in the fetal condition and iatrogenic delivery should 
be considered. 
In the sequence of deterioration of the condition of the growth-restricted fetus, the first pathological finding is 
increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery. This is followed by evidence of arterial redistribution in the fetal 
circulation and, subsequently, the development of pathological fetal heart rate patterns. On average, the time interval 
between the onset of abnormal umbilical arterial Doppler results and the onset of late fetal heart rate decelerations is 
about 2 weeks, but this interval differs considerably among fetuses and is shorter in late than early pregnancy and in 
the presence of hypertensive disease 31,38,84,94,95. Increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is usually 
associated with evidence of arterial redistribution in the fetal circulation; this is best monitored by examining the PI in 
the middle cerebral artery, which is decreased. 
Late fetal heart rate decelerations are preceded by approximately 2 weeks with Doppler evidence of a nadir in the 
brain-sparing effect and by a few days with an abrupt increase in impedance in the umbilical arteries 55. In the first 
stages of the disease, there is a preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle, leading to improved 
cerebral perfusion 71, but, with deterioration in the fetal condition, there are a decline in cardiac output and 
progressive worsening in cardiac function 71. Normal venous flow suggests continuing fetal compensation, whereas 
abnormal flow indicates the breakdown of hemodynamic compensatory mechanisms79. 
An abrupt increase in pulsatility of ductus venosus waveforms with loss of forward flow velocity during atrial 
contraction precede the onset of pathological fetal heart rate patterns and decreased short-term variation. However, 
the interval may be as short as a few hours in late gestation and in patients with pre-eclampsia; in contrast, during 
the second trimester, severely abnormal venous waveforms can be present for several days before intrauterine death. 

REFERENCES 
1. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Effect of gestational age on fetal and intervillous blood 
gas and acid–base values in human pregnancy. Fetal Ther 1986;1:168–75 
2. Nicolaides KH, Economides DL, Soothill PW. Blood gases and pH and lactate in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:996–1001 
3. Battaglia FC, Meschia G. An Introduction to Fetal Physiology. London: Academic Press, 1986:154–67 
4. Burd LI, Jones MD, Simmons MA. Placental production and fetal utilisation of lactate and pyruvate. Nature 
(London) 1975;254:210–1 
5. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Prenatal asphyxia, hyperlacticaemia, hypoglycaemia and 
erythroblastosis in growth retarded fetuses. Br Med J 1987;294:1051–3 
6. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH. Blood glucose and oxygen tension levels in small for gestational age fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:385–9 
7. Economides DL, Proudler A, Nicolaides KH. Plasma insulin in appropriate and small for gestational age 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:1091–4 
8. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH, GahlW, Bernardini I, Evans M. Plasma amino acids in appropriate and small 
for gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1219–27 
9. Economides DL, Crook D, Nicolaides KH. Hypertriglyceridemia and hypoxemia in small for gestational age 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:382–6 
10. Thorpe-Beeston JG, Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJM, Felton CV, McGregor AM. Thyroid function in small for 
gestational age fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1991;77:701–6 
11. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Hackett G, Campbell S. Utero-placental blood flow velocity resistance 
index and venous pO2, pCO2, pH, lactate and erythroblast count in growth retarded fetuses. Fetal Ther 
1986;l:l76–9 
12. Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Soothill PW, Campbell S. Absence of end diastolic frequencies in the umbilical 
artery: a sign of fetal hypoxia and acidosis. Br Med J 1988;297:1026–7 
13. Brosens I, Robertson WB, Dixon HG. The role of the spiral arteries in the pathogenesis of pre-eclampsia. 
Obstet Gynecol Annu 1972;1:177–91 
14. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Baird PJ. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms and placental resistance: 
pathological correlation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:31–8 
15. Peeters LL, Sheldon RE, Jones MD, Makowsky EL, Meschia G. Blood flow to fetal organs as a function of 
arterial oxygen content. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1979;135:637–46 
16. Robertson WB, Brosens I, Dixon HG. The pathological response of the vessels of the placental bed to 
hypertensive pregnancy. J Pathol Bacteriol 1967;93:581–92 
17. Sheppard BL, Bonnar J. An ultrastructural study of utero-placental spiral arteries in hypertensive and 
normotensive pregnancy and fetal growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1981;88:695–705 
18. Brosens IA. Morphological changes in the utero-placental bed in pregnancy hypertension. Clin Obstet 
Gynecol 1977;4:573–93 
19. Khong TY, De Wolf F, Robertson WB, Brosens I. Inadequate maternal vascular response to placentation in 
pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and by small-for-gestational age infants. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1986;93:1049–59 
20. Campbell S, Griffin DR, Pearce JM, Diaz-Recasens J, Cohen-Overbeek T,Wilson K, Teague MJ. New Doppler 
technique for assessing uteroplacental blood flow. Lancet 1983;26:675–7 
21. Trudinger BJ, Giles WB, Cook CM. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity-time waveforms in normal and 
complicated pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:39–45 

22. Campbell S, Pearce JM, Hackett G, Cohen-Overbeek T, Hernandez C. Qualitative assessment of 
uteroplacental blood flow: an early screening test for high risk pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68: 649– 
53 
23. Fleisher A, Schulman H, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Rochelson B, Koenigsberg M. Uterine artery Doppler 
velocimetry in pregnant women with hypertension. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1986;154:806–13 
24. Karsdorp VH, Dirks BK, van der Linden JC, van Vugt JM, Baak JP, van Geijn HP. Placenta morphology and 
absent or reversed end diastolic flow velocities in the umbilical artery: a clinical and morphometrical study. 
Placenta 1996;17:393–9 
25. Salafia CM, Pezzullo JC, Minior VK, Divon MY. Placental pathology of absent and reversed end-diastolic flow 
in growth-restricted fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:830–6 
26. Schulman H, Fleisher A, Stern W, Farmakides G, Jagani N, Blattner P. Umbilical velocity wave ratios in 
human pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1984;148:985–90 
27. Krebs C, Macara LM, Leiser R, Bowman AW, Greer IA, Kingdom JCP. Intrauterine growth restriction with 
absent end-diastolic flow velocity in the umbilical artery is associated with maldevelopment of the placental 
terminal villous tree. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;175:1534–42 
28. Todros T, Sciarrone A, Piccoli E, Guiot C, Kaufmann P, Kingdom J. Umbilical Doppler waveforms and 
placental villous angiogenesis in pregnancies complicated by fetal growth restriction. Obstet Gynecol 
1999;93:499–503 
29. Erskine RL, Ritchie JW. Umbilical artery blood flow characteristics in normal and growth retarded fetuses. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:605–10 
30. Trudinger BJ, Giles WB, Cook CM, Bombardieri J, Collins L. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms and 
placental resistance: clinical significance. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:23–30 
31. Reuwer PJ, Sijmons EA, Rietman GW, van Tiel MW, Bruinse HW. Intrauterine growth retardation: prediction 
of perinatal distress by Doppler ultrasound. Lancet 1987;22:415–18 
32. Rochelson B, Shulman H, Farmakides G, Bracero L, Ducey J, Fleisher A, Penny B,Winter D. The significance 
of absent end-diastolic velocity in umbilical artery velocity waveforms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1213– 
38 
33. Mandruzzato GP, Bogatti P, Fischer L, Gigli C. The clinical significance of absent or reverse end-diastolic flow 
in the fetal aorta and umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1991;1:192–6 
34. Brar HS, Platt LD. Reverse end-diastolic flow velocity on umbilical artery velocimetry in high risk 
pregnancies: an ominous finding with adverse pregnancy outcome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159: 559–61 
35. Karsdorp VH, van Vugt JM, van Geijn HP, Kostense PJ, Arduini D, Montenegro N, Todros T. Clinical 
significance of absent or reversed end diastolic velocity waveforms in umbilical artery. Lancet 
1994;344:1664–8 
36. Valcamonico A, Danti L, Frusca T, Soregaroli M, Zucca S, Abrami F, Tiberti A. Absent enddiastolic velocity in 
umbilical artery: risk of neonatal morbidity and brain damage. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:796–801 
37. Alfirevic Z, Neilson JP. Doppler ultrasonography in high-risk pregnancies: systematic review with meta-
analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1379–87 
38. Bekedam DJ, Visser GHA, van der Zee AGJ, Snijders RJM, Poelmann-Weesjes G. Abnormal velocity 
waveforms of the umbilical artery in growth-retarded fetuses: relationship to antepartum late heart rate 
decelerations and outcome. Early Hum Dev 1990;24:79–89 
39. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Bilardo KM, Campbell S. The relationship of fetal hypoxia in growth retardation to 
the mean blood velocity in the fetal aorta. Lancet 1986;2:1118–20 
40. Wladimiroff JW, Tonge HM, Stewart PA. Doppler ultrasound assessment of cerebral blood flow in the human 
fetus. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1986;93:471–5 
41. Tonge HM, Wladimiroff JW, Noordam MJ, van Kooten C. Blood flow velocity waveforms in the descending 
fetal aorta: comparison between normal and growth retarded pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;67:851–5 

42. van Eyck J, Wiadimiroff JW, Noordam MJ, Tonge HM, Prechtl HFR. The blood flow velocity waveformin the 
fetal descending aorta: its relationship to behavioural states in growth retarded fetus at 37–38 weeks of 
gestation. Early Hum Dev 1986;14:99–107 
43. Wladimiroff JW, vanWijngaard JAGW, Degani S, Noordam MJ, van Eijck J, Tonge HM. Cerebral and umbilical 
arterial blood flow velocity waveforms in normal and growth retarded pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 
1987;69:705–9 
44. Laurin J, Lingman G, Marsal K, Persson PH. Fetal blood flow in pregnancies complicated by intrauterine 
growth retardation. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:895–902 
45. Laurin J, Marsal K, Persson P, Lingman H. Ultrasound measurements of fetal blood flow in predicting fetal 
outcome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1987;94:940–8 
46. Arduini D, Rizzo D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Fetal blood flow velocity waveforms as predictors of growth 
retardation. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:7–10 
47. van Eyck J, Wladimiroff JW, van den Wijngaard JAGW, Noordam MJ, Prechtl HFR. The blood flow velocity 
waveformin the internal carotid artery: its relationship to behavioural states in growth retarded fetus at 37– 
38 weeks of gestation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1987;94:736–41 
48. Arabin B, Bergmann PL, Saling E. Simultaneous assessment of blood flow velocity waveforms in 
uteroplacental vessels, umbilical artery, fetal aorta and common carotid artery. Fetal Ther 1987;2: 17–26 
49. Hackett G, Campbell S, Gamsu H, Cohen-Overbeek T, Pearce JMF. Doppler studies in the growth retarded 
fetus and prediction of neonatal necrotising enterocolitis, haemorrhage, and neonatal morbidity. BrMed J 
1987;294:13–16 
50. Bilardo CM, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Mean blood velocities and impedance in the fetal descending thoracic 
aorta and common carotid artery in normal pregnancy. Early Hum Dev 1988; 18:213–21 
51. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Renal artery flow velocity waveforms in normal and hypoxemic fetuses. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:168–72 
52. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler measurements of fetal and uteroplacental circulations: 
relationship with umbilical venous blood gases measured at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;162:115–20 
53. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Bower S, Campbell S. Middle cerebral artery flow velocity waveforms in fetal 
hypoxemia. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:797–803 
54. Vyas S, Campbell S, Bower S, Nicolaides KH. Maternal abdominal pressure alters fetal cerebral blood flow. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:740–2 
55. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C. Changes of pulsatility index from fetal vessels preceding the onset of late 
decelerations in growth-retarded fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:605–10 
56. Potts P, Connors G, Gillis S, Hunse C, Richardson B. The effect of carbon dioxide on Doppler flow velocity 
waveforms in the human fetus. J Dev Physiol 1992;17:119–23 
57. Longo LD, Pearce WJ Fetal and newborn cerebral vascular responses and adaptations to hypoxia. Semin 
Perinatol 1991;15:49–57 
58. Arduini D, Rizzo G. Prediction of fetal outcome in small for gestational age fetuses: comparison of Doppler 
measurements obtained from different fetal vessels. J Perinat Med 1992;20:29–38 
59. Hecher K, Spernol R, Stettner H, Szalay S. Potential for diagnosing imminent risk to appropriateand small-
for-gestational-age fetuses by Doppler sonographic examination of umbilical and cerebral arterial blood flow. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:266–71 
60. Gramellini D, Folli MC, Raboni S, Vadora E, Merialdi A. Cerebral–umbilical Doppler ratio as a predictor of 
adverse perinatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 1992;74:416–20 
61. Arias F. Accuracy of the middle-cerebral-to-umbilical-artery resistance index ratios in the prediction of 
neonatal outcome in patients at high risk for fetal and neonatal complications. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1994;171:1541–5 

62. Akalin-Sel T, Nicolaides KH, Peacock J, Campbell S. Doppler dynamics and their complex interrelation with 
fetal oxygen pressure, carbon dioxide pressure, and pH in growth-retarded fetuses. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;84:439–44 
63. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Chaoui R, Taddei F, Arduini D, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in normally grown and growth-retarded fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1996;8:87–92 
64. Capponi A, Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Splenic artery velocity waveforms in small for gestational age 
fetuses: relationship with pH and blood gases measured in umbilical blood at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1997;176:300–7 
65. Bahado-Singh RO, Kovanci E, Jeffres A, Oz U, Deren O, Copel J, Mari G. The Doppler cerebroplacental ratio 
and perinatal outcome in intrauterine growth restriction. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:750–6 
66. Harrington K, Thompson MO, Carpenter RG, Nguyen M, Campbell S. In third trimester fetuses the ratio in 
pulsatility index between the fetal descending thoracic aorta and the middle cerebral artery may be more 
useful. Doppler fetal circulation in pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia or delivery of a small for 
gestational age baby. 2. Longitudinal analysis. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999; 106:453–66 
67. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic assessment of atrioventricular 
velocity waveforms in normal and small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1988;95:65–9 
68. Groenenberg IA, Baerts W, Hop WC, Wladimiroff JW. Relationship between fetal cardiac and extra-cardiac 
Doppler flow velocity waveforms and neonatal outcome in intrauterine growth retardation. Early Hum Dev 
1991;26:185–92 
69. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler echocardiographic evaluation of time to peak velocity in 
the aorta and pulmonary artery of small for gestational age fetuses. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:603–7 
70. Al-GhazaiiW, Chita SK, Chapman MG, Allan LD. Evidence of redistribution of cardiac output in asymmetrical 
growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:697–70 
71. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Fetal cardiac function in intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1991;165:876–82 
72. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Rinaldo D, Arduini D, Romanini C. Ventricular ejection force in growth retarded fetuses. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:247–55 
73. Reuss ML, Rudolph AM. Distribution and recirculation of umbilical and systemic venous blood flow in fetal 
lambs during hypoxia. J Dev Physiol 1980;2:71–84 
74. Tchirikov M, Eisermann K, Rybakowski C, Schröder HJ. Doppler ultrasound evaluation of ductus venosus 
blood flow during acute hypoxemia in fetal lambs. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 426–31 
75. Kiserud T, Stratford L, Hanson MA. Umbilical flow distribution to the liver and the ductus venosus: an in vitro 
investigation of the fluid dynamic mechanism in the fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:86–90 
76. Reuss ML, Rudolph AM, Dae MW. Phasic blood flow patterns in the superior and inferior venae cavae and 
umbilical vein of fetal sheep. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;145:70–8 
77. Kiserud T, Crowe C, Hanson M. Ductus venosus agenesis prevents transmission of central venous pulsations 
to the umbilical vein in fetal sheep. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:190–4 
78. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Inferior vena cava flow velocity waveforms in appropriate and small for 
gestational age fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1271–80 
79. Hecher K, Hackeloer BJ. Cardiotocogram compared to Doppler investigation of the fetal circulation in the 
premature growth-retarded fetus: longitudinal observations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:152–61 
80. Gudmundusson S, Tulzer G, Huhta JC, Marsal K. Venous Doppler in the fetus with absent end diastolic flow in 
umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:262–7 
81. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Soregaroli M, Arduini D, Romanini C. Umbilical vein pulsations and acid base status at 
cordocentesis in growth retarded fetuses with absent end diastolic velocity in umbilical artery. Biol Neonate 
1995;68:163–8 
82. Capponi A, Rizzo G, De Angelis C, Arduini D, Romanini C. Atrial natriuretic peptide levels in fetal blood in 
relation to inferior vena cava velocity waveforms. Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:242–7 

.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
83. Baschat AA, Gembruch U, Reiss I, Gortner L, Diedrich K. Demonstration of fetal coronary blood flow by 
Doppler ultrasound in relation to arterial and venous flow velocity waveforms and perinatal outcome. The 
heart sparing effect. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:162–72 
84. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C. The development of abnormal heart rate patterns after absent end-diastolic 
velocity in umbilical artery: analysis of risk factors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168: 43–50 
85. Hecher K, Campbell S, Doyle P, Harrington K, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal compromise by Doppler 
ultrasound investigation of the fetal circulation. Arterial, intracardiac, and venous blood flow velocity studies. 
Circulation 1995;91:129–38 
86. Kiserud T, Eik-Nes SH, Blaas HG, Hellevik LR, Simensen B. Ductus venosus blood velocity and the umbilical 
circulation in the seriously growth-retarded fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4: 109–14 
87. Tchirikov M, Rybakowski C, Hüneke B, Schröder HJ. Blood flow through the ductus venosus in singleton and 
multifetal pregnancies and in fetuses with intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998;178:943–9 
88. Hecher K, Snijders R, Campbell S, Nicolaides KH. Fetal venous, intracardiac, and arterial blood flow 
measurements in intrauterine growth retardation: relationship with fetal blood gases. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1995;173:10–15 
89. Ozcan T, Sbracia M, d’Ancona RL, Copel JA, Mari G. Arterial and venous Doppler velocimetry in the severely 
growth-restricted fetus and association with adverse perinatal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:39–44 
90. Mori A, Trudinger B, Mori R, Reed V, Takeda Y. The fetal central venous pressure waveform in normal 
pregnancy and in umbilical placental insufficiency. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:51–7 
91. Ley D, Laurin J, Bjerre I, Marsal K. Abnormal fetal aortic velocity waveform and minor neurological 
dysfunction at 7 years of age. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:152–9 
92. Ley D, Tideman E, Laurin J, Bjerre I, Marsal K. Abnormal fetal aortic velocity waveform and intellectual 
function at 7 years of age. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:160–5 
93. Chan FY, Pun TC, Lam P, Lam C, Lee CP, Lam YH. Fetal cerebral Doppler studies as a predictor of perinatal 
outcome and subsequent neurologic handicap. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:981–8 
94. Divon MY, Girz BA, Lieblich R, Langer O. Clinical management of the fetus with markedly diminished 
umbilical artery end-diastolic flow. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1523–7 
95. Arabin B, SiebertM, Jimenez E, Saling E. Obstetrical characteristics of a loss of end-diastolic velocities in the 
fetal aorta and/or umbilical artery using Doppler ultrasound. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1988;25:173–80 

Chapter 5 
Screening for placental insufficiency by uterine 
artery Doppler 
INTRODUCTION 
Impaired trophoblastic invasion of the maternal spiral arteries is associated with increased risk for subsequent 
development of intrauterine growth restriction, pre-eclampsia and placental abruption (see Chapter 4). A series of 
screening studies involving assessment of impedance to flow in the uterine arteries have examined the potential value 
of Doppler in identifying pregnancies at risk of the complications of impaired placentation (Figures 1–3). 
STUDIES IN SELECTED POPULATIONS 
Arduini et al. examined 60 women who had essential hypertension or renal disease or a previous pregnancy 
complicated by pregnancy-induced hypertension 1. They measured impedance to flow in the arcuate arteries at 18–20 
weeks of gestation and defined as an abnormal result a resistance index of more than 0.57. They reported that this 
test identified 64% of pregnancies that subsequently developed pregnancy-induced hypertension (Table 1). 
Figure 1: Insonation of the uterine artery at the crossover with the iliac artery. 

.. 
In a similar study, Jacobson et al. examined 91 women who had chronic hypertension, history of pre-eclampsia or 
fetal loss and a variety of other medical conditions 2. They measured impedance to flow in the arcuate arteries at 24 
weeks of gestation and defined as an abnormal result a resistance index of more than 0.57. Doppler signals could not 
be obtained in 8% of women and these pregnancies were considered to have abnormal test results. The sensitivity of 
the test for pregnancy-induced hypertension was 44% (Table 1). This study also examined prediction of intrauterine 
growth restriction (birth weight below the 10th centile for gestation), which was found in 18% of the cases and the 
sensitivity and positive predictive values were 71% and 33%, respectively. 
Zimmermann et al. examined 172 women at high risk for hypertensive disorders of pregnancy or intrauterine growth 
restriction 3. They measured impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 21–24 weeks of gestation and defined an 
abnormal result by a resistance index of more than 0.68. The prevalence of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth 
restriction was 18% and the sensitivity of increased impedance in the prediction of this complication was 56% (Table 
1). 
.. 
Figure 2: Normal flow velocity waveform from the 
uterine artery at 24 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 3: Flow velocity waveform from the uterine 
artery at 24 weeks of gestation in a pregnancy with 
impaired placentation; in early diastole there is a notch 
(yellow arrow) and in late diastole there is decreased 
flow (orange arrow). 
Table 1: Screening for pregnancy-induced hypertension in high-risk pregnancies by measurement of impedance to 
flow in the arcuate or uterine arteries 
.. 
Arduini et al., 
1987 1 
Jacobson et al., 
1990 2 
Zimmermann et al., 
1997 3 
Gestation at Doppler 18-20 weeks 24 weeks 21-24 weeks 
Patients 60 91 172 
Prevalence of pre-eclampsia 37% 29% 18% 
Sensitivity 64% 44% 56% 
Specificity 94% 73% 83% 
Positive predictive value 70% 33% 43% 
Negative predictive value 80% 81% 89% 

STUDIES IN UNSELECTED POPULATIONS 
Several studies in unselected populations have examined the value of Doppler assessment of the uteroplacental 
circulation in the prediction of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. The main characteristics and 
results of the studies are summarized in Tables 2–4. The early studies were limited by the use of continuous wave 
Doppler, which is a blind investigation. However, recent studies have used color Doppler ultrasound to assess flow in 
the uterine artery at the point where it crosses the external iliac artery, which is a more reproducible examination. 
Discrepant results between the studies may be the consequence of differences in Doppler technique for sampling and 
the definition of abnormal flow velocity waveform, differences in the populations examined (for example, the 
prevalence of pre-eclampsia varied from as low as 2% to as high as 24%), the gestational age at which women were 
studied, and different criteria for the diagnosis of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
PW, Pulsed wave; CW, Continuous wave 
.. 
Table 2: Characteristics of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies in unselected populations. Under Abnormal 
result, the values are given as resistance index (RI) equivalent 
Author n Doppler Vessel Abnormal result 
Gestational 
age 
(weeks) 
One-stage screening .. .. .. 
Campbell et al., 
19864 
126 PW arcuate arteries RI > 0.58 16-18 
Hanretty et al., 
19895 
291 CW arcuate arteries RI > 0.52 26-30 
Bewley et al., 
19916 
925 CW uterine and arcuate 
arteries 
mean RI > 95th centile 16-24 
Bower et al., 
19937 
2058 CW uterine RI > 95th centile or notch 18-22 
Valensise et al., 
19938 
272 color uterine mean RI > 0.58 22 
North et al., 
19949 
457 color uterine (placental side) RI > 0.57 19-24 
Chan et al., 
199510 
334 CW uterine arteries RI > 90th centile and bilateral 
notches 
20 
Irion et al., 
199811 
1159 color uterine (placental side) mean RI > 0.57 26 
Kurdi et al., 
199812 
946 color uterine arteries RI > 0.55 and bilateral notches 19-21 
.. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 
199013 
1014 CW/CW uterine arteries RI > 0.58 18 and 24 
Bower et al., 
199314 
2437 CW/color uterine arteries RI > 95th centile or notches 20 and 24 
Harrington et al., 
199615 
1233 CW/color uterine RI > 95th centile or notches 20 and 24 
Frusca et al., 
199716 
419 CW/color uterine arteries mean RI > 0.58 20 and 24 

One-stage screening 
Arcuate arteries 
Campbell et al. examined the arcuate arteries in 126 pregnancies at 16–18 weeks of gestation 4. Subsequently, 12% 
of cases developed pre-eclampsia and 14% developed intrauterine growth restriction. The sensitivity of increased 
impedance (resistance index of more than 0.58) in the prediction of pre-eclampsia was 67% and, for intrauterine 
growth restriction, it was also 67%; the specificity was about 65% for both. In contrast, Hanretty et al. examined the 
arcuate arteries in 291 pregnancies at 26–30 weeks of gestation and found no difference in pregnancy outcome 
between those with normal and abnormal Doppler results 5. 
Definitions of hypertensive disease (PET) used by the different studies: 
PET 1 - Blood pressure rise (systolic > 30 mmHg or diastolic > 15 mmHg) with proteinuria or generalized edema 
PET 2 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg, requiring further investigation or treatment 
PET 3 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 150 mg/24 h) 
PET 4 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 300 mg/24 h) 
PET 5 - Blood pressure .. 140/90 mmHg and proteinuria (> 300 mg/24 h) or non-proteinuric hypertension before 37 
weeks 
PET 6 - Blood pressure rise (systolic > 30 mmHg and diastolic > 25 mmHg) with proteinuria (> 500 mg/24 h) 
.. 
Table 3: Results of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies for the prediction of pre-eclampsia (PET) in 
unselected populations providing data on prevalence, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value (PPV) and 
negative predictive value (NPV) 
Author 
Outcome 
measure 
Prevalence 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
(%) 
Specificity 
(%) 
PPV 
(%) 
NPV 
(%) 
One-stage screening 
Campbell et al., 19864 PET 1 11.9 67 64 20 93 
Hanretty et al., 19895 PET 2 24.1 7 94 26 76 
Bewley et al., 19916 PET 3 4.6 24 95 20 96 
Bower et al., 19937 PET 4 2.5 75 86 12 99 
Valensise et al., 19938 PET 4 3.3 89 93 31 99 
North et al., 19949 PET 4 3.3 27 90 8 97 
Chan et al., 199510 PET 5 6.9 22 97 36 94 
Irion et al., 199811 PET 4 4.0 26 88 7 
Kurdi et al., 199812 PET 3 2.2 62 89 11 99 
..
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 199013 PET 4 1.9 63 89 10 99 
Bower et al., 199314 PET 4 1.8 78 95 22 99 
Harrington et al., 199615 PET 6 3.6 77 94 31 99 
Frusca et al., 199716 PET 4 1.9 50 92 11 99 

Uterine and arcuate arteries 
Bewley et al. calculated the average resistance index from the left and right uterine and arcuate arteries in 925 
pregnancies at 16–24 weeks gestation 6. When the resistance index was greater than the 95th centile, there was a 
10-fold increase in risk for a severe adverse outcome, defined by fetal death, placental abruption, intrauterine growth 
restriction or pre-eclampsia (prevalence 7%, sensitivity 21%, specificity 95%, positive predictive value 25%). 
However, the sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia or intrauterine growth restriction was only 24% and 19%, 
respectively with a specificity of about 95% for both. 
Uterine arteries 
Bower et al. examined the uterine arteries in 2058 pregnancies at 18–22 weeks 7. An abnormal result, defined by a 
resistance index above the 95th centile or the presence of an early diastolic notch in either of the two uterine arteries, 
was found in 16% of the pregnancies. The sensitivity of the test was 75% for pre-eclampsia and 46% for intrauterine 
growth restriction, and the specificity was 86% for both. This study highlighted the fact that abnormal Doppler results 
provide a better prediction of the more severe types of pregnancy complications. Thus, the sensitivity for mild preeclampsia 
was only 29%, but for moderate/severe disease the sensitivity was 82%. Similarly, the sensitivity for birth 
weight below the 10th centile was 38% and, for birth weight below the 5th centile, it was 46%. 
Valensise et al. examined the uterine arteries in 272 primigravidas at 22 weeks of gestation 8. An abnormal result, 
defined by increased impedance (mean resistance index of more than 0.58) was found in 9.6% of patients. The 
sensitivity of the test in predicting pre-eclampsia was 89% and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 67%; the 
specificities were 93% and 95%, respectively. The sensitivity for predicting nonproteinuric pregnancy-induced 
hypertension was 50%. 
North et al. examined the uterine arteries at 19–24 weeks of gestation in 457 nulliparous women and they found 
increased impedance (resistance index greater than 0.57 on the placental side) in 11% of cases 9. The sensitivity of 
the test for pre-eclampsia was 27%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 47%; the respective specificities 
were 90% and 91%. The test detected women with severe disease requiring delivery before 37 weeks with a 
sensitivity of 83% and specificity of 88%. 
Chan et al. examined the uterine arteries at 20 weeks of gestation in 334 patients considered to be at medium risk for 
the development of pregnancy-induced hypertension 10. A screen-positive result, defined by a mean resistance index 
Table 4: Results of uteroplacental Doppler screening studies for the prediction of intrauterine growth restriction 
(IUGR) in unselected populations providing data on prevalence, sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive value 
(PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV) 
Author 
Outcome 
measure 
Prevalence 
(%) 
Sensitivity 
(%) 
Specificity 
(%) 
PPV 
(%) 
NPV 
(%) 
One-stage screening 
Campbell et al., 19864 IUGR < 10th centile 11.9 67 64 20 93 
Hanretty et al., 19895 IUGR < 5th centile 24.1 7 94 26 76 
Bewley et al., 19916 IUGR < 5th centile 4.6 24 95 20 96 
Bower et al., 19937 IUGR < 5th centile 2.5 75 86 12 99 
Valensise et al., 19938 IUGR < 10th centile 3.3 89 93 31 99 
North et al., 19949 IUGR < 10th centile 3.3 27 90 8 97 
Irion et al., 199811 IUGR < 10th centile 4.0 26 88 7 
Kurdi et al., 199812 IUGR < 5th centile 2.2 62 89 11 99 
.. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al., 199013 IUGR < 5th centile 1.9 63 89 10 99 
Bower et al., 199314 IUGR < 5th centile 1.8 78 95 22 99 
Harrington et al., 199615 IUGR < 10th centile 3.6 77 94 31 99 
Frusca et al., 199716 IUGR < 10th centile 1.9 50 92 11 99 

above the 90th centile and the presence of diastolic notches in both uterine arteries, was found in 4.2% of cases. The 
sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 22%, with a specificity of 97% and a positive predictive value of 35.7%. 
Irion et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1159 nulliparous women at 26 weeks 11. Pre-eclampsia, intrauterine 
growth restriction and preterm delivery occurred in 4%, 11% and 7% of the pregnancies, respectively. At 26 weeks, 
increased impedance to flow (resistance index greater than 0.57) was present in 13% of cases and the sensitivity of 
the test was 26% for pre-eclampsia, 29% for growth restriction and 15% for preterm delivery. 
Kurdi et al. examined the uterine arteries by color Doppler in 946 unselected women at 19–21 weeks of gestation 12. 
In 12.4% of cases, there were bilateral notches and, in this group, the odds ratio for developing pre-eclampsia was 
12.8, and, for pre-eclampsia requiring delivery before 37 weeks, it was 52.6. When the uterine artery Doppler studies 
were normal, the odds ratio for developing pre-eclampsia was 0.11 and, for intrauterine growth restriction (birth 
weight below the 5th centile for gestation), it was 0.3. In women with bilateral notches and a mean resistance index 
greater than 0.55, the sensitivities for pre-eclampsia and fetal growth restriction were 62% and 37%, respectively 
and, for these complications requiring delivery before 37 weeks, the sensitivities were 88% for both. It was concluded 
that women with normal uterine artery Doppler studies at 20 weeks constitute a group that have a low risk of 
developing obstetric complications related to uteroplacental insufficiency, whereas women with bilateral notches have 
an increased risk of the subsequent development of such complications, in particular those requiring delivery before 
term. Consequently, the results of Doppler studies of the uterine arteries at the time of the routine 20-week anomaly 
scan may be of use in determining the type and level of antenatal care that is offered to women. 
Two-stage screening 
Steel et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1014 nulliparous women by continuous wave Doppler at 18 weeks of 
gestation and, in those with increased impedance (resistance index greater than 0.58), the Doppler studies were 
repeated at 24 weeks 13. A screen-positive result (increased impedance at 24 weeks) was found in 12% of cases, and 
the sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 63% and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 43% (< 5th 
centile). 
Bower et al. examined the uterine arteries in 2437 unselected women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 14. In those with increased impedance to flow (resistance index greater than the 95th centile or early 
diastolic notch in either of the two uterine arteries), the Doppler studies were repeated by color Doppler at 24 weeks. 
Persistently increased impedance was observed in 5.4% of the patients (compared to 16% at 20 weeks). It was 
reported that increased impedance provides good prediction of pre-eclampsia (but not of non-proteinuric pregnancy-
induced hypertension). Furthermore, in terms of low birth weight, abnormal waveforms provide better prediction of 
severe (below the 3rd centile) rather than mild (below the 10th centile) intrauterine growth restriction (Table 5). 
Harrington et al. examined the uterine arteries in 1233 unselected women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 15. In those with increased impedance (resistance index greater than the 95th centile or early diastolic 
notch in either of the uterine arteries), the Doppler studies were repeated by color Doppler at 24 weeks. Persistently 
increased impedance was observed in 8.9% of the patients. The sensitivity of the test for pre-eclampsia was 77%, 
and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 32%. Bilateral notching at 24 weeks was observed in 3.9% of patients; 
the sensitivity for pre-eclampsia was 55%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 22%. The respective 
sensitivities for those complications leading to delivery before 35 weeks were 81% and 58%. 
Table 5: The prediction of complications of pregnancy by increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 24 
weeks 14 
Prevalence Sensitivity Specificity PPV NPV 
Outcome (%) (%) (%) (%) (%) 
Pregnancy induced hypertension 6.5 
Pre-eclampsia 1.8 
SGA < 3rd centile 3.4 
SGA < 5th centile 4.9 
SGA < 10th centile 10.3 
8 94 994 
78 95 2299 
36 95 1998 
30 95 2396 
23 96 3792 
PPV, positive predictive value; NPV, negative predictive value; SGA, small for gestational age 

Frusca et al. examined the uterine arteries in 419 nulliparous women by continuous wave Doppler at 20 weeks of 
gestation 16. In those with increased mean resistance index (greater than 0.58), the uterine arteries were examined 
by color Doppler at 24 weeks. Persistently high resistance was observed in 8.6% of the patients. The sensitivity of the 
test for pre-eclampsia was 50%, and for intrauterine growth restriction it was 43%. In the group with increased 
impedance at 20 weeks but normal results at 24 weeks, the prevalence of pregnancy complications was not increased 
compared to those with normal impedance at 20 weeks. 
One-stage screening at 23 weeks 
Albaiges et al. used color Doppler to examine the uterine arteries in 1757 singleton pregnancies attending for routine 
ultrasound examination at 23 weeks 17. Increased impedance was observed in 7.3% of patients, including 5.1% with 
mean pulsatility index of more than 1.45 and 4.4% with bilateral notches. Increased pulsatility index identified 35.3% 
of women who later developed pre-eclampsia and 80% with pre-eclampsia requiring delivery before 34 weeks; the 
respective values for bilateral notches were 32.3% and 80%. The sensitivity of increased pulsatility index (PI) for 
delivery of an infant with birth weight below the 10th centile was 20.9% and 70% for birth weight below the 10th 
centile delivering before 34 weeks; the respective values for bilateral notches were 13.3% and 50%. These findings 
suggest that a one-stage color Doppler screening program at 23 weeks identifies most women who subsequently 
develop the serious complications of impaired placentation associated with delivery before 34 weeks. The screening 
results are similar if the high-risk group is defined either as those with increased PI or those with bilateral notches. 
Randomized controlled trial 
Davies et al. randomized 2600 unselected women to Doppler and non-Doppler groups 18. The Doppler studies were 
performed at 19–22 weeks and then at 32 weeks, unless the women were classified as being at high risk, in which 
case the Doppler studies were performed monthly. Continuous wave Doppler was used to obtain flow velocity 
waveforms in the lower lateral border of the uterus and an abnormal result was defined by the presence of an 
abnormal waveform bilaterally. There was a high frequency of pregnancy complications in women with abnormal 
uterine artery waveforms and it was concluded that abnormal waveforms are an indicator of subsequent fetal 
compromise. However, no improvement in neonatal outcome was demonstrated by routine Doppler screening. 
PROPHYLAXIS STUDIES 
Aspirin 
Studies in the 1980s have suggested that low-dose aspirin in high-risk women reduces the prevalence of intrauterine 
growth restriction and pre-eclampsia 19–22. However, a series of randomized studies have shown no effect on the 
complications 23–27. In most studies, there were no adverse effects from aspirin, but in one study the incidence of 
antenatal, intrapartum and postpartum bleeding was increased 26. The results of the randomized studies have been 
criticized because the women examined were mostly at low risk for placental insufficiency. 
Three randomized studies have examined the value of prophylactic aspirin in women considered to be at high risk of 
pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction because they had increased impedance in the uterine arteries (Table 
6) 28–30 
. 
McParland et al. carried out a two-stage Doppler screening study of the uterine arteries at 18–20 weeks and again at 
24 weeks 28. Those with persistently high resistance index (more than 0.58) were randomized to aspirin (75 mg/day) 
versus placebo for the remainder of the pregnancy. The difference between the aspirin and placebo groups in the 
frequency of pregnancy-induced hypertension (13% vs. 25%) did not achieve significance, but there were significant 
differences in the frequencies of pre-eclampsia (2% vs. 19%) and hypertension occurring before 37 weeks of 
gestation (0% vs. 17%). Fewer aspirin-treated than placebo-treated women had low birth weight babies (15% vs. 
25%), but this difference was not significant. The only perinatal death in the aspirin group followed a cord accident 
during labor, whereas the three perinatal deaths in the placebo group were all due to severe hypertensive disease. No 
maternal or neonatal side-effects were observed in either group. 

Table 6: Randomized studies examining the value of prophylactic asprin in women considered to be at high risk of 
pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction (GR) because they had increased impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries 
Study n Asprin Outcome 
McParland et al., 199028 100 75 mg/day pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 2.5 kg): 
asprin 2%, placebo 19% 
asprin 15%, placebo 25% (NS) 
Bower et al., 199629 60 60 mg/day severe pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 3rd centile): 
asprin 13%, placebo 38% 
asprin 26%, placebo 41% (NS) 
Morris et al., 199630 102 100 mg/day pre-eclampsia: 
GR (< 10th centile): 
asprin 8%, placebo 14% (NS) 
asprin 27%, placebo 22% (NS) 
NS, not significant 
Bower et al. carried out a two-stage Doppler screening study of the uterine arteries at 18–22 weeks and again at 24 
weeks 29. Those with persistently high resistance index or an early diastolic notch were randomized to aspirin (60 
mg/day) or placebo. There was no significant difference in the incidence of intrauterine growth restriction (aspirin 
26%, placebo 41%) or pre-eclampsia (aspirin 29%, placebo 41%), but severe pre-eclampsia (defined as a diastolic 
blood pressure of at least 110 mmHg with proteinuria of at least 300 mg/24 h or pre-eclampsia requiring treatment 
with intravenous antihypertensives and anticonvulsants) was significantly lower in the aspirin group (13%) than in the 
placebo group (38%). There was only one perinatal death and this occurred in a woman taking placebo. It was 
concluded that, in high risk pregnancy, low-dose aspirin commenced at 24 weeks may reduce the incidence of severe 
pre-eclampsia. 
Morris et al. examined the uterine arteries by color Doppler at 18 weeks of gestation in 955 nulliparous women30. An 
abnormal result (defined by a high resistance index and the presence of an ipsilateral early diastolic notch) was found 
in 186 women, and 102 of these agreed to randomization to either low-dose aspirin (100 mg/day) or placebo for the 
remainder of the pregnancy. Abnormal uterine artery flow velocity waveforms were associated with statistically 
significant increases in pre-eclampsia (11 vs. 4%), birth weight below the tenth centile (28 vs. 11%), and adverse 
pregnancy outcome (45 vs. 28%). Prophylactic aspirin therapy did not result in a significant reduction in pregnancy 
complications. It was concluded that, although abnormal uteroplacental resistance at 18 weeks of gestation is 
associated with a significant increase in adverse pregnancy outcome, low-dose aspirin does not reduce pregnancy 
complications in women with uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Antioxidants 
Impaired placental perfusion is thought to stimulate the release of pre-eclamptic factors that enter the maternal 
circulation and cause vascular endothelial dysfunction. Free oxygen radicals are possible promoters of maternal 
vascular dysfunction. It was, therefore, hypothesized that early supplementation with antioxidants may be effective in 
decreasing oxidative stress and improving vascular endothelial function, thereby preventing, or ameliorating, the 
course of pre-eclampsia 31. 
Chappellet al. identified 283 women as being at increased risk of pre-eclampsia by abnormal two-stage uterine artery 
Doppler analysis or a previous history of the disorder 32. The patients were randomly assigned to vitamin C (1000 
mg/day) and vitamin E (400 IU/day) or to placebo at 16–22 weeks of gestation. In the intention-to-treat cohort, preeclampsia 
occurred significantly more commonly in the placebo group (17% of 142 women) than in the vitamin group 
(8% of 141). These findings suggest that supplementation with vitamins C and E may be beneficial in the prevention 
of pre-eclampsia in women at increased risk of the disease. Multicenter trials are needed to show whether vitamin 
supplementation affects the occurrence of pre-eclampsia in low-risk women and to confirm these results in larger 
groups of high-risk women from different populations. 
Nitric oxide donors 
Nitric oxide, produced by the endothelium of blood vessels, is a potent vasodilator and inhibitor of platelet 
aggregation. Pre-eclampsia is associated with impaired production or function of nitric oxide and there is some 
evidence that treatment with the nitric oxide donor, glyceryl trinitrate, may reduce the prevalence or severity of this 
complication. 

Ramsay et al. examined 15 women with increased impedance in the uterine arteries (mean resistance index of more 
than 0.6 and bilateral notches) at 24–26 weeks 33 . Infusion of glyceryl trinitrate was associated with a dosedependent 
reduction in impedance to flow in the uterine arteries without a significant change in blood pressure, pulse 
rate or impedance in the umbilical artery or maternal carotid arteries. Grunewald et al. gave glyceryl trinitrate 
intravenously to women with severe pre-eclampsia and reported a decrease in maternal blood pressure and 
impedance in the umbilical artery, with no change in the impedance to flow in the uterine arteries 34. The effect of 
glyceryl trinitrate in this study may have been mediated by its placental transfer into the fetal vascular circuit, 
causing direct vasodilatation of the umbilical circulation. A similar effect has been shown using sublingual isosorbide 
dinitrate in healthy second-trimester pregnancy; umbilical and uterine artery impedances were lowered 35. 
Lees et al. reported a randomized study of 40 women with abnormal uterine artery Doppler results at 24–26 weeks of 
gestation 36. Women were randomly allocated to receive transdermal glyceryl trinitrate 5-mg patches per day or 
equivalent placebo patches for 10 weeks or until delivery. The rates of pre-eclampsia, fetal growth restriction or 
preterm delivery were not significantly different in the two groups. Furthermore, there were no significant differences 
in maternal systolic and diastolic blood pressure, mean uterine artery resistance index and fetal umbilical and midde 
cerebral artery PIs between the groups. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in both high-risk and low-risk pregnancies is associated 
with increased risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. Women with normal impedance to flow in the uterine arteries constitute a group that have a low risk of 
developing obstetric complications related to uteroplacental insufficiency. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries at 24 weeks of gestation is found in about 5% of 
pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care. The prevalence of high impedance at 20 weeks is about 2– 
3 times higher than at 24 weeks. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care 
identifies about 50% of those that subsequently develop pre-eclampsia. Abnormal Doppler is better in 
predicting severe rather than mild pre-eclampsia. The sensitivity for severe pre-eclampsia is about 75%. 
.. Increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in pregnancies attending for routine antenatal care 
identifies about 30% of those that subsequently develop intrauterine growth restriction. Abnormal Doppler 
is better in predicting severe (birth weight below the 3rd centile or growth restriction requiring delivery 
before 35 weeks) rather than mild growth restriction. 
.. In pregnancies with increased impedance to flow in the uterine arteries, prophylactic treatment with lowdose 
aspirin or vitamins C and E may reduce the risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. 

REFERENCES 
1. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Uteroplacental blood flow velocity waveforms as predictors of 
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Eur J Obstet Gynaecol Reprod Biol 1987;26:335–41 
2. Jacobson S-L, Imhof R, Manning N, Mannion V, Little D, Rey E, Redman C. The value of Doppler assessment 
of the uteroplacental circulation in predicting preeclampsia or intrauterine growth retardation. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1990;162:110–14 
3. Zimmermann P, Eirio V, Koskinen J, Kujansuu E, Ranta T. Doppler assessment of the uterine and 
uteroplacental circulation in the second trimester in pregnancies at high risk for pre-eclampsia and/or 
intrauterine growth retardation: comparison and correlation between different Doppler parameters. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:330–8 
4. Campbell S, Pearce JM, Hackett G, Cohen-Overbeek T, Hernandez C. Qualitative assessment of 
uteroplacental blood flow: early screening test for high-risk pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68: 649–53 
5. Hanretty KP, Primrose MH, Neilson JP, Whittle MJ. Pregnancy screening by Doppler uteroplacental and 
umbilical artery waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1163–7 
6. Bewley S, Cooper D, Campbell S. Doppler investigation of uteroplacental blood flow resistance in the second 
trimester: a screening study for pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1991;98:871–9 
7. Bower S, Schuchter K, Campbell S. Doppler ultrasound screening as part of routine antenatal scanning: 
prediction of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth retardation. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1993;100:989–94 
8. Valensise H, Bezzeccheri V, Rizzo G, Tranquilli AL, Garzetti GG, Romanini C. Doppler velocimetry of the 
uterine artery as a screening test for gestational hypertension. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:18–22 
9. North RA, Ferrier C, Long D, Townend K, Kincaid-Smith P. Uterine artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms in 
the second trimester for the prediction of preeclampsia and fetal growth retardation. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;83:378–86 
10. Chan FY, Pun TC, Lam C, Khoo J, Lee CP, Lam YH. Pregnancy screening by uterine artery Doppler 
velocimetry – which criterion performs best? Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:596–602 
11. Irion O, Masse J, Forest JC, Moutquin JM. Prediction of pre-eclampsia, low birthweight for gestation and 
prematurity by uterine artery blood flow velocity waveforms analysis in low risk nulliparous women. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:422–9 
12. KurdiW, Campbell S, Aquilina J, England P, Harrington K. The role of color Doppler imaging of the uterine 
arteries at 20 weeks’ gestation in stratifying antenatal care. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:339–45 
13. Steel SA, Pearce JM, McParland P, Chamberlain GV. Early Doppler ultrasound screening in prediction of 
hypertensive disorders of pregnancy. Lancet 1990;335:1548–51 
14. Bower S, Bewley S, Campbell S. Improved prediction of pre-eclampsia by two-stage screening of uterine 
arteries using the early diastolic notch and color Doppler imaging. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82: 78–83 
15. Harrington K, Cooper D, Lees C, Hecher K, Campbell S. Doppler ultrasound of the uterine arteries: the 
importance of bilateral notching in the prediction of pre-eclampsia, placental abruption or delivery of a small-
for-gestational-age baby. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:182–8 
16. Frusca T, Soregaroli M, Valcamonico A, Guandalini F, Danti L. Doppler velocimetry of the uterine arteries in 
nulliparous women. Early Hum Dev 1997;48:177–85 
17. Albaiges G, Missfelder-Lobos H, Lees C, Parra M, Nicolaides KH. One-stage screening for pregnancy 
complications by color Doppler assessment of the uterine arteries at 23 weeks’ gestation. Obstet Gynecol 
2000;in press 
18. Davies JA, Gallivan S, Spencer JAD. Randomised controlled trial of Doppler ultrasound screening of placental 
perfusion during pregnancy. Lancet 1992;340:1299–303 
19. Beaufils M, Uzan S, Donsimoni R, Colau JC. Prevention of pre-eclampsia by early antiplatelet therapy. Lancet 
1985;1:840–2 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
20. Wallenburg HCS, Dekker GA, Makovitz JW, Rotmans P. Low-dose aspirin prevents pregnancyinduced 
hypertension and pre-eclampsia in angiotensin-sensitive primigravidae. Lancet 1986;1:1–3 
21. Schiff E, Peleg E, GoldenbergM, et al. The use of aspirin to prevent pregnancy induced hypertension and 
lower the ratio of thromboxane A2 to prostacyclin in relatively high risk pregnancies. N Engl J Med 
1989;321:351–6 
22. Uzan S, Beaufils M, Breart G, et al. Prevention of fetal growth retardation with low dose aspirin: findings of 
the EPREDA trial. Lancet 1991;337:1427–31 
23. Italian Study of Aspirin in Pregnancy. Low-dose aspirin in prevention and treatment of intrauterine growth 
retardation and pregnancy-induced hypertension. Lancet 1993;341:396–400 
24. CLASP (Collaborative Low-dose Aspirin Study in Pregnancy) Collaborative Group. CLASP: a randomised trial 
of low-dose aspirin for the prevention and treatment of pre-eclampsia among 9364 pregnant women. Lancet 
1994;343:619 
25. Sibai BM, Caritis SN, Thom E, et al. Prevention of preeclampsia with low-dose aspirin in healthy, nulliparous 
pregnant women. The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development Network of Maternal–Fetal 
Medicine Units. N Engl J Med 1993;329:1213–18 
26. Golding J. A randomised trial of low dose aspirin for primiparae in pregnancy. The Jamaica Low Dose Aspirin 
Study Group. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:293–9 
27. Caritis S, Sibai B, Hauth J, et al. Low dose aspirin to prevent pre-eclampsia in women at high risk. N Engl J 
Med 1998;338:701–5 
28. McParland P, Pearce JM, Chamberlain GV. Doppler ultrasound and aspirin in recognition and prevention of 
pregnancy-induced hypertension. Lancet 1990;335:1552–5 
29. Bower SJ, Harrington KF, Schuchter K, McGirr C, Campbell S. Prediction of pre-eclampsia by abnormal 
uterine Doppler ultrasound and modification by aspirin. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103: 625–9 
30. Morris JM, Fay RA, Ellwood DA, Cook CM, Devonald KJ. A randomized controlled trial of aspirin in patients 
with abnormal uterine artery blood flow. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:74–8 
31. Schiff E, Friedman SA, Stampfer M, Kao L, Barrett PH, Sibai BM. Dietary consumption and plasma 
concentrations of vitamin E in pregnancies complicated by preeclampsia. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1996;175:1024–8 
32. Chappell LC, Seed PT, Briley AL, Kelly FJ, Lee R, Hunt BJ, Parmar K, Bewley SJ, Shennan AH, Steer PJ, 
Poston L. Effect of antioxidants on the occurrence of pre-eclampsia in women at increased risk: a 
randomised trial. Lancet 1999;354:810–16 
33. Ramsay B, de Belder A, Campbell S, Moncada S, Martin JF. A nitric oxide donor improves uterine artery 
diastolic blood flow in normal early pregnancy and in women at high risk of pre-eclampsia. Eur J Clin Invest 
1994;24:76–8 
34. Grunewald C, Kublickas M, Carlstrom K, Lunell N-O, Nisell H. Effects of nitroglycerin on the uterine and 
umbilical circulation in severe preeclampsia. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:600–4 
35. Thaler I, Amit A, Jakobi P, et al. The effect of isosorbide dinitrate on uterine artery and umbilical artery flow 
velocity waveforms at mid-pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:838–43 
36. Lees C, Valensise H, Black R, Harrington K, Byers S, Romanini C, Campbell S. The efficacy and fetalmaternal 
cardiovascular effects of transdermal glyceryl trinitrate in the prophylaxis of pre-eclampsia and its 
complications: a randomized double-blind placebo-controlled trial. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:334– 
8 

Chapter 6 
Doppler studies in red blood cell isoimmunization 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, maternal hemolytic antibodies cross the placenta and attach themselves onto 
fetal red cells, which are then destroyed in the fetal reticulo-endothelial system 1. In mild to moderate disease there 
is a compensatory increase in intramedullary erythropoiesis, and in severe disease there is recruitment of 
extramedullary erythropoietic sites, such as liver and spleen 2,3. 
Fetal blood pO2, pCO2 and pH usually remain within the normal range except in extreme anemia, when hypoxia and 
acidosis occur 4,5. The fetal blood oxygen content decreases in proportion to the degree of anemia. The fetal 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) concentration is increased and the consequent decrease in hemoglobin–oxygen affinity 
presumably improves delivery of oxygen to the tissues 6. In moderate anemia, the umbilical arterial plasma lactate 
concentration is increased but this is cleared by a single passage of fetal blood through the placenta and normal 
umbilical venous levels are maintained 7. In severe anemia, when the oxygen content is less than 2 mmol/l, the 
placental capacity for lactate clearance is exceeded and the umbilical venous concentration increases exponentially. 
These data suggest that, in the fetus, systemic metabolic acidosis can be prevented, unless the oxygen content 
decreases below the critical level of 2 mmol/l 7. When the fetal hemoglobin concentration deficit exceeds 6 g/dl, 
hydrops fetalis develops 1. This may be the result of extensive infiltration of the liver by erythropoietic tissue, leading 
to portal hypertension, due to parenchymal compression of portal vessels, and hypoproteinemia, due to impaired 
protein synthesis 8. Furthermore, at this hemoglobin concentration deficit, the oxygen content decreases below the 
critical level of 2 mmol/l. 
DIAGNOSIS AND TREATMENT OF FETAL ANEMIA 
The severity of fetal hemolysis can be predicted from: 
(1) The history of previously affected pregnancies; 
(2) The level of maternal hemolytic antibodies; 
(3) Changes in the flow velocity waveforms obtained by Doppler studies of the fetal circulation; 
(4) The altered morphometry of fetus and placenta; and 
(5) The presence of pathological fetal heart rate patterns 4. 
However, there is a wide scatter of values around the regression lines describing the associations between the degree 
of fetal anemia and the data obtained from these indirect methods of assessment. The only accurate method for 
determining the severity of the disease is blood sampling by cordocentesis and measurement of the fetal hemoglobin 
concentration. Cordocentesis should be performed for all patients with a history of severe disease and those with a 
hemolytic antibody level of more than 15 IU/ml or a titer of 1 in 128 or more 9–12. At cordocentesis, a fetal blood 
sample is first obtained and the hemoglobin concentration is determined. If this is below the normal range, the tip of 
the needle is kept in the lumen of the umbilical cord vessel and fresh, packed, rhesus-negative blood compatible with 
that of the mother is infused manually into the fetal circulation through a 10-ml syringe or a transfusion set. At the 
end of the transfusion, a further fetal blood sample is aspirated to determine the final hemoglobin concentration 13,14. 
Subsequent transfusions are given at 1–3-weekly intervals until 34–36 weeks, and their timing is based on the 
findings of non-invasive tests, such as Doppler studies, and the knowledge that, following a fetal blood transfusion, 
the mean rate of decrease in fetal hemoglobin is approximately 0.3 g/dl per day14. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Uterine artery 
In a longitudinal study of 12 fetuses, Copel et al. included the uterine artery pulsatility index (PI), together with the 
descending thoracic aortic peak velocity, in a multiple regression model to predict whether the fetal hematocrit was 
below or above 25% before the second fetal blood transfusion 15. The authors suggested that the significant 
contribution of uterine artery PI to the model could be explained by the effect of resolving placental edema after the 
correction of fetal anemia by the second transfusion. However, this is unlikely because there was no difference in 
uterine PI between hydropic and non-hydropic fetuses. 
In a series of 95 red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, impedance in the uterine artery was within the normal range and 
there was no significant association between PI and the degree of fetal anemia 16. Therefore, it is unlikely that fetal 
anemia alters the uteroplacental circulation. 
Umbilical artery 
Rightmire et al. found a significant inverse correlation between impedance to flow in the umbilical artery and fetal 
hematocrit 17. It was suggested that increased impedance to flow in the fetoplacental microcirculation may be due to 
hypoxemia-mediated capillary endothelial cell damage, or clogging of the placental capillaries by the large fetal 
erythroblasts. 
In contrast, Warren et al. reported that impedance in the umbilical artery was not abnormal in red cell isoimmunized 
pregnancies with high amniotic fluid bilirubin concentration 18. Similarly, in a study of 95 affected pregnancies, 
umbilical artery PI, measured immediately before cordocentesis, was not increased and was not associated with fetal 
anemia 16. 
Impedance to flow in fetal vessels 
Vyas et al. measured the PI in the middle cerebral artery of 24 non-hydropic fetuses from red cell isoimmunized 
pregnancies; there were no significant associations between PI and either the degree of fetal anemia or the degree of 
deficit in oxygen content measured in samples obtained by cordocentesis 12. Furthermore, in a study of 95 fetuses 
undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, the PI in both the middle cerebral artery and descending thoracic aorta 
was not significantly different from normal controls and there was no significant association between PI and fetal 
anemia 16. These findings indicate that impedance to flow is not affected by anemic hypoxia and by the alterations of 
blood constituents, such as hypoproteinemia, or red cell morphology, such as erythroblastemia, that accompany 
severe anemia 2,3. 
Fetal cardiac Doppler studies 
Meijboom et al. measured maximal and mean temporal velocity and early passive to late active ventricular filling 
phase (E/A) ratio on the atrioventricular orifices in 12 fetuses immediately before fetal blood transfusion19. There was 
a non-significant increase in both maximal and mean temporal velocities. Furthermore, there was a significant 
reversal in the E/A ratio in the flow waveforms from the tricuspid valve. In normal fetuses, these two peaks present 
an ‘M’ shape, whereas in anemic fetuses the E peak is dominant, suggesting that, in fetal anemia, there is an 
increased pre-load in the right atrium. 
Copel et al. found that anemic fetuses before any intrauterine transfusion had significantly higher stroke volumes and 
ventricular outputs than normal controls. The increase was shared proportionately by both ventricles 20. However, 
there was no significant relationship between fetal hematocrit and cardiac output. Nevertheless, extremely 
compromised fetuses demonstrated diminished cardiac function as a terminal finding. In contrast, Barss et al. 
reported a case of hydrops fetalis where the cardiac output measured before an intravascular transfusion was close to 
the normal mean for gestation 21. 
Rizzo et al. measured right and left cardiac outputs (by multiplying the tricuspid or mitral mean temporal velocities, 
valvular area and heart rate) in 12 anemic fetuses before blood transfusion by cordocentesis 22. Both left and right 
cardiac outputs were significantly higher for gestation than in 187 normal controls. Furthermore, the E/A ratios of 
both atrioventricular valves were higher than normal (Figure 1). 

Lam et al. examined 20 anemic (due to homozygous ..-thalassemia-1) fetuses at 12–13 weeks of gestation and 
reported increased peak velocities at the pulmonary valve and ascending aorta and an increased inner diameter of the 
pulmonary valve 23. The total cardiac output was increased by one-third and this was mainly due to an increase of the 
cardiac output on the right side. 
The findings of increased fetal cardiac output in anemia are in agreement with the results of animal studies and 
confirm the prediction, from a mathematical model, that, in fetal anemia, the cardiac output is increased to maintain 
an adequate oxygen delivery to the tissues 24. Possible mechanisms include, first, decreased blood viscosity leading 
to increased venous return and cardiac preload and, second, peripheral vasodilatation as a result of a fall in blood 
oxygen content and therefore reduced cardiac afterload. 
Figure 1: Flow velocity waveforms across the tricuspid valve in an anemic fetus at 28 weeks of gestation. The 
E/A ratio is increased (0.97 compared to the expected mean for gestation of 0.75). 
The high E/A is suggestive of increased cardiac preload. Since right-to-left cardiac output ratio is normal, there is no 
evidence of redistribution in cardiac output similar to that described in hypoxemic growth-restricted fetuses. These 
findings suggest that, in fetal anemia, the changes in fetal cardiac output are mainly due to low blood viscosity. An 
alternative explanation is that the symmetrical increase in cardiac output is secondary to an increase in catecholamine 
concentrations in fetal blood induced by anemia 25. 
Blood velocity in fetal arteries 
Rightmire et al. examined 21 fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies before fetal blood sampling and 
reported a significant inverse association between aortic mean blood velocity and fetal hemoglobin concentration 17. 
Similarly, from the examination of 68 previously untransfused fetuses at 17–37 weeks of gestation, Nicolaides et al. 
reported a significant association between aortic mean velocity, measured immediately before cordocentesis, and the 
degree of fetal anemia 11. However, separate analysis of non-hydropic and hydropic fetuses demonstrated that in the 
former group there was a significant positive correlation between increased velocity and fetal anemia, whilst in the 
latter group there was a significant negative correlation between these two parameters. 
In an extended series of 95 previously untransfused fetuses undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, there was a 
significant increase in aortic velocity with the degree of fetal anemia 16 . Although, in some hydropic fetuses, aortic 
velocity was decreased, in the majority of cases the velocity was increased. In an additional series of 212 fetuses that 
had a transfusion 2–3 weeks previously, the relation between aortic velocity and anemia was weaker. 
Copel et al. measured the peak velocity in 16 fetuses immediately before cordocentesis and derived a series of 
formulae for the prediction of whether the fetal hematocrit was above or below 25% 15. The best prediction was 
achieved for the untransfused fetuses. For subsequent transfusions, different formulae had to be used, presumably 
because of the different rheological properties of adult, rather than fetal, blood in the fetal circulation. 
Bilardo et al. measured mean velocity in the common carotid artery of 12 previously untransfused anemic fetuses 
immediately before cordocentesis 26. There was a significant association between the degree of fetal anemia and the 

increase in blood velocity. The authors speculated that this increase in common carotid artery velocity reflected 
increased cardiac output associated with fetal anemia, rather than a chemoreceptormediated redistribution in blood 
flow, as seen in hypoxemic growth-restricted fetuses 27. 
Vyas et al., in a study of 24 previously untransfused, non-hydropic fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies at 
18–35 weeks of gestation, reported a significant correlation between an increase in mean velocity in the middle 
cerebral artery and the degree of fetal anemia measured in samples obtained by cordocentesis 12. In an extended 
series of 95 previously untransfused fetuses undergoing cordocentesis for rhesus disease, there was a significant 
association between the increase in mean velocity in the middle cerebral artery with the degree of fetal anemia 16. In 
an additional series of 212 fetuses that had a transfusion 2–3 weeks previously, the relation between blood velocity 
and anemia was weaker 16. 
Mari et al . found a significant association between the peak systolic velocity in the middle cerebral artery and fetal 
hematocrit at cordocentesis. In a prospective study of 16 fetuses from isoimmunized pregnancies, they found that all 
the anemic fetuses had peak velocity values above the normal mean for gestation, whereas none of the fetuses with 
peak velocity below the normal mean was anemic 28. On the basis of these results, they suggested that, in the 
management of isoimmunized pregnancies, the indication for cordocentesis should be a peak systolic velocity above 
the normal mean for gestation. These results were confirmed in a multicenter study involving 111 fetuses from 
isoimmunized pregnancies; all moderately or severely anemic fetuses had increased peak velocity in the middle 
cerebral artery 29. 
Steiner et al. performed 112 fetal blood samplings by cordocentesis in 33 cases with rhesus isoimmunization and 
found that the mean peak systolic aortic velocity of anemic fetuses was significantly higher than that of unaffected 
fetuses 30. Furthermore, there was a good correlation between delta peak velocities and delta hematocrits for the first 
procedure. 
Bahado-Singh et al. examined the main splenic artery waveforms in 22 nonhydropic fetuses from red cell 
isoimmunized pregnancies 31. The deceleration angle between the line describing the average slope during the 
diastolic phase of the cycle and the vertical axis was measured and expressed in multiples of the median (MoM) for 
gestational age. A decrease in the deceleration angle was associated with fetal anemia and, at a threshold 
deceleration angle of < 0.60 MoM, the sensitivity for severe anemia (hemoglobin deficit of 5 g/dl) was 100%, with an 
8.8% false-positive rate. It was concluded that all cases of severe anemia could be identified before the development 
of hydrops, and, if, in the management of red cell isoimmunization, cordocentesis is only carried out if the 
deceleration angle is < 0.60 MoM, then the need for cordocentesis would decrease by more than 90% 31. 
Figure 2: Blood velocity in the fetal thoracic aorta (left) and middle cerebral artery (right) in red cell 
isoimmunized pregnancies plotted on the appropriate reference range (mean, 95th and 5th centiles) for 
gestation. Fetal anemia is associated with a hyperdynamic circulation. 

The findings of increased blood velocity in the fetal arteries with anemia (Figure 2 and Figure 3) are compatible with 
the data from the fetal cardiac Doppler studies. If it is assumed that, in anemia, the cross-sectional area of the fetal 
descending aorta and middle cerebral arteries does not change, the increased velocity would reflect an increase in 
both central and peripheral blood flow due to increased cardiac output. The decreased aortic velocity in some hydropic 
fetuses may be the consequence of cardiac decompensation, presumably due to the associated hypoxia and lactic 
acidosis and to the impaired venous return due to liver infiltration with hemopoietic tissue 2. 
Figure 3: Flow velocity waveform in the fetal middle cerebral artery in a severely anemic fetus at 22 weeks 
(left) and in a normal fetus (right). In fetal anemia, blood velocity is increased 
Blood velocity in fetal veins 
Rightmire et al. measured the fetal inferior vena caval time averaged mean velocity immediately before the first 
intravascular fetal blood transfusion in 19 rhesus-affected pregnancies at 18–28 weeks of gestation 17. Although the 
velocity was higher than in non-anemic controls, there was no significant correlation with fetal hematocrit. In the 
same study, the intrahepatic umbilical venous velocity was not significantly different from non-anemic controls. 
In contrast, Kirkinen et al. examined 18 rhesus isoimmunized pregnancies within 4 days before delivery and reported 
that, in anemic fetuses, the volume flow in the intrahepatic umbilical vein was significantly increased due to both 
increased blood velocity and vessel diameter 32. Similarly, Warren et al. performed serial measurements of fetal blood 
flow in 51 rhesus isoimmunized pregnancies and reported that increased flow was associated with subsequent 
development of fetal hydrops or rise in amniotic fluid bilirubin concentration. It was postulated that the increased flow 
was the result of reduced blood viscosity due to the reduced hematocrit. 
Iskaros et al. performed serial measurements of umbilical vein maximal flow velocity and found that elevated 
velocities prior to delivery were predictive of the need for exchange blood transfusion 33. They concluded that 
pregnancies with a mild or no history of fetal anemia may be monitored by a combination of serial antibody 
quantification and Doppler measurement of umbilical vein maximal flow velocities. 
Oepkes et al., in a study of 21 previously transfused fetuses from red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, reported 
increased peak systolic and time averaged maximum velocities in the ductus venosus before intravascular fetal blood 
transfusion, which returned to normal values the following day 34. It was suggested that the increase in ductus 
venosus blood flow in anemic fetuses reflects increased venous return and therefore cardiac preload. 
Hecher et al. recorded flow velocity waveforms from the ductus venosus, right hepatic vein, inferior vena cava, middle 
cerebral artery and descending thoracic aorta from 38 red cell isoimmunized pregnancies and found that only the 
velocity in the thoracic aorta was significantly associated with the degree of fetal anemia 35. Furthermore, this study 
showed that heart failure is not the primary mechanism for the development of hydrops, but rather the end-stage of 
severe anemia, because the pulsatility of venous blood flow waveforms was not increased. Hydrops may be due to 
reduced colloid osmotic pressure, hypoxia-induced endothelial damage and increased permeability. 
Severe fetal anemia, with consequent cardiac failure, is associated with a reversed ‘a’ wave in the ductus venosus. 
Under these conditions, pulsations are also present in the venous portal system (which in normal fetuses is 
characterized by a continuous flow). The pulsatile pattern present in the venous system corresponds to findings in 
children with portal hypertension 36. 
Since, in fetal anemia, resistance to flow in the fetal circulation and placenta is unchanged, an increase of umbilical 
venous blood flow is in accordance with high cardiac output and elevated arterial velocities. 

Hemodynamic changes following fetal blood transfusion 
Warren et al. and Kirkinen et al. found that, immediately after a fetal intraperitoneal blood transfusion, there was a 
temporary increase in umbilical venous blood flow and subsequent gradual decrease from above to within the normal 
range 18,32. It was suggested that the gradual decrease in flow, coinciding with resolution of fetal ascites, was the 
result of absorption of the transfused blood and correction of the fetal anemia. 
Copel et al. measured impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries and peak velocity in the descending 
thoracic aorta immediately before and 12 hours after fetal blood exchange transfusion by cordocentesis; no 
differences were found 15. 
Doppler studies of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery before and soon after intravascular top-up transfusion 
provided conflicting results. In a study of 43 cases, Bilardo et al. found no significant changes 26. In contrast, Weiner 
and Anderson and Hanretty et al. reported a significant decrease in impedance immediately after fetal blood 
transfusion in 19 and 22 fetuses, respectively 37,38. It was postulated that simple needling of fetal blood vessels 
stimulates a humoral vasodilator mechanism. Supportive evidence was provided by the finding that fetal blood levels 
of vasoactive substances with vasodilatatory effects, like prostaglandins and atrial natriuretic peptide, are increased 
after an intravascular blood transfusion 39,40. However, as Welch et al. pointed out, the possible changes in indices of 
impedance after an intrauterine transfusion may not be simply due to vasodilatation but due to the complex 
influences of altered fetal whole blood viscosity, increased number of scattering particles (red cells) and vasoactive 
compounds 41. 
Bilardo et al. performed fetal Doppler studies in 43 cases immediately before and within 30 minutes of an 
intravascular top-up transfusion 26. There was a significant decrease in mean blood velocity in both the descending 
thoracic aorta (Figure 4) and common carotid artery. Similarly, Mari et al. found that intrauterine transfusion is 
associated with a significant decrease in the peak velocity in the middle cerebral artery and this decrease is 
proportional to the increase in fetal hematocrit 42. These findings are likely to be the result of a decrease in cardiac 
output following the transfusion due to: 
(1) Increased blood hemoglobin concentration and viscosity, and consequent decrease in venous return; 
(2) Congestive heart failure due to overloading of the fetal circulation; or 
(3) Cardio-inhibition due to increased baroreceptor activity. 
Confirmatory evidence of a decrease in cardiac output following blood transfusion was provided by Rizzo et al.22. They 
measured left and right cardiac outputs before and at 15-min intervals for 2 hours after an intravascular top-up 
transfusion in 12 fetuses. After transfusion, there was a significant temporary fall in both right and left cardiac 
outputs. Furthermore, the E/A ratios in both the tricuspid and mitral valves were increased suggesting that cardiac 
preload was also increased. Within 2 hours after transfusion, both parameters had returned towards the normal 
range. The fall in cardiac output was significantly related to the amount of expansion of the fetoplacental volume due 
to the transfusion. The most likely explanation for these findings is that transfusion results in temporary 
cardiovascular overload. Animal studies have also shown that the fetal heart has very limited reserve capacity to 
increase its output in response to acute overload, and that massive increases in fetal blood volume are associated 
with a decrease in cardiac output. After transfusion, there is a rapid rate of fluid loss and this explains the rapid 
recovery in E/A ratios and cardiac output 43. 
The short-lived nature of the hemodynamic effects of intravascular transfusion can also explain the findings of Mari et 
al. who reported that the middle cerebral artery PI, internal carotid artery PI and umbilical artery PI before and the 
day after fetal transfusion were not significantly different 44. Similarly, Copel et al., in a study of cardiac output at 12 
hours after intravascular blood transfusion, found no significant differences from the pretransfusion levels 20. 

Figure 4: Flow velocity waveform in the fetal descending thoracic aorta in an anemic fetus demonstrating 
high velocities and Doppler ‘window’ for low velocities during systole (top). After blood transfusion, there is a 
decrease in peak systolic velocity and the Doppler ‘window’ has disappeared (bottom). 
.. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, placentation is normal and therefore indices of impedance to flow in 
the uterine and umbilical arteries are normal, irrespective of the severity of fetal anemia. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, normal placental perfusion results in normal fetal blood pO2, pCO2 
and pH and therefore there is no evidence of redistribution in the fetal circulation; the PI in the middle 
cerebral artery, thoracic aorta and renal arteries is normal. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, the left and right cardiac outputs and blood velocity in the umbilical 
vein, middle cerebral artery, thoracic aorta, renal arteries and the fetal venous system are ncreased in 
proportion to the degree of fetal anemia. The most likely mechanism for the hyperdynamic circulation of 
anemic fetuses is decreased blood viscosity, leading to increasedvenous return and cardiac preload. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, fetal heart failure is not the primary mechanism for the development 
of hydrops. However, severe anemia with consequent end-stage cardiac failure may be associated with high 
pulsatility or even reversed ‘a’ wave in the ductus venosus and pulsations in portal sinus. 
.. In red cell isoimmunized pregnancies, intravascular fetal blood transfusion results in temporary 
cardiovascular overload with a temporary fall in both right and left cardiac outputs. 

REFERENCES 
1. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Clewell WH, Rodeck CH, Mibashan R, Campbell S. Fetal haemoglobin 
measurement in the assessment of red cell isoimmunization. Lancet 1988;i:1073–6 
2. Nicolaides KH, Thilaganathan B, Rodeck CH, Mibashan RS. Erythroblastosis and reticulocytosis in anemic 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988;159:1063–5 
3. Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJM, Thorpe-Beeston JG, Van den Hof MC, Gosden CM, Bellingham AJ. Mean red cell 
volume in normal, small and anemic fetuses. Fetal Therapy 1989;4:1–13 
4. Nicolaides KH. Studies on fetal physiology and pathophysiology in rhesus disease. Semin Perinatol 
1989;13:328–37 
5. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Bellingham AJ. The effect of replacing fetal with adult hemoglobin on 
the blood gas and acid–base parameters in human fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158:66–9 
6. Soothill PW, Lestas AN, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Bellingham AJ. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate in normal, 
anaemic and transfused human fetuses. Clin Sci 1988;74:527–30 
7. Soothill PW, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Clewell WH, Lindridge J. Relationship of fetal hemoglobin and oxygen 
content to lactate concentration in Rh isoimmunized pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:268–71 
8. Nicolaides KH, Warenski JC, Rodeck CH. The relationship of fetal protein concentration and hemoglobin level 
to the development of hydrops in rhesus isoimmunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;152:341–4 
9. Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH. Maternal serum anti-D concentration in the assessment of rhesus 
isoimmunisation. Br Med J 2000;in press 
10. Nicolaides KH, Sadovsky G, Cetin E. Fetal heart rate patterns in red blood cell isoimmunized pregnancies. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:351–6 
11. Nicolaides KH, Bilardo CM, Campbell S. Prediction of fetal anemia by measurement of the mean blood 
velocity in the fetal aorta. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:209–12 
12. Vyas S, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler examination of the middle cerebral artery in anemic fetuses. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:1066–8 
13. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Ultrasound guided sampling of umbilical cord and 
placental blood to assess fetal wellbeing. Lancet 1986;i:1065–7 
14. Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Rodeck CH, ClewellW. Rh disease: intravascular fetal blood transfusion by 
cordocentesis. Fetal Therapy 1986;1:185–92 
15. Copel JA, Grannum PA, Belanger K, Green J, Hobbins JC. Pulsed Doppler flow velocity waveforms before and 
after intrauterine intravascular transfusion for severe erythroblastosis fetalis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1988;158:768–74 
16. Nicolaides KH, Kaminopetros P. Red-cell isoimmunization. In Pearce M, ed. Doppler Ultrasound in Perinatal 
Medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992;244–57 
17. Rightmire DA, Nicolaides KH, Rodeck CH, Campbell S. Fetal blood velocities in Rh isoimmunization: 
relationship to gestational age and to fetal hematocrit. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:233–6 
18. Warren PS, Gill RW, Fisher CC. Doppler blood flow studies in rhesus isoimmunization. Sem Perinatol 
1987;11:375–8 
19. Meijboom EJ, De Smedt MCH, Visser GHA, Jager W, Nicolaides KH. Fetal cardiac output measurements by 
Doppler echocardiography. In Proceedings of the Sixth Annual Meeting of The Society of Perinatal 
Obstetricians. San Antonio, Texas, 1986: Abstract 17 
20. Copel JA, Grannum PA, Green JJ, Hobbins JC, Kleinman CS. Fetal cardiac output in the isoimmunized 
pregnancy: a pulsed Doppler echocardiographic study of patients undergoing intravascular intrauterine 
transfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:361–4 
21. Barss VA, Doubilet PM, St.John-Sutton M, Cartier MS, Frigoletto FD. Cardiac output in a fetus with 
erythrobastosis fetalis: assessment using pulsed Doppler. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:442–4 

22. Rizzo G, Nicolaides KH, Arduini D, Campbell S. Effects of intravascular fetal blood transfusion on fetal 
intracardiac Doppler velocity waveforms. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163;569–71 
23. Lam YH, Tang MH, Lee CP, Tse HY Cardiac blood flow studies in fetuses with homozygous alpha-thalassemia-
1 at 12–13 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:48–51 
24. Huikeshoven FJ, Hope ID, Power GG, Gilbert RD, Longo LD. A comparison of sheep and human fetal oxygen 
delivery systems with use of a mathematical model. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151: 449–55 
25. Oberhoffer R, Grab D, Keckstein J, Högel J, Terinde R, Lang D. Cardiac changes in fetusessecondary to 
immune hemolytic anemia and their relation to hemoglobin and catecholamine concentrations in fetal blood. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:396–400 
26. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler studies in red cell isoimmunization. Clin Obstet Gynecol 
1989;32:719–27 
27. Bilardo CM, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. Doppler measurements of fetal and utero-placental circulation: 
relationship with umbilical venous blood gases measured at cordocentesis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;162:115–20. 
28. Mari G, Adrignolo A, Abuhamad AZ, Pirhonen J, Jones DC, Ludomirsky A, Copel JA. Diagnosis of fetal anemia 
with Doppler ultrasound in the pregnancy complicated by maternal blood group immunization. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:400–5 
29. Mari G. Noninvasive diagnosis by Doppler ultrasonography of fetal anemia due to maternal red-cell 
alloimmunization. N Engl J Med 2000; 342: 9–14 
30. Steiner H, Schaffer H, Spitzer D, Batka M, Graf AH, Staudach A. The relationship between peak velocity in 
the fetal descending aorta and hematocrit in rhesus isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:659–62 
31. Bahado-Singh R, Oz U, Deren O, Pirhonen J, Kovanci E, Copel J, Onderoglu L. A new splenic artery Doppler 
velocimetric index for prediction of severe fetal anemia associated with Rh alloimmunization. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;180:49–54 
32. Kirkinen P, Jouppila P, Eik-Nes S. Umbilical vein blood flow in rhesus isoimmunization. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1983;90:640–3 
33. Iskaros J, Kingdom J, Morrison JJ, Rodeck C. Prospective non-invasive monitoring of pregnancies complicated 
by red cell alloimmunization. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:432–7 
34. Oepkes D, Vandenbussche FP, van Bel F, Kanhai HHH. Fetal ductus venosus blood flow velocities before and 
after transfusion in red-cell alloimmunized pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1993;82;237–41 
35. Hecher K, Snijders R, Campbell S, Nicolaides K. Fetal venous, arterial, and intracardiac blood flows in red 
blood cell isoimmunization. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:122–8 
36. d’Ancona RL, Rahman F, Ozcan T, Copel JA, Mari G. The effect of intravascular blood transfusion on the flow 
velocity waveform of the portal venous system of the anemic fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997; 
10:333–7 
37. Weiner CP, Anderson TL. The acute effect of cordocentesis with or without fetal curarization and of 
intravascular transfusion upon umbilical artery waveform indices. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73: 219–24 
38. Hanretty KP, Whittle MJ, Gilmore DH, McNay MB, Howie CA, Rubin PC. The effect of intravascular transfusion 
for rhesus haemolytic disease on umbilical artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 
1989;96:960–3 
39. Weiner CP, Robillard GE. Effect of acute intravascular volume expansion on human fetal prostaglandin 
concentrations. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161:1494–7 
40. Panos MZ, Nicolaides KH, Anderson JV, Economides DL, Rees L, Williams R. Plasma atrial natriuretic peptide: 
response to intravascular blood transfusion. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 357–61 
41. Welch CR, Rodeck CH. The effect of intravascular transfusion for rhesus haemolytic disease on umbilical 
artery Doppler flow velocity waveforms. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1990;97:865–6 
42. Mari G, Rahman F, Olofsson P, Ozcan T, Copel JA. Increase of fetal hematocrit decreases the middle cerebral 
artery peak systolic velocity in pregnancies complicated by rhesus alloimmunization. J Matern Fetal Med 
1997;6:206–8 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
43. Gillbert RD. Control of fetal cardiac output during changes in blood volume. Am J Physiol 1980;238:H80–6 
44. Mari G, Moise KJ, Russell LD, Kirshon B, Stefos T, Carpenter RJ. Flow velocity waveforms of the vascular 
system in the anemic fetus before and after intravascular transfusion for severe red blood cell 
alloimunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:1060–4 

Chapter 7 
Doppler studies in pregnancies with maternal 
diabetes mellitus 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
Maternal diabetes mellitus is associated with a high risk of fetal death. In the past, before the introduction of insulin, 
the main cause of death was in association with maternal keto-acidosis, but now most fetal deaths are non-ketoacidotic 
and occur in association with fetal macrosomia. 
The major source of fetal glucose is the mother and there is a good correlation between maternal and fetal blood 
glucose concentrations 1. In pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus, the maternal hyperglycemia causes fetal 
hyperglycemia and hyperinsulinemia 2,3. Furthermore, the fetal insulin to glucose ratio is increased because 
hyperglycemia and/or the other metabolic derangements associated with maternal diabetes mellitus act on the fetal 
pancreas to cause ..-cell hyperplasia and precocious pancreatic maturation 2. Fetal hyperinsulinemia causes 
macrosomia, either directly through its anabolic effect on nutrient uptake and utilization, or indirectly through related 
peptides such as insulin-like growth factors 4. 
Although good diabetic control in the third trimester of pregnancy reduces the incidence of macrosomia, the latter is 
not always preventable. In pregnant women with diabetes mellitus, despite stringent maternal glycemic control, the 
fluctuation in maternal glucose concentration is greater than in non-diabetics and it is possible that, during short-lived 
episodes of hyperglycemia, an already hyperplastic fetal pancreas will respond with a disproportionately high release 
of insulin. 
In diabetic pregnancies, analysis of blood samples obtained by cordocentesis has demonstrated significant acidemia 
and hyperlacticemia in the absence of hypoxemia 5-7. Fetal acidemia, which may offer an explanation for the 
unexplained stillbirths of diabetic pregnancies, is likely to be the consequence of increased metabolic rate. Salvesen et 
al. performed cordocentesis in diabetic pregnancies and reported a significant association between fetal plasma insulin 
concentration and the degree of fetal acidemia 2. In pregnant sheep, chronic hyperglycemia results in increased 
aerobic and anaerobic glucose metabolism, with consequent increased oxygen consumption, lactate production and 
fall in pH and pO2 8-13. Glucose oxidation and oxygen consumption are also increased by hyperinsulinemia, and this 
effect is independent of that caused by hyperglycemia 12. Hyperlacticemia occurs because the fetus has a reduced 
capacity for oxidative metabolism and low pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. Severe hyperglycemia is characterized by 
acidemia and hypoxemia, but minor degrees of hyperglycemia are associated with acidemia in the absence of 
hypoxemia 8. However, in the presence of mild fetal hypoxemia, minor degrees of fetal hyperglycemia do result in 
severe acidosis and even fetal death 13. 
The alternative explanation for fetal acidemia in maternal diabetes mellitus is impaired placental perfusion. 
Histological studies have reported decreased villous surface area, villous edema and thickening of the basement 
membrane 14. However, the finding that acidemia is not accompanied by hypoxemia suggests that the acidemia is 
unlikely to be due to impaired placental function; in pregnancies complicated by intrauterine growth restriction due to 
uteroplacental insufficiency, acidemia is accompanied by hypoxemia (see Chapter 4 ). 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE UMBILICAL AND UTERINE ARTERIES 
The aim of Doppler ultrasound studies of the umbilical and uterine arteries in diabetic pregnancies is to determine 
whether impedance to flow is related to maternal glycemic control and whether impedance is increased in patients 
with diabetic nephropathy and vasculopathy. This section also examines whether impedance in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries can provide useful prediction of subsequent development of preeclampsia and/or intrauterine 
growth restriction in the same way that it does in nondiabetic pregnancies. 

Olofsson et al. examined 40 diabetic pregnancies and reported that the volume blood flow in the fetal aorta and 
umbilical vein and the pulsatility index (PI) in the umbilical artery were higher in diabetic than in non-diabetic 
pregnancies 15. There was no significant association between these indices and the degree of diabetic control or fetal 
size, but the high umbilical artery PI and high aortic volume flow occurred in fetuses who later developed distress in 
labor. It was suggested that, in some diabetic pregnancies, there is increased placental vascular resistance with a 
compensatory increase in volume flow. A high umbilical artery PI cannot be considered characteristic of diabetic 
pregnancy, but fetal distress might be more common in diabetic pregnancy15. More recently, Ursem et al. examined 
16 women with well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus at 12–21 weeks of gestation and reported 
increased fetal heart rate variability and umbilical artery peak systolic velocity, but normal fetal heart rate and 
umbilical artery time-averaged velocity 16. It was suggested that fetal heart rate variability and umbilical artery peak 
systolic velocity may be markers for fetal cardiovascular homeostasis in pregnancies complicated by insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus 16. 
Bracero et al. performed Doppler studies of the umbilical artery during the third trimester of pregnancy in 43 women 
with diabetes mellitus 17. They found a significant association between impedance to flow and maternal serum 
glucose concentration. Furthermore, high impedance was associated with an increased number of stillbirths and 
neonatal morbidity. It was suggested that maternal hyperglycemia causes placental vasoconstriction by impairing 
prostacyclin production 17. In another study, Bracero et al. evaluated 207 singleton pregnancies complicated by 
maternal diabetes mellitus within 1 week of delivery. In 36% of cases, there was an adverse outcome (defined as 
delivery before 37 weeks, or fetal risk requiring Cesarean delivery, or fetal growth restriction, or neonatal 
hypocalcemia, hypoglycemia, hyperbilirubinemia, or respiratory distress syndrome) 18. The relative risk of adverse 
outcome was 2.6 for increased impedance in the umbilical artery, which was higher than the risk of 1.7 for abnormal 
biophysical profile score or a non-reactive non-stress test18. Bracero et al. also measured impedance to flow in the 
left and right uterine arteries in 265 women with singleton pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus within 1 
week before delivery 19. The higher the difference in impedance between the two uterine arteries, the greater was the 
risk of adverse pregnancy outcome, but there was a considerable overlap in discordance between the good and 
adverse outcome groups. 
Landon et al. performed serial measurements of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 35 insulin-dependent 
diabetic women, during the second and third trimesters, and found no significant association between this index and 
maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin level 20. Women with vascular disease had a higher impedance in 
the umbilical artery compared to those with uncomplicated diabetes. Increased impedance in women with vascular 
disease was associated with subsequent development of intrauterine growth restriction and, in those with no vascular 
disease, with the development of pre-eclampsia. Similarly, Dicker et a. carried out Doppler examinations of the 
umbilical artery in 108 pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and found no significant association 
between impedance to flow and maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin levels 21. Increased umbilical 
artery impedance was associated with the subsequent development of pre-eclampsia (in women without 
vasculopathy) and development of intrauterine growth restriction in those with vasculopathy. 
Reece et al. examined 56 diabetic pregnancies and reported that the umbilical artery PI was higher in patients with 
diabetic vasculopathy than in non-diabetic controls or in diabetic patients without vasculopathy. Intrauterine growth 
restriction and neonatal metabolic complications were also significantly correlated with elevated umbilical artery PI 22. 
There was, however, no correlation between Doppler indices and maternal glucose values, although most were within 
a euglycemic range. 
Ishimatsu et al. performed Doppler studies of the umbilical artery during the third trimester of pregnancy in 16 
women with diabetes mellitus. They found no significant association between impedance to flow and maternal serum 
glucose or fructosamine levels 23. However, in two patients with serum glucose levels of over 300 mg/dl, impedance 
was increased and returned to the normal range when the serum glucose level decreased to below 200 mg/dl. 
Johnstone et al. measured impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 128 pregnancies complicated by diabetes 
mellitus 24. There was no significant association between impedance to flow and either short-term or long-term 
glycemic control. Although, in some cases that subsequently developed fetal distress, there was increased impedance, 
fetal compromise also occurred in association with normal impedance. 
Zimmermann et al. carried out serial measurements of impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in 53 women with 
insulin-dependent diabetes. Impedance was within the normal range and there was no significant association with 
maternal blood glucose or glycosylated hemoglobin level or maternal vascular disease 25. This group also measured 
impedance to flow in the uterine arteries in 43 pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus and 
found no significant differences from normalor significant associations with short-and long-term glycemic control, 

maternal vasculopathy, or diabetes-specific fetal morbidity 26. 
The effectiveness of screening for the complications of impaired placentation by uterine artery Doppler in diabetic 
pregnancies may be similar to that in non-diabetics 27. Thus, Haddad et al. measured impedance to flow in the 
uterine arteries of 37 diabetic pregnancies and reported that increased impedance identified 45% of those that 
subsequently developed pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. Barth et al. measured impedance to 
flow in the uterine arcuate artery system beneath the placenta within 8 days of delivery in 47 patients with insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus and reported increased impedance in those cases where histological examination of the 
decidual arteries after delivery showed severe vasculopathy 28. The study confirmed a relationship between arcuate 
artery Doppler indices and downstream decidual vascular pathology. Kofinas et al. examined 31 pregnant women with 
gestational diabetes and 34 with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Impedance to flow in the umbilical and uterine 
arteries during the third trimester was not different between patients with good glycemic control and those with poor 
control 29. In contrast, impedance was significantly higher in patients with pre-eclampsia than in those without preeclampsia, 
regardless of glycemic control. It was concluded that Doppler investigation may be clinically useful only in 
diabetic pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia. 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE FETAL MIDDLE CEREBRAL ARTERY AND AORTA 
Diabetes mellitus is associated with an increased risk of fetal death, and data from cordocentesis have demonstrated 
an association between maternal hyperglycemia and fetal acidemia. The aim of Doppler ultrasound studies of the fetal 
middle cerebral artery and aorta is to examine whether the compromised fetus of a diabetic pregnancy demonstrates 
the same features of circulatory redistribution as seen in fetal hypoxemia due to uteroplacental insufficiency. 
Salvesen et al. carried out a longitudinal Doppler study in 48 relatively well-controlled diabetic pregnancies 30. With 
the exception of three pregnancies complicated by pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction, the 
uteroplacental and fetoplacental circulations were essentially normal. Thus, impedance to flow in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and the PI or mean velocity in the middle cerebral artery or descending thoracic aorta were not 
significantly different from normal. It is of particular interest that normal Doppler results in the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and the fetal middle cerebral artery and aorta were also observed in five of six patients with diabetic 
nephropathy 31. In all cases, iatrogenic delivery was carried out at 27–36 weeks because of worsening maternal 
proteinuric hypertension. Cordocentesis, performed within 24 hours before delivery, demonstrated these fetuses to be 
hypoxemic and acidemic. It was concluded that fetal acidemia in pregnancies complicated by diabetic nephropathy is 
not a consequence of impaired placental perfusion, and the degree of metabolic derangement may be obscured by the 
apparent normal growth of these fetuses and their failure to demonstrate blood flow redistribution. Another 
conclusion from this study is that uterine artery Doppler may be useful in distinguishing true pre-eclampsia (increased 
PI) from renal proteinuria and hypertension (normal PI). 
Ishimatsu et al. measured impedance to flow in the fetal middle cerebral artery in 43 pregnant women with well- 
Table 1: Doppler studies 
Author Doppler study 
Diabetes vs. 
non-diabetes 
Diabetic 
vasculopathy 
Diabetic 
control 
Olofsson et al., 198715 umbilical increased .. no correlation 
Bracero et al., 198617 umbilical increased .. good correlation 
Landon et al., 198920 umbilical .. increased no correlation 
Reece et al., 199422 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Ishimatsu et al., 199123 umbilical .. increased no correlation 
Johnstone et al., 199224 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Zimmermann et al., 199225 umbilical normal normal no correlation 
Kofinas et al., 199129 umbilical .. .. no correlation 
Salvesen et al., 199330 umbilical normal normal no correlation 
Kofinas et al., 199129 uterine .. .. no correlation 
Salvesen et al., 199330 uterine normal normal no correlation 
Zimmermann et al., 199426 uterine normal normal no correlation 

controlled diabetes mellitus at 24–38 weeks of gestation 32. The PI was within the normal range and was not 
significantly associated with maternal serum glucose, fructosamine or glycosylated hemoglobin level. Reece et al. 
examined 30 pregnant women with insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus at 2-week intervals between 18 and 38 weeks 
of gestation 33. They found no significant association between impedance to flow in the fetal aorta and fetal outcome. 
They concluded that fetal aortic Doppler velocimetry cannot be used as a means of assessing impending fetal 
compromise in offspring of diabetic mothers. 
DOPPLER STUDIES OF THE FETAL HEART 
Infants of diabetic mothers are at increased risk of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This disease is characterized by a 
thickening of the interventricular septum and ventricular walls and by systolic and diastolic dysfunction, which may 
result in congestive heart failure. 
Figure 1: Real-time and M-mode tracing of a fetus of an insulin-dependent diabetic mother at 36 weeks of 
gestation. The interventricular wall septal thickness is increased (10 mm compared to the expected mean of 5 
mm for this gestation) 
Figure 2: Flow velocity waveforms across the tricuspid valve in a fetus of an insulin-dependent diabetic 
mother at 32 weeks of gestation. The E/A ratio is decreased (0.48 compared to expected mean of 0.77 for 
this gestation) 
Rizzo et al. examined 40 well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 20–38 weeks of gestation and 
reported a significant increase in fetal interventricular septal thickness (Figure 1) and an associated decrease in the 
ratio between the peak velocities during early passive ventricular filling and active atrial filling at the level of the 
atrioventricular valves 34. These findings, which were unrelated to maternal glycosylated hemoglobin levels, suggest 
that, even in well-controlled maternal diabetes mellitus, there is fetal interventricular septal hypertrophy that affects 
cardiac diastolic function. A longitudinal study of 14 well-controlled, insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 20–36 
weeks of gestation confirmed the presence of hypertrophy in the interventricular septum and the right and left 

ventricular walls, as well as abnormal development of cardiac function – decrease in the ratio between early and 
active ventricular filling at the level of both the mitral and tricuspid valves (Figure 2) 35. The cardiomegaly and 
cardiac dysfuncion increased with gestation but they were evident from as early as 20 weeks. Since the diabetic 
control in these pregnancies was good, it was suggested that fetal cardiomegaly may be the consequence of increased 
insulin sensitivity of the fetal myocardium. This hypothesis is supported by the data of Thorsson and Hintz, showing a 
reduction from fetus to adult in the number and affinity of insulin receptors 36. 
The lower ratio between early and active ventricular filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves in fetuses of 
diabetic mothers may be due to impaired development of ventricular compliance, possibly secondary to cardiac wall 
thickening. In addition, the ratio may be influenced by reduced preload, as a consequence of the polycythemia, and 
therefore increased blood viscosity in fetuses of diabetic mothers. Thus, in a Doppler study of 37 fetuses of insulin-
dependent diabetic mothers, immediately before an elective Cesarean section, the ratio between early and active 
ventricular filling was significantly and independently affected by both the interventricular wall thickness and fetal 
hematocrit 37. 
Weber et al. performed serial evaluations of cardiac growth and ventricular diastolic filling using M-mode and Doppler 
echocardiography at 20–40 weeks of gestation and at 48–72 hours after birth in 11 fetuses of non-diabetic mothers 
and nine fetuses of well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic mothers. Cardiac growth and birth weight in the two 
groups were similar 38. Ventricular diastolic filling increased with gestation in both groups but the increase was 
delayed in the diabetic group. Tsyvian et al. examined 15 third-trimester pregnancies complicated by insulin-
dependent maternal diabetes mellitus and reported a delay in fetal left ventricular filling, which may reflect changes in 
myocardial relaxation 39. Weiner et al. examined 31 well-controlled insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies at 22–40 
weeks of gestation and reported that, after 34 weeks, in the fetuses of diabetic pregnancies, compared to normal 
pregnancies, there was a lower ratio between the peak velocities during early passive ventricular filling and active 
atrial filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves 40. 
Macklon et al. examined well-controlled diabetic pregnancies at 18–20 weeks of gestation and reported that the fetal 
intraventricular septal thickness was increased, but transvalvular peak flow velocities and the duration of ventricular 
ejection in the fetal heart were not significantly different from normal 41. It was concluded that, in fetuses of well-
controlled diabetic pregnancies, altered cardiac morphology is evident early in pregnancy, before any obvious 
alteration in cardiac function. Rizzo et al. examined 27 insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies from 12 weeks of 
gestation 42. In the fetuses of diabetic mothers, compared to normal pregnancies, there was a lower ratio between 
early and active ventricular filling at the level of the atrioventricular valves, a higher percentage of reverse flow 
during atrial contraction in the inferior vena cava, and a higher proportion of cases with pulsations in the umbilical 
vein. These findings, demonstrating impaired development of cardiac and venous blood flow patterns from as early as 
at 12 weeks of gestation, were more evident in pregnancies with poorer glycemic control but they were also found in 
the presence of good metabolic control. 
Peak velocities at the level of the aortic and pulmonary outflow tracts were significantly higher in fetuses of diabetic 
mothers than in normal fetuses 34. The most likely explanations for the increased peak velocities are increased 
cardiac contractility (also found in postnatal studies in infants of diabetic mothers) and increased intracardiac flow 
volume due to the relatively large size of such fetuses, since cardiac output is a function of fetal weight. These 
abnormalities in cardiac hemodynamics also impair the venous circulation. Rizzo et al. carried out a cross-sectional 
study of 62 third-trimester fetuses in insulin-dependent diabetic pregnancies and reported that increased preload 
index in the inferior vena cava (in the absence of alterations in fetal peripheral vessels) was associated with a lower 
umbilical arterial blood pH and higher hematocrit at birth, as well as increased neonatal morbidity 43. These findings 
suggest that the mechanisms inducing fetal distress in diabetic pregnancies (where the development of hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy plays a pivotal role in the genesis of fetal distress) are different from those in fetuses with 
intrauterine growth restriction, where the change in cardiac function is secondary to the alteration in peripheral 
resistance. 
In neonates from normal pregnancies, the ratio between early and active ventricular filling at the level of the 
atrioventricular valves increases during the first few days of postnatal life; the early wave is usually higher than the 
active one, resulting in a ratio between early and active ventricular filling that is higher than one. In newborns of 
diabetic mothers, there are no changes in this ratio during the first 5 days of life and its value remains lower than 
one44. These anomalies might explain the relatively high incidence of transitory tachypnea and pulmonary edema in 
neonates from diabetic pregnancies. The cardiac hypertrophy of fetuses of diabetic mothers resolves during the first 
year of postnatal life. However, it is possible that the cardiac hypertrophy and dysfunction observed in intrauterine life 
may affect cardiac function in adult life. 

CONCLUSIONS 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries is not related to either 
short-term or long-term maternal glycemic control. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is normal, even in patients with 
nephropathy and vasculopathy. However, increased impedance, as in non-diabetic pregnancies, identifies a 
group at high risk for subsequent development of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is associated with the 
development of pre-eclampsia and/or intrauterine growth restriction. There is contradictory evidence 
concerning a possible increase in impedance in pregnancies with maternal vasculopathy. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, there is no evidence of redistribution in the fetal circulation with decreased PI 
in the middle cerebral artery and increased PI in the descending thoracic aorta. This is presumably because, 
in diabetes, there may be acute fluctuations in fetal blood pH, since the latter is associated with the 
maternal glucose concentration. Furthermore, unlike intrauterine growth restriction, in diabetes metabolic 
derangements in the fetus may lead to acidemia without hypoxemia. Therefore, the classic redistribution 
seen in fetal hypoxemia due to uteroplacental insufficiency may not occur even in severely compromised 
fetuses, and it is therefore important not to be misled by apparently normal fetal Doppler results. 
.. In maternal diabetes mellitus, the fetus is at increased risk of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. This disease is 
characterized by a thickening of the interventricular septum and cardiac dysfunction, which may be evident 
from as early as 12 weeks of gestation. 

REFERENCES 
1. Economides DL, Nicolaides KH. Blood glucose and oxygen tension in small for gestational age fetuses. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:385–9 
2. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Proudler A, Crook D, Nicolaides KH. Fetal pancreatic b-cell function in 
pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:1363–9 
3. Pedersen J. The Pregnant Diabetic and Her Newborn, 2nd edn. Baltimore: Williams and Wilkins, 1977:211– 
20 
4. Wang HS, Chard T. The role of insulin-like growth factor-I and insulin-like growth factor-binding protein-1 in 
the control of human fetal growth. J Endocrinol 1992;132:11–19 
5. Bradley RJ, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal acidosis and hyperlacticaemia diagnosed by cordocentesis in 
pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Diabet Med 1991;8:464–8 
6. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal polycythemia and thrombocytopenia in pregnancies 
complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:1287–92 
7. Salvesen DR, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal plasma erythropoietin in pregnancies complicated by 
maternal diabetes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:88–94 
8. Robillard JE, Sessions C, Kennedy RL, Smith FG. Metabolic effect of constant hypertonic glucose infusion in 
well oxygenated fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1978;130:199–203 
9. Phillips AF, Dubin JW, Matty PJ, Raye JR. Arterial hypoxemia and hyperinsulinemia in the chronically 
hyperglycemic fetal lamb. Pediatr Res 1982;16:653–8 
10. Phillips AF, Porte PJ, Stabinsky S, Rosenkrantz TS, Raye JR. Effects of chronic fetal hyperglycemia upon 
oxygen consumption in the ovine uterus and conceptus. J Clin Invest 1984;74:279–86 
11. Phillips AF, Rosenkrantz TS, Porte PJ, Raye JR. The effect of chronic fetal hyperglycemia on substrate uptake 
by the ovine fetus and conceptus. Pediatr Res 1985;19:659–66 
12. HayWW, DiGiacomo JE, Meznarich HK, Zerbe G. Effects of glucose and insulin on fetal glucose oxidation and 
oxygen consumption. Am J Physiol 1989;256:E704–13 
13. Shelly HJ, Bassett JM, Milner RDG. Control of carbohydrate metabolism in the fetus and newborn. Br Med 
Bull 1975;31:37–43 
14. Fox H. Pathology of the placenta in maternal diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 1969;34:792–8 
15. Olofsson P, Lingman G, Marsal K, Sjoberg NO. Fetal blood flow in diabetic pregnancy. J Perinat Med 
1987;15:545–53 
16. Ursem NT, Clark EB, Keller BB, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal heart rate and umbilical artery velocity variability in 
pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:312– 
16 
17. Bracero L, Schulman H, Fleischer A, Farmakides G, Rochelson B. Umbilical artery velocimetry in diabetes and 
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1986;68:654–8 
18. Bracero LA, Figueroa R, Byrne DW, Han HJ. Comparison of umbilical Doppler velocimetry, nonstress testing, 
and biophysical profile in pregnancies complicated by diabetes. J Ultrasound Med 1996;15:301–8 
19. Bracero LA, Evanco J, ByrneDW. Doppler velocimetry discordancy of the uterine arteries in pregnancies 
complicated by diabetes. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:387–93 
20. Landon MB, Gabbe SG, Bruner JP, Ludmir J. Doppler umbilical artery velocimetry in pregnancy complicated 
by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:961–5 
21. Dicker D, Goldman JA, Yeshaya A, Peleg D. Umbilical artery velocimetry in insulin dependent diabetes 
mellitus (IDDM) pregnancies. J Perinat Med 1990;18:391–5 
22. Reece EA, Hagay Z, Assimakopoulos E, Moroder W, Gabrielli S, DeGennaro N, Homko C, O’Connor T, 
Wiznitzer A. Diabetes mellitus in pregnancy and the assessment of umbilical artery waveforms using pulsed 
Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1994;13:73–80 

23. Ishimatsu J, Yoshimura O, Manabe A, Hotta M, Matsunaga T, Matsuzaki T, Tetsuou M, Hamada T. Umbilical 
artery blood flow velocity waveforms in pregnancy complicated by diabetes mellitus. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
1991;248:123–7 
24. Johnstone FD, Steel JM, Haddad NG, Hoskins PR, Greer IA, Chambers S. Doppler umbilical artery flow 
velocity waveforms in diabetic pregnancy. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;99:135–40 
25. Zimmermann P, Kujansuu E, Tuimala R. Doppler velocimetry of the umbilical artery in pregnancies 
complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1992;47: 85–93 
26. Zimmermann P, Kujansuu E, Tuimala R. Doppler flow velocimetry of the uterine and uteroplacental 
circulation in pregnancies complicated by insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. J Perinat Med 1994;22:137– 
47 
27. Haddad B, Uzan M, Tchobroutsky C, Uzan S, Papiernik-Berkhauer E. Predictive value of uterine Doppler 
waveform during pregnancies complicated by diabetes. Fetal Diagn Ther 1993;8:119–25 
28. BarthWHJr, Genest DR, Riley LE, Frigoletto FD Jr, Benacerraf BR, Greene MF. Uterine arcuate artery Doppler 
and decidual microvascular pathology in pregnancies complicated by type I diabetes mellitus. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1996;8:98–103 
29. Kofinas AD, Penry M, Swain M. Uteroplacental Doppler flow velocity waveform analysis correlatespoorly with 
glycemic control in diabetic pregnant women. Am J Perinatol 1991;8:273–7 
30. Salvesen DR, Higueras MT, Mansur CA, Freeman J, Brudenell JM, Nicolaides KH. Placental and fetal Doppler 
velocimetry in pregnancies complicated by maternal diabetes mellitus. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:645– 
52 
31. Salvesen DR, Higueras MT, Brudenell JM, Drury PL, Nicolaides KH. Doppler velocimetry and fetal heart rate 
studies in nephropathic diabetics. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1297–303 
32. Ishimatsu J, Matsuzaki T, Yakushiji M, Hamada T. Blood flow velocity waveforms of the fetal middle cerebral 
artery in pregnancies complicated by diabetes mellitus. Kurume Med J 1995;42: 161–6 
33. Reece EA, Hagay Z, Moroder W, DeGennaro N, Homko C, Wiznitzer A. Is there a correlation between aortic 
Doppler velocimetric findings in diabetic pregnant women and fetal outcome? J Ultrasound Med 
1996;15:437–40 
34. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Cardiac function in fetuses of type I diabetic mothers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1991;164:837–43 
35. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Accelerated cardiac growth and abnormal cardiac flow in fetuses of type I 
diabetic mothers. Obstet Gynecol 1992;80:369–76 
36. Thorsson AV, Hintz RL. Insulin receptors in the newborn: Increase in receptor affinity and number. N Engl J 
Med 1977:297;908–12 
37. Rizzo G, Pietropolli A, Capponi A, Cacciatore C, Arduini D, Romanini C. Analysis of factors influencing 
ventricular filling patterns in fetuses of type I diabetic mothers. J Perinat Med 1994;22:149–57 
38. Weber HS, Botti JJ, Baylen BG. Sequential longitudinal evaluation of cardiac growth and ventricular diastolic 
filling in fetuses of well controlled diabetic mothers. Pediatr Cardiol 1994;15:184–9 
39. Tsyvian P, Malkin K, Artemieva O, Wladimiroff JW. Assessment of left ventricular filling in normally grown 
fetuses, growth-restricted fetuses and fetuses of diabetic mothers. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:33–8 
40. Weiner Z, Zloczower M, Lerner A, Zimmer E, Itskovitz-Eldor J. Cardiac compliance in fetuses of diabetic 
women. Obstet Gynecol 1999;93:948–51 
41. Macklon NS, Hop WC, Wladimiroff JW. Fetal cardiac function and septal thickness in diabetic pregnancy: a 
controlled observational and reproducibility study. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105: 661–6 
42. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Capponi A, Romanini C. Cardiac and venous blood flow in fetuses of insulin-dependent 
diabetic mothers: evidence of abnormal hemodynamics in early gestation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1995;173:1775–81 
43. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Angelini E, Mazzoleni A. Romanini C. Inferior cava velocity waveformpredict neonatal 
complications in fetuses of insulin dependent diabetic mothers. In press 

.... 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
44. Mace S, Hirschfeld SS, Riggs T, Faranoff AA, Mecketz IR. Echocardiographic abnormalities in infants of 
diabetic mothers. J Pediatr 1979;95:1013–19 

Chapter 8 
Doppler studies in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY 
Preterm delivery occurs in less than 10% of pregnancies but accounts for more than 70% of all neonatal deaths. 
Approximately one-third of preterm deliveries are associated with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and, in a high 
proportion of such cases, the underlying cause may be ascending infection from the lower genital tract. Thus, positive 
amniotic fluid cultures, with organisms commonly found in the vagina, are present in about one-third of cases with 
preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and in one-third of these there is fetal bacteremia. 
In a study of 69 pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, the diagnosis of intrauterine infection was based on 
the results of culture of amniotic fluid and fetal blood obtained by amniocentesis and cordocentesis, respectively 1. In 
patients with fetal bacteremia, there was spontaneous delivery within 5 days of amniorrhexis, whereas, in those with 
negative fetal blood and amniotic fluid cultures, the interval between amniorrhexis and delivery was prolonged by up 
to 5 months and subsequent cultures of blood obtained from the umbilical cord at delivery or from the neonates were 
negative 1. These findings suggest that, first, infection is one of the causes rather than the consequence of 
amniorrhexis, and, second, in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, infection may be the cause of subsequent preterm labor 
and delivery. The likely mechanism for the link between infection and labor is infection-mediated release of cytokines 
which stimulate the production of prostaglandins that induce uterine contractions 2,3. 
In pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, there are essentially two causes of perinatal death: 
prematurity and pulmonary hypoplasia. In cases with intrauterine infection, delivery occurs within a few days and 
therefore survival depends on the gestation at amniorrhexis 1. Postnatal survival increases from less than 10% before 
24 weeks to more than 90% by 30 weeks. In those patients with no infection, pregnancy may be prolonged by 
several weeks and, in these cases, there is a risk of postnatal death due to pulmonary hypoplasia 4. The risk of death 
is inversely related to the gestation at amniorrhexis and decreases from approximately 50% for those with 
amniorrhexis before 20 weeks, to 20% for those with amniorrhexis at 20–24 weeks and to less than 5% for 
amniorrhexis after 24 weeks. Consequently, in the management of pregnancies complicated by amniorrhexis, the 
major issue is prediction of intrauterine infection and pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Fetal blood gases 
Cordocentesis in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis has demonstrated that the mean umbilical venous 
blood pO2 and pH are not significantly different from the appropriate normal mean for gestation, and there are no 
significant differences between those with positive or negative fetal blood and amniotic fluid cultures 5. These findings 
suggest that, in the presence of intrauterine infection, fetal oxygenation is not impaired. 
DOPPLER STUDIES 
Prediction of intrauterine infection 
The rationale for the use of Doppler in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis is that infection of the 
amniotic fluid and choriodecidua causes constriction of the umbilical cord and chorionic vessels and may consequently 
impair fetal perfusion 6-12. 
Doppler studies of the umbilical arterial circulation in pregnancies with chorioamnionitis have provided conflicting 
results, with some reporting an increase and others no change in impedance to flow. Thus, in two cross-sectional 
studies, involving a total of 35 patients with clinical chorioamnionitis, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries was 
always normal 13,14. In a longitudinal study of 22 patients with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis and umbilical 
vasculitis, although there was an increase of impedance in the umbilical arteries 24 hours before delivery compared to 
previous measurements, impedance had remained within the normal range15. In another longitudinal study of uterine 

and umbilical arteries in 60 patients with amniorrhexis, including 12 who developed clinical chorioamnionitis, there 
was no significant increase in impedance, even in measurements taken within 24 hours before delivery 16. 
Carroll et al. performed Doppler studies immediately before cordocentesis and amniocentesis for bacteriological 
studies in 69 pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis 5. The mean pulsatility indices in the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and in the fetal middle cerebral arteries and thoracic aorta were not significantly different from the 
appropriate normal mean for gestation and there were no significant differences in these values between those with 
and without intrauterine infection 5. 
These findings suggest that chorioamnionitis is not associated with a major degree of vasoconstriction in the 
uteroplacental or fetoplacental circulation. Consequently, Doppler does not provide a clinically useful distinction 
between infected and noninfected cases. However, Doppler studies in pregnancies with suspected amniorrhexis may 
be useful in the differential diagnosis from oligohydramnios due to uteroplacental insufficiency and intrauterine growth 
restriction. In the latter, there is an increase in impedance to flow in the uterine and/or umbilical arteries with 
decreased pulsatility index in the fetal cerebral vessels and increased pulsatility index (PI) in the descending thoracic 
aorta (see Chapter 4 ). 
Prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia 
Amniorrhexis before 25 weeks of gestation is associated with the development of pulmonary hypoplasia and 
hypertension. Suggested mechanisms for the development of pulmonary hypoplasia include: 
(1) Extrinsic compression of the fetal lungs, which interferes with normal development; 
(2) Excessive loss of lung fluid, either due to extrinsic compression of the fetal thorax or decrease in intra-amniotic 
pressure and increase in the alveolar–amniotic pressure gradient 17; and 
(3) Cessation of fetal breathing movements, because, in animal studies, transection of the cervical spinal cord and 
consequent interruption of breathing movements result in pulmonary hypoplasia 18. 
Attempts at antenatal prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia in pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis have 
focused on ultrasonographic assessment of lung size, amniotic fluid volume and fetal breathing movements 19. 
Studies examining fetal thoracic circumference and lung size have reported favorable results in the prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia 20,21, whereas studies that attempted to quantify the degree of oligohydramnios or fetal 
breathing movements have generally reported poor prediction 19–23. 
Prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia has also been attempted by antenatal Doppler studies 24. Blood flow in the ductus 
arteriosus, as assessed by Doppler ultrasound, is altered by breathing movements. In a study of 12 cases of preterm 
prelabor amniorrhexis and severe oligohydramnios, the alteration in ductal blood flow by breathing movements was 
normal in seven cases with normal lungs, and reduced in all five cases with pulmonary hypoplasia 25. Doppler studies 
in fetuses with pulmonary hypoplasia, due to multicystic kidneys or obstructive uropathy, reported increased 
impedance to flow in the branches of the pulmonary artery, consistent with high peripheral pulmonary vascular 
resistance 26–29. 
Rizzo et al. meaured the PI in the peripheral pulmonary arteries in 20 pregnancies complicated by amniorrhexis 
before 24 weeks of gestation 30. In fetuses that subsequently developed pulmonary hypoplasia, the PI was increased 
from as early as 2 weeks after amniorrhexis (Figure 1). The PI in the peripheral pulmonary arteries was above the 
95th centile of the normal range in 62.5% of those that developed pulmonary hypoplasia 30. 
.... 

Figure 1: Flow velocity waveforms (left) from the fetal peripheral pulmonary artery at 28 weeks in a noncomplicated 
pregnancy. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis is associated with a high risk of preterm delivery, due to intrauterine 
infection, as well as neonatal death, due to pulmonary hypoplasia. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, intrauterine infection is not associated with altered fetal 
oxygenation or a major degree of vasoconstriction in the uteroplacental or fetoplacental circulation. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, Doppler assessment does not provide a clinically useful 
distinction between infected and non-infected cases. The pulsatility indices in the uterine and umbilical 
arteries and in the fetal middle cerebral arteries and thoracic aorta are not significantly different from 
normal and there are no significant differences between these values in those with and without intrauterine 
infection. 
.. In pregnancies with preterm prelabor amniorrhexis, Doppler assessment may be useful in the prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia. Thus, in fetuses that subsequently develop pulmonary hypoplasia, impedance in the 
peripheralpulmonary arteries is increased from as early as 2 weeks after amniorrhexis. 

REFERENCES 
1. Carroll SG, Ville Y, Greenough A, Gamsu H, Patel B, Philpott-Howard J, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabour 
amniorrhexis: intrauterine infection and interval between membrane rupture and delivery. Arch Dis Child 
1995;72:F43–6 
2. Gomez R, Romero R, Mazor M, Ghezzi F, David C, Yoon BH. The role of infection in preterm labour and 
delivery. In Elder MG, Lamont RF, Romero R, eds. Preterm Labour. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1997:85 
3. Carroll SG, Abbas A, Ville Y, Meher-Homjii H, Nicolaides KH. Concentration of fetal plasma and amniotic fluid 
interleukin-1 in pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. J Clin Pathol 1995;48:368–71 
4. Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of livebirths. Obstet Gynecol 
1995;86:18–25 
5. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the placental and fetal circulation in 
pregnancies with preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:184–8 
6. Howard RB, Hosokawa T, Maguire MH. Pressor and depressor actions of prostanoids in the intact human 
feto-placental vascular bed. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes Med 1986;21:323–30 
7. Mak KK-W, Gude NM,WaltersWAW, Boura ALA. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on the human umbilical-fetal 
placental vasculature. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1984;91:99–106 
8. Altura BM, Malaviya AD, Reich CF, Orkin LR. Effects of vasoactive agents on isolated human umbilical 
arteries and veins. Am J Physiol 1972;222:345–55 
9. Hyde S, Smotherman J, Moore J, Altshulter G. A model of bacterially induced umbilical vein spasm, relevant 
to fetal hypoperfusion. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:966–70 
10. Hellerqvist CG, Rojas J, Green RS, Sell S, Sundell H, Stahlman MT. Studies of group B, beta-hemolytic 
streptococcus. Isolation and partial characterization of an extracellular toxin. Pediatr Res 1981;15:892–8 
11. Sandberg K, Englehardt B, Hellerqvist C, Sundell H. Pulmonary response to group B streptococcal toxin in 
young lambs. J Appl Physiol 1987;63:2024–30 
12. Bjoro K, Stray-Pedersen. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on different segments of human umbilicoplacental 
vessels. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1986;22:1–6 
13. Brar HS, Medearis AL, Platt LD. Relationship of systolic/diastolic ratios from umbilical velocimetry to fetal 
heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:188–91 
14. Leo MV, Skurnick JH, Ganesh VV, Adhate A, Apuzzio JJ. Clinical chorioamnionitis is not predicted by umbilical 
artery doppler velocimetry in patients with premature rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:916– 
8 
15. Fleming AD, Salafia CM, Vintzileos AM, Rodis JF, Campbell WA, Bantham F. The relationships among 
umbilical artery velocimetry, fetal biophysical profile, and placental inflammation in preterm premature 
rupture of the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:38–41 
16. Abramowicz JS, Sherer DM,Warsof SL, Levv DL. Fetoplacental and uteroplacental Doppler blood flow velocity 
analysis in premature rupture of membranes. Am J Perinatol 1992;9:353–6 
17. Nicolini U, Fisk NM, Rodeck CH, Talbert DG, Wigglesworth JS. Low amniotic pressure in oligohydramnios – is 
this the cause of pulmonary hypoplasia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 1098–101 
18. Wigglesworth JS, Desai R. Effects on lung growth of cervical cord section in the rabbit fetus. Early Hum Dev 
1979;3:51–65 
19. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal activity and amniotic fluid volume in the 
prediction of intrauterine infection in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1427 .. – 
35 
20. Blott M, Greenough A, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. The ultrasonographic assessment of the fetal thorax and 
fetal breathing movements in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. Early Hum Dev 1990;21:143–51 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Roberts AB, Mitchell JM. Direct ultrasonographic measurement of fetal lung length in normal pregnancies 
and pregnancies complicated by prolonged rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1560–6 
22. Rotschild A, Ling EW, Puterman ML, Farquharson D. Neonatal outcome after prolonged preterm rupture of 
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:46–52 
23. Moessinger AC, Higgins A, Fox HE, Rey HR. Fetal breathing movements are not a reliable predictor of 
continued lung development in pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. Lancet 1987;ii:1297–9 
24. Wladimiroff JW. Predicting pulmonary hypoplasia: assessment of lung volume or lung function or both? 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:164–6 
25. Van Eyck J, van der Mooren K, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus arteriosus flow velocity modulation by fetal breathing 
movements as a measure of fetal lung development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163: 558–66 
26. Laudy JA, Gaillard JL, v d Anker JN, Tibboel D, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler ultrasound imaging: a new technique 
to detect lung hypoplasia before birth? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:189–92 
27. Mitchell JM, Roberts AB, Lee A. Doppler waveforms from the pulmonary arterial system in normal fetuses 
and those with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:167–72 
28. Oshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
29. Chaoui R, Kalache K., Tennestedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler velocimetry in fetuses with 
lung hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;84:179–185 
30. Rizzo G, Capponi A., Angelini E, Mazzoleni A, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from fetal 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in pregnancies with preterm premature rupture of membranes: relationship 
with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;in press 

Chapter 9 
Doppler studies in maternal autoimmune disease 
SYSTEMIC LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS 
Systemic lupus erythematosus, which affects about one in 1000 adults, is an idiopathic multisystem chronic 
inflammatory disease, characterized by the presence of circulating autoantibodies directed against nuclear antigens. 
In pregnant women with systemic lupus erythematosus, the rate of fetal loss in the first trimester is similar to that in 
normal women (about 15%), but, in the second and third trimesters, the fetal loss rate is about 10%1,2. The 
mechanism for this increase in fetal loss is unclear but may be related to placental dysfunction. The most sensitive 
predictor of fetal death is the presence of antiphospholipid antibodies 3–5. 
About 25% of pregnancies in women with systemic lupus erythematosus are complicated by pre-eclampsia 3. The 
reason for this increased frequency of pre-eclampsia may be related to the underlying renal disease 6. Fetal growth 
restriction is found in about 20% of pregnancies 1. Distinguishing between an exacerbation of systemic lupus 
erythematosus involving active nephritis and pre-eclampsia is difficult, since they may both present with proteinuria, 
hypertension and evidence of multi-organ dysfunction. In the typical problem case, the patient develops hypertension 
and increasing proteinuria in the latter half of pregnancy. Elevated levels of anti-dsDNA and an active urinary 
sediment strongly suggest lupus. In severe and confusing cases, renal biopsy may be necessary to make the correct 
diagnosis. 
Neonatal lupus erythematosus, with a birth prevalence of about one in 20 000, is characterized by dermatological, 
cardiac or hematological abnormalities. The condition is due to maternal autoantibodies, particularly anti-Ro/SS-A and 
anti-SS-B/La, that cross the placenta 7. About half of the mothers who deliver an infant with neonatal lupus 
erythematosus have systemic lupus erythematosus or another autoimmune disease. The risk of a mother with anti-
SS-A/Ro and/or anti-SS-B/La having a fetus or neonate with neonatal lupus erythematosus is fairly low and among all 
mothers with systemic lupus erythematosus, the risk of neonatal lupus erythematosus is less than 5% 8. The cardiac 
lesions associated with the condition are congenital complete heart block and endocardial fibroelastosis. The usual 
presentation is a fixed fetal bradycardia of 60–80 beats per min presenting at 15–25 weeks of gestation; in some 
cases there is associated hydrops fetalis. The histological lesion is one of fibrosis and interruption of the conduction 
system, especially in the area of the atrioventricular node. Because the lesion is permanent, a pacemaker may be 
necessary for neonatal survival. After prenatal diagnosis of fetal heart block, administration of a glucocorticoid to the 
mother is associated with improvement in fetal cardiac function and limitation of further immunological damage to the 
fetal heart 9,10. 
ANTIPHOSPHOLIPID SYNDROME 
Antiphospholipid syndrome is an autoimmune condition characterized by the production of moderate to high levels of 
antiphospholipid antibodies (lupus anticoagulant or anticardiolipin antibody) and at least one clinical feature (venous 
or arterial thrombosis, autoimmune thrombocytopenia and/or pregnancy loss). The risk of thrombosis in pregnancy in 
women with antiphospholipid syndrome is sufficiently substantial to warrant prophylactic treatment with heparin. 
Antiphospholipid syndrome is associated with early pregnancy loss; antiphospholipid antibodies are found in about 
10% of women with recurrent first-trimester pregnancy loss (compared to about 2.5% in controls) 11–15. About 50% 
of women with antiphospholipid syndrome develop pre-eclampsia, which may start from as early as 15 weeks, or 
worsening hypertension 16,17 and about 10% of women with severe earlyonset (before 34 weeks) pre-eclampsia have 
antiphospholipid antibodies. The rate of pre-eclampsia does not appear to be markedly diminished by treatment with 
either glucocorticoids with low-dose aspirin or heparin with low-dose aspirin. The syndrome is also associated with 
fetal growth impairment, which is found in about 30% of treated pregnancies 16,17. In women with antiphospholipid 
syndrome, treatment with thromboprophylactic doses of heparin and low-dose aspirin improves the chances of a 
successful pregnancy outcome 18-21 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
In pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus erythematosus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical 
arteries is associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. Thus, Kerslake et al. 
carried out serial Doppler studies in 56 pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus erythematosus 22. They 
reported that the absence of end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical artery was a good predictor of the need for 
subsequent delivery by Cesarean section, whereas the presence of end-diastolic frequencies was associated with 
normotensive pregnancy 22. Similarly, Farine et al. examined 56 pregnancies complicated by maternal systemic lupus 
erythematosus and reported that absent or reversed enddiastolic frequencies, which were detected in 11% of the 
patients, were associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction 23. 
In systemic lupus erythematosus, it is uncertain if impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is increased. Thus,Weiner 
et al. carried out serial Doppler studies of the uterine and umbilical arteries in five patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus from week 10 to term 24. Impedance to flow in the uterine artery was within the normal range in all 
cases, whereas most values from the umbilical artery were above the 95th centile of the normal range. All five 
pregnancies resulted in healthy live births but one infant was growth-restricted; the highest impedance in the 
umbilical artery was observed in the case of growth restriction. Guzman et al. examined 27 pregnancies in women 
with systemic lupus erythematosus 25. In 18 pregnancies, there was normal impedance in both the uterine and 
umbilical arteries and they all had normal outcomes. In five pregnancies, there was normal impedance in the uterine 
arteries but increased impedance in the umbilical artery and, in this group, there were two cases of intrauterine 
growth restriction. In four pregnancies, there was increased impedance in both vessels; in all four, there was 
intrauterine growth restriction and three resulted in intrauterine or neonatal death. 
In antiphospholipid syndrome there is thrombosis of the uteroplacental vasculature and placental infarction. There is 
some evidence that, in pregnancies with antiphospholipid syndrome, increased impedance in the uterine arteries 
identifies those cases that subsequently develop pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. Thus, Caruso et al. 
examined 28 pregnancies in women with antiphospholipid syndrome and reported that increased impedance in the 
uterine arteries at 18–24 weeks of gestation provided useful prediction of both pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth 
restriction 26. In this respect, the findings of Doppler studies in predicting the outcome of pregnancies with the 
antiphospholipid syndrome may be similar to those with placental insufficiency due to impaired trophoblastic invasion 
of the maternal spiral arteries. However, Trudinger et al. suggested that, in the antiphospholipid syndrome, infarction 
of the placental vessels may be an acute phenomenon causing rapid deterioration in the fetal condition without 
impairment in growth, which would necessitate chronic placental insufficiency 27. They examined six pregnancies in 
women with antiphospholipid syndrome and reported increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery in four of 
the cases, despite the absence of pre-eclampsia or intrauterine growth restriction. Further evidence emphasizing the 
difference in the implications of antiphospholipid syndrome from impaired trophoblastic invasion was provided by the 
studies of Carroll 28. He examined 28 pregnancies complicated by antiphospholipid syndrome and reported that, in 
five of the six cases associated with intrauterine growth restriction, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries was 
increased, whereas only two of these patients demonstrated abnormally elevated impedance in the uterine arteries. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Systemic lupus erythematosus is associated with increased risk of pre-eclampsia, intrauterine growth 
restriction and perinatal death. 
.. In systemic lupus erythematosus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries is associated with 
increased risk of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In systemic lupus erythematosus, it is uncertain if impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is increased. 
.. Antiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by thrombosis of the uteroplacental vasculature and placental 
infarction, and is associated with early pregnancy loss, pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction. 
.. In antiphospholipid syndrome, the development of pre-eclampsia and intrauterine growth restriction is 
preceded by increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries and possibly the uterine arteries. 

REFERENCES 
1. Carroll SG, Ville Y, Greenough A, Gamsu H, Patel B, Philpott-Howard J, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabour 
amniorrhexis: intrauterine infection and interval between membrane rupture and delivery. Arch Dis Child 
1995;72:F43–6 
2. Gomez R, Romero R, Mazor M, Ghezzi F, David C, Yoon BH. The role of infection in preterm labour and 
delivery. In Elder MG, Lamont RF, Romero R, eds. Preterm Labour. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1997:85 
3. Carroll SG, Abbas A, Ville Y, Meher-Homjii H, Nicolaides KH. Concentration of fetal plasma and amniotic fluid 
interleukin-1 in pregnancies complicated by preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. J Clin Pathol 1995;48:368–71 
4. Carroll SG, Blott M, Nicolaides KH. Preterm prelabor amniorrhexis: outcome of livebirths. Obstet Gynecol 
1995;86:18–25 
5. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the placental and fetal circulation in 
pregnancies with preterm prelabour amniorrhexis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:184–8 
6. Howard RB, Hosokawa T, Maguire MH. Pressor and depressor actions of prostanoids in the intact human 
feto-placental vascular bed. Prostaglandins Leukotrienes Med 1986;21:323–30 
7. Mak KK-W, Gude NM,WaltersWAW, Boura ALA. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on the human umbilical-fetal 
placental vasculature. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1984;91:99–106 
8. Altura BM, Malaviya AD, Reich CF, Orkin LR. Effects of vasoactive agents on isolated human umbilical 
arteries and veins. Am J Physiol 1972;222:345–55 
9. Hyde S, Smotherman J, Moore J, Altshulter G. A model of bacterially induced umbilical vein spasm, relevant 
to fetal hypoperfusion. Obstet Gynecol 1989;73:966–70 
10. Hellerqvist CG, Rojas J, Green RS, Sell S, Sundell H, Stahlman MT. Studies of group B, beta-hemolytic 
streptococcus. Isolation and partial characterization of an extracellular toxin. Pediatr Res 1981;15:892–8 
11. Sandberg K, Englehardt B, Hellerqvist C, Sundell H. Pulmonary response to group B streptococcal toxin in 
young lambs. J Appl Physiol 1987;63:2024–30 
12. Bjoro K, Stray-Pedersen. Effects of vasoactive autocoids on different segments of human umbilicoplacental 
vessels. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1986;22:1–6 
13. Brar HS, Medearis AL, Platt LD. Relationship of systolic/diastolic ratios from umbilical velocimetry to fetal 
heart rate. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;160:188–91 
14. Leo MV, Skurnick JH, Ganesh VV, Adhate A, Apuzzio JJ. Clinical chorioamnionitis is not predicted by umbilical 
artery doppler velocimetry in patients with premature rupture of membranes. Obstet Gynecol 1992;79:916– 
8 
15. Fleming AD, Salafia CM, Vintzileos AM, Rodis JF, Campbell WA, Bantham F. The relationships among 
umbilical artery velocimetry, fetal biophysical profile, and placental inflammation in preterm premature 
rupture of the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:38–41 
16. Abramowicz JS, Sherer DM,Warsof SL, Levv DL. Fetoplacental and uteroplacental Doppler blood flow velocity 
analysis in premature rupture of membranes. Am J Perinatol 1992;9:353–6 
17. Nicolini U, Fisk NM, Rodeck CH, Talbert DG, Wigglesworth JS. Low amniotic pressure in oligohydramnios – is 
this the cause of pulmonary hypoplasia? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989;161: 1098–101 
18. Wigglesworth JS, Desai R. Effects on lung growth of cervical cord section in the rabbit fetus. Early Hum Dev 
1979;3:51–65 
19. Carroll SG, Papaioannou S, Nicolaides KH. Assessment of fetal activity and amniotic fluid volume in the 
prediction of intrauterine infection in preterm prelabor amniorrhexis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;172:1427 .. – 
35 
20. Blott M, Greenough A, Nicolaides KH, Campbell S. The ultrasonographic assessment of the fetal thorax and 
fetal breathing movements in the prediction of pulmonary hypoplasia. Early Hum Dev 1990;21:143–51 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Roberts AB, Mitchell JM. Direct ultrasonographic measurement of fetal lung length in normal pregnancies 
and pregnancies complicated by prolonged rupture of membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163:1560–6 
22. Rotschild A, Ling EW, Puterman ML, Farquharson D. Neonatal outcome after prolonged preterm rupture of 
the membranes. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:46–52 
23. Moessinger AC, Higgins A, Fox HE, Rey HR. Fetal breathing movements are not a reliable predictor of 
continued lung development in pregnancies complicated by oligohydramnios. Lancet 1987;ii:1297–9 
24. Wladimiroff JW. Predicting pulmonary hypoplasia: assessment of lung volume or lung function or both? 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:164–6 
25. Van Eyck J, van der Mooren K, Wladimiroff JW. Ductus arteriosus flow velocity modulation by fetal breathing 
movements as a measure of fetal lung development. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;163: 558–66 
26. Laudy JA, Gaillard JL, v d Anker JN, Tibboel D, Wladimiroff JW. Doppler ultrasound imaging: a new technique 
to detect lung hypoplasia before birth? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:189–92 
27. Mitchell JM, Roberts AB, Lee A. Doppler waveforms from the pulmonary arterial system in normal fetuses 
and those with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:167–72 
28. Oshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
29. Chaoui R, Kalache K., Tennestedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler velocimetry in fetuses with 
lung hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999;84:179–185 
30. Rizzo G, Capponi A., Angelini E, Mazzoleni A, Romanini C. Blood flow velocity waveforms from fetal 
peripheral pulmonary arteries in pregnancies with preterm premature rupture of membranes: relationship 
with pulmonary hypoplasia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;in press 

Chapter 10 
Doppler studies in post-term pregnancies 
POST-TERM PREGNANCY 
The prevalence of post-term pregnancy (those exceeding 294 days or 42 weeks of gestation) is about 10% when 
dating is based on the first day of the last menstrual period, but this is only about 5% when dating is by an early 
ultrasound scan. In about 30% of post-term pregnancies, the fetuses develop a postmaturity syndrome, characterized 
by growth restriction, dehydration, severe desquamation of the epidermis, bile-stained nails and amnion, advanced 
hardness of the skull, absence of the vernix caseosa and lanugo hair. 
Figure 1: Intrauterine death (black), neonatal death and post-neonatal death (white) per 1000 ongoing 
pregnancies at each gestation. Adapted by permission from Hilder et al.1 
Post-term pregnancy is associated with increased risk of both intrauterine and postnatal death. Hilder et al. examined 
171 527 births in the North East Thames Region in London and reported that the rate of stillbirth increased six-fold 
from 0.35 per 1000 ongoing pregnancies at 37 weeks of gestation to 2.12 per 1000 pregnancies at 43 weeks (Figure 
1). When neonatal and post-neonatal mortality rates are included, the overall risk of death increased from 0.7 per 
1000 ongoing pregnancies at 37 weeks to 5.8 per 1000 pregnancies at 43 weeks 1. 
There are no morphological features that could indicate an aging process of the term or post-term placenta, either by 
light or by electron microscopy; furthermore, placental DNA increases linearly with gestation beyond the 40th week of 
pregnancy 2. In contrast, the amniotic fluid volume decreases from about 37 weeks, and, during the post-dates 
period, it is estimated that there is a decrease in amniotic fluid volume of about 33% per week 3,4. This decrease in 
amniotic fluid volume, combined with the increased incidence of meconium staining of the amniotic fluid in post-term 
pregnancies, results in an increased risk of meconium aspiration syndrome. The risk of perinatal death is mainly in 
the small, postmature, growth-restricted fetus, and the main aim of antenatal monitoring is to identify the onset of 
uteroplacental insufficiency and the development of fetal hypoxia. 

DOPPLER STUDIES 
Post-term pregnancies are associated with the development of oligohydramnios and non-reactive fetal heart rate 
patterns. One possible explanation for the oligohydramnios is decreased fetal renal perfusion due to impaired fetal 
cardiac function. 
The alternative hypothesis for the reduction in renal perfusion and urinary output is redistribution in the fetal 
circulation, as in intrauterine growth restriction. Supportive evidence for impaired fetal renal perfusion as a cause of 
oligohydramnios in post-term pregnancies was provided by the study of Veille et al. who examined 50 pregnancies at 
or after 40 weeks of gestation. In the 17 with oligohydramnios (amniotic fluid index of less than 5 cm) impedance to 
flow in the fetal renal artery was significantly higher than in the 33 pregnancies with normal amniotic fluid 5. 
Several studies have examined the potential value of Doppler assessment in the prediction of adverse outcome 
(usually defined as fetal distress in labor) in post-term pregnancies and provided conflicting results (Table 1). All four 
studies examining uterine arteries reported no significant changes in pregnancies with adverse outcome. Impedance 
to flow in the umbilical arteries of pregnancies with adverse outcomes was normal in five studies, increased in three 
studies and decreased in one study. Impedance in the fetal cerebral circulation was reported as being decreased in 
three studies andnormal in two studies. 
Table 1: Studies examining the relation of impedance to flow in the uterine and/or umbilical arteries and fetal 
cerebral arteries in the prediction of adverse outcome in post-term pregnancies 
Author n Impedance to flow Adverse outcome 
Rightmire & Campbell, 198716 35 umbilical artery increased 
Brar et al., 198919 45 internal cerebral artery decreased 
Fischer et al., 199114 75 umbilical artery increased 
Anteby et al., 199417 78 umbilical artery increased 
Olofsson et al., 199712 44 umbilical artery decreased 
Anteby et al., 199417 78 middle cerebral artery decreased 
Devine et al., 199418 49 middle cerebral : umbilical artery decreased 
Rightmire & Campbell, 198716 35 uterine artery normal 
Farmakides et al., 198820 149 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Brar et al., 198919 45 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Stokes et al., 199121 70 umbilical and uterine arteries normal 
Bar-Hava et al., 199523 57 umbilical and middle cerebral arteries normal 
Zimmermann et al., 199522 153 umbilical, uterine & middle cerebral arteries normal 
Impaired fetal cardiac function 
There is evidence that the oligohydramnios and abnormal fetal heart rate pattern in post-term fetuses are caused by 
impaired fetal cardiac function. Thus, Weiner et al. examined 120 post-term pregnancies and reported that the 
pregnancies with oligohydramnios had a significantly lower peak velocity and velocity–time integral in the fetal aortic 
outflow tract and mitral valve. Post-term fetuses with reduced fetal heart rate variation had a significantly lower peak 
velocity and velocity–time integral in the aortic and pulmonic outflow tracts and mitral valve 6. In a further study, 
Weiner et al. examined 45 pregnancies at 41–43 weeks of gestation. In eight fetuses that subsequently developed an 
abnormal fetal heart rate pattern in labor, there was a decrease in peak velocity and velocity–time integral in the fetal 
aortic and pulmonic outflow tracts 7. It was suggested that, in prolonged pregnancies, cardiac function deteriorates in 
fetuses that subsequently develop an abnormal fetal heart rate pattern. Similarly, Horenstein et al. examined post-
term pregnancies and reported an inverse relationship between fetal ventricular function and amniotic fluid volume 8. 
Placental insufficiency and redistribution in the fetal circulation 
Battaglia et al. compared 16 pregnancies at 40 weeks with 16 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks. In the post-term 
pregnancies, the time-averaged maximum velocity of the fetal descending thoracic aorta and the ratio of the 

impedance in the middle cerebral artery to that in the umbilical artery were decreased 9. Furthermore, post-term 
pregnancies were associated with an increased incidence of oligohydramnios, increased plasma viscosity and 
coagulation parameters (decreased fibrinogen, antithrombin III and platelet number). It was concluded that post-
term pregnancy may mimic a mild ‘fetal growth restriction’ 9. 
Hitschold et al. examined 253 post-term pregnancies for the relation between impedance to flow in the umbilical 
artery and histological findings in the placenta 10. Disseminated retarded maturation of the villi was associated with 
high impedance in the umbilical artery and, in this group, there was a high rate of Cesarean section for fetal distress, 
low birth weight and high neonatal morbidity. Disseminated retarded maturation of the placenta was found in 66% of 
the cases with pathological umbilical artery flow velocity waveforms, whereas it occurred only in 6% of the cases with 
normal flow 10. 
Olofsson et al. examined 34 pregnancies that delivered after 43 weeks of gestation and reported that, at this 
gestation, compared to 40 weeks, the mean flow velocity and volume flow in the fetal aorta were lower, the flow 
velocity in the umbilical vein was higher, impedance to flow in the umbilical artery was lower and impedance to flow 
in the uterine artery was not different 11. It was suggested that these findings are compatible with physiological 
circulatory alterations enhancing continued fetal growth until the late post-term period. There were no signs of any 
general circulatory deterioration. In a subsequent study, these authors examined 44 pregnancies at 42–43 weeks of 
gestation. In cases that developed fetal distress in labor, the umbilical artery pulsatility index (PI) was significantly 
decreased and the fetal aortic volume flow significantly increased; uterine flow was not significantly different. It was 
suggested that, in post-term pregnancies, subclinical fetal hypoxia may trigger vasodilation of placental vessels (with 
consequent decrease in umbilical artery PI) and indicates an increase of cardiac output with consequent increased 
aortic volume flow 12. 
Another similarity between the growth-restricted and the post-term fetus was highlighted by the study of Arduini et 
al. who examined the changes in fetal blood flow velocity waveforms during maternal hyperoxygenation 13. They 
administered 60% humidified oxygen in 45 post-term pregnancies. During oxygen treatment, nine fetuses exhibited a 
temporary 20% increase in the impedance to flow in the internal carotid artery and, in this group, there was a higher 
incidence of emergency Cesarean delivery due to fetal distress and more neonatal complications than in the other 36 
fetuses that did not respond to maternal hyperoxygenation. It was concluded that an increase of at least 20% in the 
PI of the fetal internal carotid artery during maternal hyperoxygenation may be a useful marker of adverse outcome 
in post-term fetuses. 
Some studies reported that the pregnancies which subsequently developed fetal distress in labor were associated with 
antepartum evidence of increased impedance in the umbilical artery, decreased impedance in the fetal middle 
cerebral artery, and decreased blood flow velocity in the fetal aorta. Fischer et al. examined 75 pregnancies at more 
than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the umbilical artery was significantly higher in 
those with subsequent abnormal perinatal outcomes than in those with normal outcomes 14. Similarly, Hitschold et al. 
examined 130 pregnancies at 40–42 weeks of gestation and reported that, in the group with increased impedance in 
the umbilical artery, the rate of Cesarean section for fetal distress was 53%, compared to 3% in those with normal 
impedance 15. Rightmire and Campbell examined 35 pregnancies at more than 42 weeks of gestation and reported 
that impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries did not change with gestation, but impedance in the 
umbilical artery was higher in fetuses with a worse clinical outcome 16. Blood flow velocity in the fetal descending 
aorta decreased with gestation and velocity was lower in fetuses who passed meconium before delivery. It was 
suggested that fetal compromise in prolonged pregnancy is more a fetal–placental problem than a uteroplacental 
problem 16. Similarly, Anteby et al. examined 78 women at more than 41 weeks of gestation, who had normal non-
stress test and amniotic fluid volume 17. Pregnancies that subsequently developed signs of fetal distress during labor 
had increased impedance in the umbilical artery, decreased impedance in the fetal middle cerebral artery, and 
decreased time averaged velocity in the fetal aorta. It was concluded that, in uncomplicated post-term pregnancies, 
those with abnormal Doppler results are prone to need intervention following fetal distress in labor 17. 
Further evidence for centralization of the fetal circulation was provided by the study of Devine et al., who examined 
49 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that decreased fetal middle cerebral artery to 
umbilical artery impedance to flow ratio is an accurate method of predicting post-date-related adverse outcome (the 
occurrence of meconium aspiration syndrome, Cesarean delivery for fetal distress, or fetal acidosis)18. A middle 
cerebral artery to umbilical artery ratio of less than 1.05 predicted an adverse outcome, with a sensitivity of 80%, 
specificity of 95% and positive predictive value of 80%. In contrast, the sensitivities of oligohydramnios (amniotic 
fluid index of less than 5 cm), non-reactive fetal heart rate pattern, and a biophysical profile score equal to or less 
than 6, had sensitivities equal to or less than 40%18. Similarly, Brar et al. examined 45 pregnancies at more than 41 
weeks of gestation and reported that the incidence of fetal distress in labor was higher in patients with antepartum 
oligohydramnios (amniotic fluid index less than 5 cm) or non-reactive fetal heart rate pattern. In this group, 

compared to those with normal amniotic fluid and reactive fetal heart rate pattern, there was no significant difference 
in impedance to flow in the umbilical and uterine arteries, but impedance in the fetal internal cerebral artery was 
significantly lower 19. 
Normal placental and fetal Doppler 
Some studies suggested that the pathophysiology of placental insufficiency in post-term pregnancies differs from that 
observed in cases of fetal growth restriction at earlier gestational ages, because, in post-term pregnancies, both 
placental and fetal Doppler indices are normal. Thus, Farmakides et al. examined 149 pregnancies at more than 41 
weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the uterine and umbilical arteries was not altered, even in 
the presence of other signs suggestive of fetal compromise20. Similarly, Stokes et al. examined 70 pregnancies at 
more than 41 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in the umbilical and uteroplacental arteries was 
not significantly different in pregnancies associated with fetal compromise and abnormal neonatal outcome from those 
with normal outcome 21. 
Zimmermann et al. examined 153 pregnancies at 41–43 weeks of gestation and reported that impedance to flow in 
the umbilical artery, uteroplacental arteries and fetal middle cerebral artery did not change significantly within this 
gestational range 22. The majority of Doppler measurements in pregnancies with subsequent asphyxia or otherwise 
complicated fetal outcome were within the 95% prediction interval for patients with normal fetal outcome. This study 
also reported that, in the prediction of asphyxia, the sensitivity for oligohydramnios and antepartum cardiotocography 
was less than 20%. 
Bar-Hava et al. examined 57 pregnancies at more than 41 weeks of gestation 23. They measured impedance to flow 
in the umbilical arteries and the fetal middle cerebral and renal arteries. In 15 pregnancies, there was 
oligohydramnios and, although in this group the mean birth weight was significantly lower than in the 42 pregnancies 
with normal amniotic fluid, there were no significant differences between the groups in the Doppler indices. It was 
concluded that, in post-term pregnancies, oligohydramnios is not associated with a major redistribution in the fetal 
circulation. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. Post-term pregnancy is associated with increased risk of both intrauterine and postnatal death. 
.. In post-term pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is normal. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcomes, impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries may be 
increased or normal. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, impedance to flow in the fetal middle cerebral arteries may 
be decreased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, blood flow velocity in the fetal descending aorta may be 
decreased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with oligohydramnios, impedance to flow in the fetal renal arteries may be 
increased. 
.. In post-term pregnancies with adverse outcome, there is decreased blood flow velocity in fetal aortic and 
pulmonic outflow tracts and across the mitral valve. 

REFERENCES 
1. Hilder L, Costeloe K, Thilaganathan B. Prolonged pregnancy: evaluating gestation-specific risks of fetal and 
infant mortality. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:169–73 
2. Fox H. Placental pathology. In Progress in Obstetrics and Gynaecology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 
1983;3 
3. Phelan JP, Platt LD, Yeh SY, Broussard P, Paul RH. The role of ultrasound assessment of amniotic fluid 
volume in the management of the postdate pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;151:304–8 
4. Beischer NA, Brown JB, Townsend L. Studies in prolonged pregnancy. 3. Amniocentesis in prolonged 
pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1969;103:496–503 
5. Veille JC, PenryM, Mueller-Heubach E. Fetal renal pulsed Doppler waveform in prolonged pregnancies. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:882–4 
6. Weiner Z, Farmakides G, Schulman H, Casale A, Itskovitz-Eldor J. Central and peripheral haemodynamic 
changes in post-term fetuses: correlation with oligohydramnios and abnormal fetal heart rate pattern. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:541–6 
7. Weiner Z, Farmakides G, Barnhard Y, Bar-Hava I, Divon MY. Doppler study of the fetal cardiac function in 
prolonged pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:200–2 
8. Horenstein J, Brar H, DeVore G. Cardiovascular evaluation of the post-termfetus. Presented at the 34 Annual 
Meeting of the Society of Gynaecologic Investigation, Atlanta, GA, 1987 
9. Battaglia C, Artini PG, Ballestri M, Bonucchi D, Galli PA, Bencini S, Genazzani AP. 
Hemodynamic, ematological and hemorrheological .. .. .. evaluation of post-term pregnancy. Acta Obstet Gynecol 
Scand 1995;74:336–40 
10. Hitschold T, Weiss E, Berle P, Muntefering H. Histologic placenta findings in prolonged pregnancy: correlation 
of placental retarded maturation, fetal outcome and Doppler sonographic findings in the umbilical artery. Z 
Geburtshilfe Perinatol 1989;193:42–6 
11. Olofsson P, Saldeen P, Marsal K. Fetal and uteroplacental circulatory changes in pregnancies proceeding 
beyond 43 weeks. Early Hum Dev 1996;46:1–13 
12. Olofsson P, Saldeen P, Marsal K. Association between a low umbilical artery pulsatility index and fetal 
distress in labor in very prolonged pregnancies. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1997;73:23–9 
13. Arduini D, Rizzo G, Romanini C, Mancuso S. Doppler assessment of fetal blood flow velocity waveforms 
during acute maternal oxygen administration as predictor of fetal outcome in post-term pregnancy. Am J 
Perinatol 1990;7:258–62 
14. Fischer RL, Kuhlman KA, Depp R, Wapner RJ. Doppler evaluation of umbilical and uterinearcuate arteries in 
the postdates pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:363–8 
15. Hitschold T, Weiss E, Berle P. Doppler sonography of the umbilical artery, mode of delivery and perinatal 
morbidity in prolonged pregnancy. Z Geburtshilfe Perinatol 1988;192:197–202 
16. Rightmire DA, Campbell S. Fetal and maternal Doppler blood flow parameters in postterm pregnancies. 
Obstet Gynecol 1987;69:891–4 
17. Anteby EY, Tadmor O, Revel A, Yagel S. Post-term pregnancies with normal cardiotocographs and amniotic 
fluid columns: the role of Doppler evaluation in predicting perinatal outcome. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod 
Biol 1994;54:93–8 
18. Devine PA, Bracero LA, Lysikiewicz A, Evans R, Womack S, Byrne DW. Middle cerebral to umbilical artery 
Doppler ratio in post-date pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:856–60 
19. Brar HS, Horenstein J, Medearis AL, Platt LD, Phelan JP, Paul RH. Cerebral, umbilical, and uterine resistance 
using Doppler velocimetry in postterm pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 1989;8: 187–91 
20. Farmakides G, Schulman H, Ducey J, Guzman E, Saladana L, Penny B, Winter D. Uterine and umbilical artery 
Doppler velocimetry in postterm pregnancy. J Reprod Med 1988;33:259–61 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
21. Stokes HJ, Roberts RV, Newnham JP. Doppler flow velocity waveform analysis in postdate pregnancies. Aust 
N Z J Obstet Gynaecol 1991;31:27–30 
22. Zimmermann P, Alback T, Koskinen J, Vaalamo P, Tuimala R, Ranta T. Doppler flow velocimetry of the 
umbilical artery, uteroplacental arteries and fetal middle cerebral artery in prolonged pregnancy. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:189–97 
23. Bar-Hava I, DivonMY, Sardo M, Barnhard Y Is oligohydramnios in posttermpregnancy associated with 
redistribution of fetal blood flow? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:519–22 

Chapter 11 
Doppler studies in twin pregnancy 
CHORIONICITY IN TWINS 
Twins account for about 1% of all pregnancies with two-thirds being dizygotic and one-third monozygotic. All dizygotic 
pregnancies are dichorionic. In monozygotic pregnancies, splitting of the single embryonic mass into two within 3 
days of fertilization, which occurs in one-third of cases, results in dichorionic twins. When embryonic splitting occurs 
after the 3rd day following fertilization, there are vascular communications within the two placental circulations 
(monochorionic). Embryonic splitting after the 9th day following fertilization results in monoamniotic monochorionic 
twins, and splitting after the 12th day results in conjoined twins. 
Determination of chorionicity can be performed reliably by ultrasound examination at 11–14 weeks of gestation 
(Figure 1); in dichorionic twins, there is an extension of placental tissue into the base of the intertwin membrane 
(lambda sign) 1,2. 
Figure 1: Ultrasound appearance of monochorionic (left) and dichorionic (right) twin pregnancies at 12 weeks 
of gestation. In both types, there appears to be a single placental mass but, in the dichorionic type, there is 
an extension of placental tissue into the base of the intertwin membrane, forming the lambda sign. 
PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS 
In dichorionic twins, the rate of at least one fetal loss between 10 and 24 weeks is about 2.5%, whereas, in 
monochorionic twins, the rate of fetal loss is about 12% 3. This increased loss in monochorionic pregnancies is likely 
to be the consequence of severe early-onset twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
The perinatal mortality rate in twins is around six times higher than in singletons, and is about three to four times 
higher in monochorionic compared to dichorionic twins, regardless of zygosity 4,5. This increased mortality is mainly 
due to prematurity related complications. In a singleton pregnancy, the chance of delivery between 24 and 32 weeks 
is 1–2%. In monochorionic twins, the incidence is about 9% and in dichorionic twins it is about 5% 3. In 
monochorionic twins, an additional complication to prematurity is twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
In twin pregnancies, the risk of delivering growth-restricted babies is about ten times higher than in singleton 
pregnancies 6. In a study of 467 twin pregnancies, the chance of growth restriction (birth weight below the 5th centile 
for gestation in singletons) of at least one of the fetuses was 34% for monochorionic and 23% for dichorionic twins 3. 
Furthermore, the chance of growth restriction of both twins was about four times as high in monochorionic (7.5%) 
compared to dichorionic (1.7%) pregnancies 3. In monochorionic twins, a disparity in size between the fetuses may 

be a consequence of the degree of imbalance in fetal nutrition as a result of chronic twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. In dichorionic twins, disparity in size may also be due to differences in fetal nutrition, but in this case such 
differences may be a consequence of discordancy in the effectiveness of trophoblastic invasion of the maternal spiral 
arteries and therefore placental function. 
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
In monochorionic twin pregnancies, there are placental vascular anastamoses which allow communication of the two 
fetoplacental circulations 7. In about 25% of pregnancies, imbalance in the net flow of blood across the placental 
vascular arteriovenous communications from one fetus, the donor, to the other, the recipient, results in twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome; in about half of these cases, there is severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome presenting as 
acute polyhydramnios in the second trimester. The pathognomonic features of severe twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome by ultrasonographic examination are the presence of a large bladder in the polyuric recipient fetus in the 
polyhydramniotic sac and ‘absent’ bladder in the anuric donor, that is found to be ‘stuck’ and immobile at the edge of 
the placenta or the uterine wall, where it is held fixed by the collapsed membranes of the anhydramniotic sac (Figure 
2) 8. 
Other sonographic findings that may prove to be of prognostic significance include the presence of a hypertrophic, 
dilated and dyskinetic heart, with absence or reversal of flow in the ductus venosus during atrial contraction (Figure 
3) 9. In the donor, the heart may be dilated, the bowel is hyperechogenic, and there is absent end-diastolic flow in 
the umbilical artery; these features are commonly seen in hypoxemic fetuses in pregnancies with severe 
uteroplacental insufficiency. In severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, survival with expectant management is less 
than 10% 8. 
Figure 2: Severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome at 20 weeks of gestation. In the polyuric recipient, there 
is a large bladder and polyhydramnios (left) and the anuric donor is held fixed to the placenta by the 
collapsed membranes of the anhydramniotic sac (right). 
Figure 3: Abnormal waveform of the ductus venosus with reversal of flow during atrial contraction in the 
recipient fetus of a pregnancy with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
The precise underlying mechanisms by which a select population of those monochorionic pregnancies with vascular 
communications go on to develop twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is not fully understood. However, it has been 
hypothesized that primary maldevelopment of the placenta of the donor twin may cause increased peripheral 
resistance in the placental circulation, which promotes shunting of blood to the recipient; the donor therefore suffers 
from both hypovolemia due to blood loss and hypoxia due to placental insufficiency8. The recipient fetus compensates 
for its expanded blood volume with polyuria 10, but, since protein and cellular components remain in its circulation, 
the consequent increase in colloid oncotic pressure draws water from the maternal compartment across the placenta. 

A vicious cycle of hypervolemia, polyuria, hyperosmolality is established, leading to high-output heart failure and 
polyhydramnios. 
Monoamniotic twins 
Splitting of the embryonic mass after day 9 of fertilization results in monoamniotic twins. In these cases, there is a 
single amniotic cavity with a single placenta and the two umbilical cords insert close to each other. In monoamniotic 
twins, found in about 1% of all twins or about 5% of monochorionic twins, the fetal loss rate is about 50–75%, due to 
fetal malformations, preterm delivery and complications arising from the close proximity of the two umbilical cords. 
Cord entanglement is generally thought to be the underlying mechanism for the majority of fetal losses. However, 
cord entanglement is found in most cases of monoamniotic twins and this is usually present from the first trimester of 
pregnancy 11–13. Therefore, a more likely cause of fetal death in monoamniotic twins, which occurs suddenly and 
unpredictably, is acute twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, rather than cord entanglement per se. The close insertion 
of the umbilical cords into the placenta is associated with large-caliber anastamoses between the two fetal 
circulations13,14. Consequently, an imbalance in the two circulations could not be sustained for prolonged periods of 
time (which is necessary for the development of the classic features of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome), but would 
rather have major hemodynamic effects, causing sudden fetal death. 
DOPPLER STUDIES IN TWINS 
Several Doppler studies in the 1980s and early 1990s have examined flow velocity waveforms in the umbilical arteries 
in twin pregnancies 15-24. These reported that increased impedance provided useful prediction of the subsequent 
development of fetal growth restriction and adverse perinatal outcome. Furthermore, in pregnancies discordant for 
growth restriction, there were large intertwin disparities in impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries of the co-twins. 
These findings are not surprising, since, in the absence of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the underlying 
pathophysiology for fetal growth restriction due to placental insufficiency in twins is the same as in singleton 
pregnancies. Giles et al. reported that the histopathological changes in the placentas from twin pregnancies 
complicated by the presence of abnormal umbilical Doppler results (reduction in the count of small arterial vessels in 
placental tertiary stem villi restricted to the placenta of the affected fetus) are similar to those found in singleton 
pregnancies 25. 
Neilson et al. reported that there were no significant differences between monochorionic and dichorionic pregnancies 
in either the pattern of umbilical artery flow velocity waveform or intertwin discordance in fetal growth 26. It was 
concluded that, in the absence of severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the vascular anastomoses that have 
been shown to be common in monochorionic placentas do not exert a strong influence on fetal growth or fetoplacental 
blood flow. 
Two randomized trials of Doppler ultrasound, which included twin pregnancies, have been reported 27,28. Although 
the number of twins in these studies was small (16 and 26, and 18 and 22 in the Doppler assessment and control 
groups, respectively), there was a combined odds ratio of 0.14 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.03–0.77) for the 
reduction in fetal death. 
Rizzo et al. reported that impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is lower in twin than in singleton pregnancies 29. 
The diagnostic efficacy of impedance in the uterine artery for predicting the development of gestational hypertension 
and/or pre-eclampsia was disappointingly low, compared to findings in singleton pregnancies (see Chapter 5). 
DOPPLER STUDIES IN TWIN-TO-TWIN TRANSFUSION SYNDROME 
Placental vessels 
Hecher et al. examined the role of color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of the communicating placental 
vessels in 18 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and two with an acardiac twin 30. Color Doppler 
studies of the placental vasculature were performed before fetoscopy for laser coagulation of the communicating 
vessels. In six cases of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the placental attachment of the intertwin membrane could 
be visualized, and pulsatile arterial blood flow was observed from the donor to the recipient twin that disappeared 
after laser therapy. In both cases of acardiac twins, one communicating vessel with pulsatile and another vessel with 
non-pulsatile blood flow in the opposite direction could be identified. It was suggested that color Doppler imaging is 
unlikely to play a major role in assisting endoscopic laser separation of chorioangiopagus in patients with acute 
polyhydramnios, but it may prove to be useful in the early identification of pregnancies at risk of developing twin-to-

twin transfusion syndrome. 
Denbow et al. examined 45 monochorionic pregnancies for the presence of arterio–arterial anastomoses by color 
Doppler energy 31. Arterio–arterial anastomoses were present in 8% (1 of 12) that developed twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome, compared to 71% (20 of 28) of those that did not have twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. It was 
concluded that twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome is associated with an absence of functional arterio–arterial 
anastomoses. 
Umbilical and fetal arterial Doppler 
Giles et al. examined 11 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome (diagnosed retrospectively by the 
presence of monochorionic placentation and umbilical venous blood hemoglobin differences exceeding 5 g/dl at 
delivery) 32. There was no significant difference in the impedance to flow in the umbilical artery between donor and 
recipient fetuses. In contrast, Pretorius et al. examined eight cases of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and reported 
significant differences in umbilical arterial impedance to flow between the fetuses in all cases 33. However, Doppler 
studies could not differentiate donor from recipient or provide prognostic data regarding outcome. Yamada et al. 
examined 31 twin pregnancies, including six with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 34. In seven cases, the intertwin 
difference in umbilical arterial pulsatility index was above 0.5, and, in six of these, there was twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. Ohno et al. reported that, in five pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there was intertwin 
discordancy in umbilical arterial pulsatility index (PI) greater than 0.5 and, in all cases, the PI in the recipient was 
above the normal range 35. In contrast, in 28 pregnancies without twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there were no 
cases with increased impedance or discordancy greater than 0.5. 
Gaziano et al. assessed impedance to flow in the umbilical artery and middle cerebral artery in 33 monochorionic 
diamniotic twin pregnancies and 50 dichorionic pregnancies 36. Monochorionic twins demonstrated a significantly 
greater probability of blood flow redistribution (increased impedance in the umbilical artery and decreased impedance 
in the middle cerebral artery) than dichorionic twins of similar low birth weights. It was suggested that placental 
vascular connections and the attendant hemodynamic changes in the fetuses of monochorionic twins may account for 
this difference. 
Hecher et al. investigated the circulatory profile of the donor and recipient fetuses in pregnancies with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome manifested by acute polyhydramnios during the second trimester of pregnancy 37. Doppler 
investigations of the umbilical arteries and of the fetal descending thoracic aortas and middle cerebral arteries were 
performed in both fetuses of 27 pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome at 18–25 weeks of gestation. 
Significant differences from normal values were increased umbilical artery PI and decreased aortic mean velocity in 
both donor and recipient fetuses, decreased middle cerebral artery PI in recipients and decreased middle cerebral 
artery mean velocity in donors. Increased umbilical artery PI in some donor and recipient fetuses may be the 
consequence of abnormal placental development and polyhydramnios-related compression, respectively. Doppler 
findings in the fetal circulation are compatible with hypovolemia in the donor and hypervolemia with congestive heart 
failure in the recipient. 
Cardiac and venous Doppler 
Ishimatsu et al. examined 40 twin pregnancies, including six with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, and reported 
that the syndrome was not associated with any distinctive findings in umbilical artery blood flow velocity 
waveforms38. However, cardiomegaly in five of the recipient fetuses and tricuspid regurgitation and biphasic umbilical 
vein waveforms in three recipient fetuses constituted characteristic features of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
Rizzo et al. compared Doppler results in 15 dichorionic twin pregnancies (in which the smaller twin subsequently 
developed antepartum fetal heart rate late decelerations) and ten pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome39. Doppler recordings were obtained from umbilical artery, descending aorta, and middle cerebral artery, 
and the PI was measured. Furthermore, peak velocity from cardiac outflow tract and the percentage of reverse flow in 
the inferior vena cava were calculated. For all these index values, the intertwin differences (delta value) were 
determined by subtracting the values obtained in the larger twin from those of the smaller twin. In the dichorionic 
pregnancies, there were significant changes of delta values for all the parameters tested. In particular, delta values of 
PI from the umbilical artery and descending aorta progressively increased, approaching the occurrence of late 
decelerations, whereas the delta value for the middle cerebral artery reached a nadir 2 weeks before delivery. 
Similarly, delta values of peak velocity from outflow tracts significantly decreased, whereas those of the percentage 
reverse flow in the inferior vena cava increased. In the pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there 
were no significant intertwin differences in PI in any of the vessels that were examined, but there was a significant 

increase in delta of the peak velocity from the outflow tract and a decrease in the percentage of reverse flow in the 
inferior vena cava. It was concluded that serial Doppler recordings may show hemodynamic changes in the fetal 
circulation of discordant twins. Different trends occur according to the underlying pathophysiological mechanisms of 
the growth defect. 
Hecher et al. investigated the circulatory profile of the donor and recipient fetuses in 20 pregnancies with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome presenting with acute polyhydramnios at 17–27 weeks of gestation 9. Doppler investigations of 
the arterial vessels and ductus venosus, inferior vena cava, right hepatic vein, tricuspid and mitral ventricular inflow 
were performed in both fetuses. Mean values of most blood flow velocities on the venous side showed a significant 
decrease in both groups of fetuses, and a significant increase in mean values for indices describing waveform 
pulsatility was found in all three venous vessels in the group of recipients, whereas, in the donor group, this was only 
the case in the ductus venosus. Mean values of atrioventricular flow velocities showed a significant decrease in the 
donor group. The most significant findings on the arterial side were an increased mean umbilical artery PI and a 
decreased mean value for aortic blood flow velocity in both groups of fetuses. Five recipients and four donors had 
absence or reversal of blood flow during atrial contraction in the ductus venosus. All these fetuses showed pulsations 
in the umbilical vein (Figure 4). Tricuspid regurgitation was present in eight recipients (Figure 5). Absence or reversal 
of end-diastolic velocities in the umbilical artery was found in four donors. The circulation of the recipient showed the 
characteristics of congestive heart failure due to hypovolemia. The significant decrease of diastolic venous blood flow 
velocities is compatible with increased end-diastolic ventricular pressure. Alterations in the circulation of the donor are 
consistent with decreased venous return due to hypovolemia and increased cardiac afterload due to increased 
placental resistance. 
Zosmer et al. examined five pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and reported increased 
cardiothoracic ratio and tricuspid regurgitation in all recipient twins 40. High pulmonary artery velocities developed in 
three. One recipient twin died a week after delivery of endocardial fibroelastosis and infundibular pulmonary stenosis. 
Two others had balloon dilatation for pulmonary stenosis, one shortly after birth and one at 4 months. A further twin 
had apical thickening of the right ventricle at 6 months. The remaining recipient twin had normal echocardiographic 
findings at follow-up. 
Figure 4: Pulsations in the umbilical vein with reversal of flow at the end of diastole in the recipient fetus of a 
pregnancy with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 

Figure 5: Holosystolic tricuspid regurgitation in the recipient fetus of a pregnancy with twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome 
Hecher et al. described the sequence of events in the development and subsequent spontaneous resolution of 
functional tricuspid valve atresia in the donor fetus in a case of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 41. Fetoscopic laser 
coagulation of the placental anastomoses was performed at 20 weeks of gestation. Subsequently, there was evidence 
of increased placental vascular resistance in the donor twin and major impairment of right ventricular function, with 
no forward flow through the tricuspid valve. During the next 4 weeks, however, there was spontaneous and complete 
recovery of ventricular function and resolution of the functional tricuspid valve atresia. These findings suggest that 
alterations in fetal hemodynamics may result in structural cardiac abnormality and may be the precursors of some 
forms of congenital heart disease. 
Lachapelle et al. examined whether index values of cardiac performance could discriminate between the twin-to-twin 
transfusion syndrome and placental insufficiency as the etiology of the polyhydramnios–oligo-hydramnios sequence in 
monochorionic diamniotic twins, by comparing findings in eight cases with placental insufficiency and five with twinto-
twin transfusion syndrome 42. Intertwin comparisons were made for the following cardiac parameters: 
cardiothoracic index, end-diastolic thickness of the ventricular walls and septum, aortic and pulmonary artery Doppler 
peak velocities, ejection and acceleration times, left ventricular shortening fraction, and combined cardiac output and 
output indexed to fetal weight. All five recipient twins had thickened ventricular walls. The left ventricular shortening 
fractions and outputs were significantly increased in the donor twin with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome and 
normal in placental insufficiency. It was concluded that, in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the donor twin shows 
evidence of a hyperdynamic cardiac state. Intertwin comparison of cardiac parameters, especially the left ventricular 
shortening fraction, can be considered a useful tool in diagnosing the different etiologies of the polyhydramnios– 
oligohydraminos sequence. 
Fesslova et al. examined 17 pairs of monochorionic diamniotic twin fetuses with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
treated by decompressive amniocenteses 43. Serial Doppler echocardiographic sudies showed no specific cardiac 
involvement in the donor twins, either in utero or after birth. In contrast, all recipient twin fetuses showed variable 
degrees of biventricular hypertrophy and dilatation with tricuspid regurgitation. These features were evident 
postnatally but they resolved 1–6 months after birth. 
CONCLUSIONS 
.. In twin pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is lower than in singleton pregnancies. 
.. In twin pregnancies, impedance to flow in the uterine arteries is not as predictive as in singleton 
pregnancies of the subsequent development of pre-eclampsia. 

.. In twin pregnancies, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical arteries provides a useful prediction of the 
subsequent development of fetal growth restriction and adverse perinatal outcome. 
.. In twin pregnancies with fetal growth restriction due to placental insufficiency, the growth-restricted fetus 
demonstrates the same circulatory changes as observed in singleton pregnancies with the same 
complication. Thus, increased impedance to flow in the umbilical artery is usually associated with arterial 
redistribution in the fetal circulation, demonstrated by decreased PI in the middle cerebral artery and 
preferential shift of cardiac output in favor of the left ventricle. Deterioration in the fetal condition is 
associated with a breakdown of hemodynamic compensatory mechanisms, with a decline in cardiac output 
and the development of abnormal venous flow with increase in pulsatility of ductus venosus waveforms and 
loss of forward flow velocity during atrial contraction. 
.. In pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, placental vascular anastomoses can be identified by 
Doppler only in a minority of cases. In monochorionic twins with no twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, the 
incidence of vascular anastomoses is much higher than in those with the syndrome. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there is increased umbilical artery PI in both 
the donor and recipient fetuses, which may be the consequence of abnormal placental development and 
polyhydramnios-related compression, respectively. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, there is decreased middle cerebral artery PI 
in recipients and decreased middle cerebral artery mean velocity in donors. Additionally, there is decreased 
blood flow velocity and increased impedance to flow in the ductus venosus of both the donor and recipient 
fetuses. In donor fetuses, flow velocities across the atrioventricular valves are decreased. In a high 
proportion of recipient fetuses, there is tricuspid regurgitation. 
.. In pregnancies with severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, Doppler findings in the fetal circulation of 
the donor are consistent with decreased venous return due to hypovolemia and increased cardiac afterload 
due to increased placental resistance. In the recipient, there is evidence of hypervolemia with congestive 
heart failure; hypervolemia may cause compensatory cardiac hypertrophy, but eventually the pumping 
capabilities of the enlarged heart are exceeded and cardiac failure occurs. 

REFERENCES 
1. Bessis R, Papiernik E. Echographic imagery of amniotic membranes in twin pregnancies. In Gedda L, Parisi P, 
eds. Twin Research 3: Twin Biology and Multiple Pregnancy. New York: Alan R Liss, 1981:183–7 
2. SepulvedaW, Sebire NJ, Hughes K, Odibo A, Nicolaides KH. The lambda sign at 10–14 weeks of gestation as 
a predictor of chorionicity in twin pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:421–3 
3. Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Hughes K, Sepulveda W, Nicolaides KH. The hidden mortality of monochorionic twin 
pregnancies. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1997;104:1203–7 
4. Derom R, Vlietnick R, Derom C, ThieryM, Van Maele G, Van den Berghe H. Perinatal mortality in the East 
Flanders prospective twin survey. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 1991;41:25–6 
5. Machin G, Bamforth F, Innes M, Minichul K. Some perinatal characteristics of monozygotic twins who are 
dichorionic. Am J Med Genet 1995;55:71–6 
6. Luke B, Keith LG. The contribution of singletons, twins and triplets to low birth weight, infant mortality and 
handicap in the United States. J Reprod Med 1992;37:661–6 
7. Benirschke K. Twin placenta in perinatal mortality. N Y St J Med 1961;61:1499–508 
8. Saunders NJ, Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Therapeutic amniocentesis in twin–twin transfusion syndrome 
appearing in the second trimester of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;166:820–4 
9. Hecher K, Ville Y, Snijders R, Nicolaides KH. Doppler studies of the fetal circulation in twin–twin transfusion 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995 5:318–24 
10. Rosen D, Rabinowitz R, Beyth Y, Feijgin MD, Nicolaides KH. Fetal urine production in normal twins and in 
twins with acute polyhydramnios. Fetal Diagn Ther 1990;5:57–60 
11. Rodis JF, McIlveen PF, Egan JF, Borgida AF, Turner GW, Campbell WA. Monoamniotic twins: improved 
perinatal survival with accurate prenatal diagnosis and antenatal fetal surveillance. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1997;177:1046–9 
12. Overton TG, Denbow ML, Duncan KR, Fisk NM. First-trimester cord entanglement in monoamniotic twins. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:140–2 
13. Arabin B, Laurini RN, Van Eyck J. Early prenatal diagnosis of cord entanglement in monoamniotic multiple 
pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:181–6 
14. Bajoria R. Abundant vascular anastamoses in monoamniotic versus diamniotic monochorionic placentas. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:788–93 
15. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM. Fetal umbilical artery flow velocity-time waveforms in twin pregnancies. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1985;92:490–7 
16. Farmakides G, Schulman H, Saldana LR, Bracero LA, Fleischer A, Rochelson B. Surveillance of twin 
pregnancy with umbilical arterial velocimetry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:789–92 
17. Gerson AG,Wallace DM, Bridgens NK, Ashmead GG,Weiner S, Bolognese RJ. Duplex Doppler ultrasound in 
the evaluation of growth in twin pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987;70:419–23 
18. Nimrod C, Davies D, Harder J, Dempster C, Dodd G, McDicken N, Nicholson S. Doppler ultrasound prediction 
of fetal outcome in twin pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:402–6 
19. DivonMY, Girz BA, Sklar A, Guidetti DA, Langer O. Discordant twins – a prospective study of the diagnostic 
value of real-time ultrasonography combined with umbilical artery velocimetry. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1989;161:757–60 
20. Hastie SJ, Danskin F, Neilson JP, Whittle MJ. Prediction of the small for gestational age twin fetus by Doppler 
umbilical artery waveform analysis. Obstet Gynecol 1989;74:730–3 
21. Gaziano EP, Knox GE, Bendel RP, Calvin S, Brandt D. Is pulsed Doppler velocimetry useful in the 
management of multiple-gestation pregnancies? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991;164:1426–33 
22. Degani S, Gonen R, Shapiro I, Paltiely Y, Sharf M. Doppler flow velocity waveforms in fetal surveillance of 
twins: a prospective longitudinal study. J Ultrasound Med 1992;11:537–41 

23. Kurmanavicius J, Hebisch G, Huch R, Huch A. Umbilical artery blood flow velocity waveforms in twin 
pregnancies. J Perinat Med 1992;20:307–12 
24. Jensen OH. Doppler velocimetry in twin pregnancy. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1992;45:9–12 
25. GilesW, Trudinger B, Cook C, Connelly A. Placental microvascular changes in twin pregnancies with 
abnormal umbilical artery waveforms. Obstet Gynecol 1993;81:556–9 
26. Neilson JP, Danskin F, Hastie SJ. Monozygotic twin pregnancy: diagnostic and Doppler ultrasound studies. Br 
J Obstet Gynaecol 1989;96:1413–18 
27. Omtzigt AWJ. Clinical value of umbilical Doppler velocimetry; randomized controlled trial. Doctoral thesis, 
University of Utrecht, 1990 
28. Johnstone FD, Prescott R, Hoskins, Greer IA, McGlew T, Compton M. The effect of introduction of umbilical 
Doppler recordings to obstetric practice. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1993;100:733–41 
29. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Uterine artery Doppler velocity waveforms in twin pregnancies. Obstet 
Gynecol 1993;82:978–83 
30. Hecher K, VilleY, Nicolaides KH. Color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of communicating 
vessels in twin–twin transfusion syndrome and acardiac twins. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14: 37–40 
31. Denbow ML, Cox P, Talbert D, Fisk NM. Colour Doppler energy insonation of placental vasculature in 
monochorionic twins: absent arterio–arterial anastomoses in association with twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:760–5 
32. Giles WB, Trudinger BJ, Cook CM, Connelly AJ. Doppler umbilical artery studies in the twin–twin transfusion 
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1990;76:1097–9 
33. Pretorius DH, Manchester D, Barkin S, Parker S, Nelson TR. Doppler ultrasound of twin transfusion 
syndrome. J Ultrasound Med 1988;7:117–24 
34. Yamada A, Kasugai M, Ohno Y, Ishizuka T, Mizutani S, Tomoda Y. Antenatal diagnosis of twin–twin 
transfusion syndrome by Doppler ultrasound. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:1058–61 
35. Ohno Y, Ando H, Tanamura A, Kurauchi O, Mizutani S, Tomoda Y. The value of Doppler ultrasound in the 
diagnosis and management of twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Arch Gynecol Obstet 1994;255:37–42 
36. Gaziano E, Gaziano C, Brandt D. Doppler velocimetry determined redistribution of fetal blood flow: 
correlation with growth restriction in diamniotic monochorionic and dizygotic twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998;178:1359–67 
37. Hecher K, Ville Y, Nicolaides KH. Fetal arterial Doppler studies in twin–twin transfusion syndrome. J 
Ultrasound Med 1995;14:101–8 
38. Ishimatsu J, Yoshimura O, Manabe A, Matsuzaki T, Tanabe R, Hamada T. Ultrasonography and Doppler 
studies in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Asia Oceania J Obstet Gynaecol 1992;18: 325–31 
39. Rizzo G, Arduini D, Romanini C. Cardiac and extracardiac flows in discordant twins. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1994;170:1321–7 
40. Zosmer N, Bajoria R,Weiner E, Rigby M, Vaughan J, Fisk NM. Clinical and echographic features of in utero 
cardiac dysfunction in the recipient twin in twin–twin transfusion syndrome. Br Heart J 1994;72:74–9 
41. Hecher K, Sullivan ID, Nicolaides KH. Temporary iatrogenic fetal tricuspid valve atresia in a case of twin to 
twin transfusion syndrome. Br Heart J 1994;72:457–60 
42. Lachapelle MF, Leduc L, Cote JM, Grignon A, Fouron JC. Potential value of fetal echocardiography in the 
differential diagnosis of twin pregnancy with presence of polyhydramnios– oligohydramnios syndrome. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;177:388–94 
43. Fesslova V, Villa L, Nava S, Mosca F, Nicolini U. Fetal and neonatal echocardiographic findings in twin–twin 
transfusion syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:1056–62 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 

Chapter 12 
Color Doppler sonography in the assessment of the 
fetal heart 
by Rabih Chaoui 
INTRODUCTION 
Pulsed and color Doppler ultrasound improve the diagnostic accuracy of two-dimensional gray-scale imaging in the 
prenatal detection of abnormalities of the heart and great arteries. The two methods are complementary to each 
other, with color Doppler being used for general assessment of flow in the region of interest and pulsed Doppler for 
targeted examination of flow in a vessel or across a valve 1-10. 
In pulsed Doppler ultrasound, the examiner positions a sample volume over the region of interest to obtain flow 
velocity waveforms as a function of time. This makes it possible to quantify blood flow as peak or time-averaged 
mean velocities, which allow the calculation of ratios (such as the E/A ratio) or blood volume (such as stroke volume 
or cardiac output) after measurement of vessel diameter. Color Doppler, which is technically easier to perform, allows 
a rapid assessment of the hemodynamic situation, but gives only descriptive or semi-quantitative information on 
blood flow. Color Doppler should be an integral part of the routine examination of a fetal heart because this helps to 
shorten the scanning time, but also provides improved reliability in diagnosing or excluding abnormalities. 
EXAMINATION OF THE NORMAL HEART 
Examination of the fetal heart using color Doppler is achieved through similar planes as gray-scale imaging. Several 
planes, including the abdominal view, four-chamber view, five-chamber view, the short-axis and the three-vessel 
view need to be assessed to achieve spatial information on different cardiac chambers and vessels as well as their 
connections to each other 1,2,4. The difference from two-dimensional scanning is that, with color Doppler, the angle of 
insonation should be as small as possible for optimal visualization of flow. 
In the abdominal plane, the position of the aorta, inferior vena cava and the connection of the vein to the right atrium 
are examined. Pulsed Doppler sampling from the inferior vena cava, the ductus venosus or the hepatic veins can be 
achieved in longitudinal planes. 
The four-chamber view allows the detection of many severe cardiac defects. Using color Doppler in an apical (Figure 
1) or basal approach, the diastolic perfusion across the atrioventricular valves can be assessed; there is a 
characteristic separate perfusion of both inflow tracts during diastole (Figure 1). Using pulsed Doppler, there is a 
typical biphasic shape of the diastolic flow velocity waveform with an early peak diastolic velocity (E) and a second 
peak during atrial contraction (A-wave); E is smaller than A, and the E : A ratio increases during pregnancy toward 1, 
to be inversed after birth. In this plane, regurgitation across the atrioventricular valves, which is more frequent at the 
tricuspid valve, is easily detected during systole with color Doppler. Flow across the foramen ovale is visualized in a 
lateral approach of the four-chamber view. Color Doppler allows confirmation of the physiological right-to-left shunt 
and visualization of the pulmonary veins as they enter the left atrium. 
The transducer is then tilted to obtain the five-chamber view and then the short-axis view. Using color Doppler, flow 
during systole is visualized (Figure 2 and Figure 3). 

Figure 1: Four-chamber view in real-time (left) and color Doppler. During diastole, flow is visualized entering 
from both the right and left atria (RA, LA) into the right and left ventricles (RV, LV) and the flows are 
separated by the interatrial and interventricular septum. 
Figure 2: Five-chamber view in real-time (left) using color Doppler (right). The aorta, arising from the left 
ventricle, is seen and color shows the laminar flow across the aortic valve during systole. Compare with aortic 
stenosis (Figure 7) and overriding aorta (Figure 12). 
Figure 3: Five-chamber view in real-time (left) using color Doppler (right). The pulmonar vein, arising from 
the right ventricle. 
Figure 4: (a,b) Aortic Arch; (c) color doppler angio of the aortic arch 

Figure 5: (a,b) Ductal Arch; (c) color doppler of the ductal arch 
Figure 6: (a,b) Venous return (IVC & SVC); (c) color doppler angio of the venous return 
In these planes, the correct ventriculo–arterial connections (compare Figures 2 and 14), the non-aliased flow 
(compare Figures 2 and Figure 14) and the continuity of the interventricular septum with the aortic root are examined 
(compare Figures 2 and 12). With pulsed Doppler, a single peak flow velocity waveform for the aortic and pulmonary 
valves is demonstrated. The peak systolic velocity increases from 50 to 110 cm/s during the second half of pregnancy 
and is higher across the aortic than the pulmonary valve. Time to peak velocity in the aorta is longer than in the 
pulmonary trunk. 
The three-vessel view enables assessment of the aortic arch and the ductus arteriosus. In the third trimester, an 
aliased flow is found within the ductus as a sign of the onset of constriction. When the fetal position is optimal, the 
aortic arch and ductus arteriosus can be seen in a longitudinal plane, allowing visualization of neck vessels. 
Figure 7: Three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound of the crossing of the great vessels in a 28-week 
fetus. AOA, aortic arch; DA, ductus arteriosus; LPA, left pulmonary artery; TP, pulmonary trunk. 

Figure 8: Tricuspid atresia (*) and ventricular septal defect (VSD). Arrows show the direction of flow; due to 
the atresia of the tricuspid valve, blood entering the right atrium cannot enter directly into the right ventricle 
and it flows to the left atrium, left ventricle and across the VSD to the hypoplastic right ventricle (right). 
EXAMINATION OF THE ABNORMAL HEART 
Tricuspid atresia 
In this condition, there is absence of the connection between the right atrium and the right ventricle. In the fourchamber 
view, the right ventricle is hypoplastic or absent and color Doppler demonstrates the absence of flow from 
the right atrium to the right ventricle (Figure 3). Blood from the right atrium flows across the foramen ovale to the 
left atrium and from there during diastole to the left ventricle. This unilateral perfusion across the left ventricular 
inflow tract is typical for this lesion. In the presence of an associated ventricular septal defect, a left-to-right shunt 
into the small right ventricular cavity is found. The postnatal prognosis depends on the anatomy of the great vessels. 
The ventriculo–arterial connection can be concordant or discordant, and the pulmonary valve can be patent, stenotic 
or atretic; color Doppler helps in the reliable differentiation between these conditions. 
Figure 9: the right ventricle is hypoplastic or absent and color Doppler demonstrates the absence or 
minimum flow from the right atrium to the right ventricle. 
.. 

Tricuspid dysplasia and Ebstein anomaly 
In tricuspid dysplasia, the valve leaflets are correctly inserted but they are thickened. By contrast, the valve leaflets in 
Ebstein anomaly are inserted abnormally so that they are more apical in the right ventricle and their ability to close is 
reduced. In both conditions there is tricuspid regurgitation which is generally associated with dilatation of the right 
atrium and, in extreme forms, with gross cardiomegaly (Figure 4) 11,12. Color Doppler is used to confirm tricuspid 
regurgitation and spectral Doppler (Figure 5) is used to measure the pressure gradient and duration of the 
regurgitation. Since both anomalies are associated with an obstruction of the right ventricular outflow tract 
(pulmonary stenosis or atresia), it is mandatory to analyze the perfusion in the pulmonary trunk. In severe 
obstruction, retrograde flow within the ductus arteriosus is found (see Figure 6). This, however, does not prove 
pulmonary atresia because a patent but stenotic pulmonary valve, due to tricuspid regurgitation, can show the same 
features as an atresia and thus leads to a false-positive result 12. 
Figure 10: The characteristic finding is that of a massively enlarged right atrium, a small right ventricle, and 
a small pulmonary artery. Doppler can be used to demonstrate regurgitation in the right atrium 
Pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum 
This diagnosis includes a group of heart defects with an atretic pulmonary valve and an intact ventricular septum. The 
size and shape of the right ventricle show a wide range, from hypoplastic to normal sized or even dilated. The latter 
form is identical to tricuspid dysplasia with pulmonary atresia. In both former types, the right ventricle shows no 
contractility and the tricuspid valve movements are reduced. Color Doppler in the four-chamber view shows absence 
or reduced tricuspid flow and, during systole, there may be tricuspid valve regurgitation. In the three-vessel view or 
the short-axis view, there is absence of antegrade perfusion across the pulmonary valve and retrograde flow through 
the ductus arteriosus (Figure 6). The pulmonary trunk in these conditions is narrower than the ascending aorta, but is 
not severely hypoplastic because of retrograde perfusion through the ductus arteriosus. In some hearts with 
pulmonary atresia, communications between the hypoplastic right ventricle and the coronary arteries may be present 
and are detectable by color Doppler ultrasound 13 in mid-gestation. Their presence is associated with worse neonatal 
outcome. 

Figure 11: Tricuspid valve dysplasia with severe tricuspid insufficiency and cardiomegaly. Retrograde flow 
from the right ventricle (RV) to the right atrium (RA) is seen in blue and turbulence is coded by green pixels. 
Figure 12: Severe tricuspid regurgitation. Pulsed wave Doppler (left) is not useful due to the aliasing 
phenomenon and the maximal velocities that can be assessed are 180 cm/s (arrow). The continuous wave 
transducer allows assessment of very high velocities; in this case 420 cm/s 
Figure 13: Hypoplastic right ventricle (arrow) in a fetus with pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum 
(a). Color doppler of the 4 chamber view with asymmetric flow between the left heart and right heart. 
Pulmonary valve atresia can be diagnosed using color Doppler by visualizing the great vessels – aorta (Ao) 
and pulmonary trunk (TP) – in the upper thorax and demonstrating the retrograde flow from the descending 
aorta across the ductus arteriosus toward the pulmonary valve. 
.. 

Pulmonary stenosis 
In the isolated form of this lesion, there is narrowing of the semilunar valves. In severe cases, a hypokinetic and 
hypertrophied right ventricle can be found but most cases are not detected prenatally. On two-dimensional imaging, 
the diagnosis is suspected by the presence of poststenotic dilatation of the pulmonary trunk and reduction of 
pulmonary valve excursion. With color Doppler, the diagnosis is easy and is based on the demonstration of turbulent 
flow across the pulmonary valve. In severe cases, a retrograde flow can be found through the ductus arteriosus. 
Doppler flow velocity waveforms using a continuous wave transducer enable the demonstration of high velocities 
(more than 2 m/s), which are typical of stenosis. These findings, either in color or in pulsed Doppler, are only typical 
of the isolated form and are not commonly found in conditions associated with a ventricular septal defect, such as 
tetralogy of Fallot or double outlet right ventricle. Fetal pulmonary stenosis can be associated in the third trimester 
with tricuspid insufficiency, leading in some cases to right atrial dilatation 8. 
Aortic stenosis 
In general, the narrowing is found at the level of the aortic valve and a simple stenosis is rarely detected in the four-
chamber view. However, a critical aortic stenosis is associated with a dilated and hypokinetic left ventricle with an 
echogenic endocardium, as a sign of endocardial fibroelastosis. Simple aortic stenosis can be detected only by using 
color Doppler (Figure 7). Antegrade turbulent flow (aliasing) is a characteristic finding in the five-chamber view 
(Figure 7). Pulsed Doppler analysis shows high velocities (more than 2 m/s) and a characteristic aliasing pattern. 
Continuous wave Doppler is therefore necessary to confirm the diagnosis (Figure 7). In critical aortic stenosis, there is 
antegrade turbulent flow across the aortic valve, but peak systolic velocities can vary from more than 2 m/s to values 
within the normal range, as an expression of left ventricular dysfunction 9. Due to the high pressure in the left 
ventricle, both a mitral regurgitation and a left-to-right shunt at the level of the foramen ovale are found 8. In severe 
left ventricular dysfunction, a retrograde flow is seen within the aortic arch. 
Figure 14: Aortic stenosis with turbulent flow (green pixels), as seen in the five-chamber view (compare with 
normal findings in Figure 2). Continuous wave Doppler allows a quantification of the stenosis. 
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
In this condition, the aortic valve is generally atretic or severely stenotic and the left ventricle diminutive and noncontractile. 
The mitral valve is either atretic (Figure 8) or stenotic (Figure 9). Color Doppler demonstrates reduced or 
absent diastolic filling of the left ventricle 8. In the four-chamber view, there is unilateral perfusion of the right 
ventricle. Often, there is mild tricuspid regurgitation. Careful examination of the intra-atrial communication shows an 
abnormal left-to-right shunt. In hypoplastic left heart syndrome, there is retrograde perfusion of the neck vessels and 
coronary arteries which can also be used for the differential diagnosis 14,15. Using color Doppler, it is then possible to 
confirm the diagnosis by demonstrating, in the three-vessel view, the retrograde perfusion in the hypoplastic aortic 
arch 14,15 
. 

Figura 15: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome -the left ventricle diminutive, with color doppler there is an 
assimetric color perfusion of the chambers. 
Ventricular septal defect 
The defect can be either situated in the inlet, in the muscular part or, most commonly, in the perimembranous part of 
the ventricular septum. The defect can be suspected by two-dimensional ultrasound examination if it is larger than 3 
mm. Color Doppler can help to identify small muscular septal defects (Figure 10). Although right and left ventricular 
pressures are quite equal prenatally, a bidirectional shunt across the defect is present. The best approach to examine 
a septal defect with color Doppler is the perpendicular insonation of the interventricular septum (Figure 10). In cases 
of an obstruction of an outflow tract, there is an unidirectional shunt to the contralateral side; in a ventricular septal 
defect with aortic stenosis, there is a left-to-right shunt8. 
Figure 16: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. The left ventricle (LV) is absent (?) due to mitral atresia and 
aortic atresia. Color Doppler shows the one-sided perfusion from the right atrium into the right ventricle 
(RA,RV). Compare with the normal four-chamber view in Figure 1 and with another hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome in Figure 9. 

Figure 17: Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. In comparison with the fetus in Figure 8, this fetus shows a 
hypoplastic hypokinetic left ventricle. This is due to the combination of aortic atresia and patent but dysplastic 
mitral valve. Color Doppler shows similar features as in Figure 8, with one-sided perfusion across the right 
ventricular inflow tract. 
Figure 18: Four-chamber view seen from the right side. With real-time scanning, the anatomy appears to be 
normal. The use of color Doppler demonstrates the presence of a muscular ventricular septal defect during 
the phase of a shunt (blue) between the right and left ventricles. 
Atrioventricular septal defect 
In this malformation, there is a combination of defects in the atrial and ventricular septum at the level of the 
atrioventricular connections. The septal valve leaflets are generally malformed and, in severe cases, they can be 
absent. In a complete atrioventricular septal defect, color Doppler produces a characteristic H-shape with biventricular 
diastolic flow across the right and the left inflow tracts and a communication at the level of the atrioventricular valves 
(Figure 11) 6. During systole, the dysplastic valves are not able to close properly, leading to tricuspid and mitral 
regurgitation (Figure 12). If the regurgitation is severe, cardiac failure and non-immune hydrops develop 16. 

Figure 19: Four-chamber view in a fetus with Down syndrome demonstrating a complete atrioventricular 
septal defect (AV canal). The defect (*) can be recognized during diastole when the valves are patent but is 
better assessed using color Doppler, which demonstrates the interatrial and interventricular connection during 
diastole (H-shape). Compare with the normal findings in Figure 1. 
Tetralogy of Fallot 
This cardiac defect is defined by the association of a ventricular septal defect, an overriding aorta, an infundibular 
pulmonary stenosis and a secondary hypertrophy of the right ventricle. Prenatally, the first three signs are present 
and they can be diagnosed. Using two-dimensional ultrasound, the ventricular septal defect and overriding aorta can 
be seen in the five-chamber view. With color Doppler, the Y-shape of systolic blood flow from both ventricles into the 
overriding aorta can be visualized (Figure 13) 6. However, an overriding vessel is not exclusive to tetralogy of Fallot, 
as it can be found in truncus arteriosus communis, in some forms of double outlet right ventricle or in pulmonary 
atresia with ventricular septal defect. It is, therefore, important to assess the anatomy and hemodynamics of the 
pulmonary trunk, when an overriding vessel is suspected. 
.... 
Figure 20: overriding aorta can be seen in the five-chamber view. With color Doppler, the Y-shape of systolic 
blood flow from both ventricles into the overriding aorta can be visualized (a). 

Figure 21: Five-chamber view in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF), demonstrating the systolic perfusion 
from both the right and left ventricle (RV, LV) into the overriding aorta (Y-shape). 
Double outlet right ventricle 
This is a group of cardiac defects in which the aorta and pulmonary trunk originate from the right ventricle. The 
position of these vessels to each other is variable, but they usually have a parallel course. In most cases, the 
diagnosis is achieved using two-dimensional ultrasound, but this is often facilitated by applying color Doppler (Figure 
14). In hearts with double outlet right ventricle, obstructions of the pulmonary or aortic pathway can be present and 
are easily diagnosed by color Doppler. In patent atrioventricular valves, the left ventricle appears smaller than the 
right one and flow across the ventricular septal defect is found to be unidirectional from left to right. 
In double outlet right ventricle (DORV) most of the aorta and pulmonary valve arise completely or almost completely 
from the right ventricle. The relation between the two vessels may vary, ranging from a Fallot-like to a TGA-like 
situation (the Taussig-Bing anomaly). DORV is not a single malformation from a pathophysiological point of view. The 
term refers only to the position of the great vessels that is found in association with ventricular septal defects, 
tetralogy of Fallot, transposition, univentricular hearts. Pulmonary stenosis is very common in all types of DORV, but 
left outflow obstructions, from subaortic stenosis to coarctation and interruption of the aortic arch, can also be seen. 

Figure 22: Double outlet right ventricle (DORV) with both the aorta (AO) and pulmonary trunk (TP) arising 
from the right ventricle. Color Doppler demonstrates blood flow from the right ventricle into both vessels and 
the flow is not turbulent because there is no stenosis. 
Complete transposition of the great arteries 
In this defect, the aorta arises from the right ventricle and the pulmonary trunk from the left ventricle. The diagnosis 
is suspected postnatally when the infant becomes cyanotic after closure of the ductus arteriosus and foramen ovale. 
Prenatally, the four-chamber view appears normal. The malformation is recognized when both arteries are visualized 
simultaneously and they appear to be parallel to each other (Figure 15); color Doppler is particularly helpful in 
demonstrating this sign. Color Doppler is also useful in demonstrating pulmonary stenosis and ventricular septal 
defect, which are occasionally found in transposition of the great arteries. 
Figure 23a: (a) four chamber view with parallel outflow tracts from the base of the heart (b) left ventricule 
with the pulmonary the left heart view demonstrating that the vessel connected to the left ventricle has a 
posterior course and bifurcates into the two pulmonary arteries (c) the vessel connected to the right ventricle 
has a long upward course and gives rise to the brachio-cephalic vessels. 
Figure 23: Transposition of the great arteries demonstrating the abnormal connection of the right ventricle 
(RV) with the aorta (AO) and the left ventricle (LV) with the pulmonary trunk (TP). Both great arteries show a 
parallel course. 

Other heart defects 
Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of a wide range of fetal heart defects, including abnormal connections of 
systemic or pulmonary veins, truncus arteriosus communis, anomalies of the aortic arch, and assessment of 
intracardiac hemodynamics in cardiomyopathies or in cardiac tumors. 
Figure 24: Rhabdomyoma (which represents excessive growth of cardiac muscle) a single or multiple 
echogenic masses impinging upon the cardiac cavities. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF TRICUSPID REGURGITATION 
Regurgitation of the fetal atrioventricular valves is more common on the right side than on the left. Regurgitation of 
the tricuspid valve shows a wide range of severity, from harmless regurgitation of short duration 15 to severe 
insufficiency lasting throughout the whole of systole (holosystolic), leading to huge dilatation of the right atrium 
(Figure 4). In some conditions, gross dilatation of the right atrium can be the first sign detected on real-time 
imaging11 and targeted color Doppler demonstrates severe insufficiency to be the underlying cause. On many 
occasions, however, tricuspid regurgitation is detected accidently when performing either a routine examination with 
color Doppler or during a targeted fetal echocardiographic scan in suspected fetal disease. Tricuspid regurgitation of 
short duration in early systole is observed in 3–5% of all healthy fetuses at mid-gestation 17,18 and this is considered 
to be physiological. However, the detection of tricuspid regurgitation should stimulate a search for a possible 
underlying pathology (Table 1). 

.. 
Table 1: Differential diagnosis of fetal tricuspid regurgitation 
Pathogenesis Etiology 
Mild regurgitation physiological due to immature fetal lungs or myocardium. 
Found in 3-5% of all pregnancies at 18-24 weeks 
Heart defects with dysplasia 
of the tricuspid valve 
Ebstein anomaly 
tricuspid valve dysplasia 
Heart defects with facultative 
tricuspid regurgitation 
atrioventricular valve septal defect 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
coarctation of the aorta 
double outlet right ventricle 
Heart defects and diseases with 
right ventricular outflow tract 
obstruction 
pulmonary artesia 
pulmonary stenosis 
constriction of the ductus arteriosus (mild to severe tricuspid 
regurgitation) 
Volume overload (often with 
mitral regurgitation) 
fetal anemia, due to red cell isoimmunization, parvo-virus B19 
infection, fetomaternal hemorrhage 
peripheral arteriovenous fistula, due to vein of Galen aneurysm, 
sacrococcygeal teratoma, chorangioma 
severe tachycardia or bradycardia 
recipient fetus in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
heart defect with volume overload or pulmonary regurgitation 
(tatralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve) 
Impairment of myocardial 
contractility 
myocarditis, due to infection, systemic lupus erythematosus 
cardiomyopathy secondary to severe arrhythmia or volume overload, 
dilatative cardiomyopathy 
myocardial impairment in severe fetal growth restriction 
endocardial fibroelastosis of the right ventricle 

REFERENCES 
.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
1. DeVore GR, Horenstein J, Siassi B, Lawrence DP. Fetal echocardiography. VII. Doppler color flow mapping: a 
new technique for the diagnosis of congenital heart disease. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:1054–64 
2. Gembruch U, Hansmann M, Redel D, Bald R. Fetal two-dimensional Doppler echocardiography (color flow 
mapping) and its place in prenatal diagnosis. Prenat Diagn 1989;9:535–47 
3. Kurjak A, Breyer B, Jurkovic D, Alfirevic Z, Miljan M. Color flow mapping in obstetrics. J Perinat Med 
1987;15:271–81 
4. Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Fetal color Doppler echocardiography. 1. General principles and normal findings 
(German). Ultraschall Med 1994;15:100–4 
5. Rice MJ, McDonald RW, Sahn DJ. Contributions of color Doppler to the evaluation of cardiovascular 
abnormalities in the fetus. Semin Ultrasound CT MR 1993;14:277–85 
6. Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Fetal color Doppler echocardiography. 2. Abnormalities of the heart and great essels 
(German). Ultraschall Med 1994;15:105–11 
7. Copel JA, Morotti R, Hobbins JC, Kleinman CS. The antenatal diagnosis of congenital heart disease using 
fetal echocardiography: is color flow mapping necessary? Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:1–8 
8. DeVore G. The use of color Doppler imaging to examine the fetal heart. Normal and pathologic anatomy. In 
Jaffe R, Warsof SL, eds. Color Doppler Imaging in Obstetrics and Gynecology. McGraw-Hill, 1992:121–54 
9. Sharland G, Chita S, Allan L. The use of color Doppler in fetal echocardiography. Int J Cardiol 1990;28:229– 
36 
10. Chiba Y, Kanzaki T, Kobayashi H, Murakami M, Yutani C. Evaluation of fetal structural heart disase using 
color flow mapping. Ultrasound Med Biol 1990;16:221–9 
11. Chaoui R, Bollmann R, Goldner B, Heling KS, Tennstedt C. Fetal cardiomegaly: echocardiographic findings 
and outcome in 19 cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 1994;9:92–104 
12. Chaoui R, Goldner B, Heling K-S, Bollmann R. Intracardiac Doppler flow velocities in marked fetal 
cardiomegaly. J Matern Fetal Invest 1995;5:68–73 
13. Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Goldner B, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of ventriculo-coronary communications in 
a second-trimester fetus using transvaginal and transabdominal color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:194–7 
14. Gembruch U, Chatterjee M, Bald R, Redel D, Hansmann M. Prenatal diagnosis of aortic atresia by colour 
Doppler flow mapping. Prenat Diagn 1990;10:211–15 
15. Hata K, Hata T, Manabe A, Kitao M. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: color Doppler sonographic and 
magnetic resonance imaging features in utero. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1995;39:70–2 
16. Gembruch U, Knopfle G, Chatterjee M, Bald R, Redel DA, Fodisch HJ, Hansmann M. Prenatal diagnosis of 
atrioventricular canal malformations with up-to-date echocardiographic technology: report of 14 cases. Am 
Heart J 1991;121:1489–97 
17. Respondek ML, Kammermeier M, Ludomirsky A,Weil SR, Huhta JC. The prevalence and clinical significance 
of fetal tricuspid valve regurgitation with normal heart anatomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;171:1265–70 
18. Gembruch U, Smrcek JM. The prevalence and clinical significance of tricuspid valve regurgitation in normally 
grown fetuses and those with intrauterine growth retardation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:374–82 

Chapter 13 
Color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of fetal 
abnormalities 
by Rabih Chaoui 
INTRODUCTION 
Color Doppler plays a vital role in the diagnosis of fetal cardiac defects and in the assessment of the hemodynamic 
responses to fetal hypoxia and anemia. This chapter examines an additional role of color Doppler in the diagnosis of 
non-cardiac malformations. In the future, color Doppler may also be used in the three-dimensional reconstruction and 
visualization of fetal and placental vessels.1,2 
PLACENTAL AND UMBILICAL VESSELS 
The umbilical cord vessels can be followed from their placental insertion (Figure 1) to their attachment on the fetal 
abdominal wall and their extension into the fetal abdomen 3. Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of vasa previa 
(Figure 2), and targeted examination for this condition should always be undertaken in patients with velamentous 
insertion of the cord (Figure 1), succenturiate lobe, placenta previa, multiple gestation and amniotic bands 4-8. Color 
Doppler is also helpful in the detection of placenta accreta 9,10 and chorioangioma, which is an arteriovenous fistulous 
malformation within the placenta 11,12. 
Examination of the umbilical cord facilitates the detection of nuchal cord (Figure 3), false and true knots of the cord 
(Figure 3), hemangioma or angiomyxoma of the cord, hypoplastic umbilical artery, fusion of two arteries into one, 
and a single umbilical artery 13-21. In a transverse view of the lower abdomen, the two umbilical arteries (superior 
vesical arteries) are seen on either side of the bladder (Figure 4) and, using this plane, it is easier to diagnose a 
single umbilical artery than by examining a cross-section of the umbilical cord. 
Figure 1: The umbilical cord inserts into an anterior placenta but an umbilical vessel extends into the 
amniotic membranes (left). In this fetus with a posterior placenta, there is velamentous insertion of the 
umbilical cord (right). 

Figure 2: Transvaginal demonstration of a vasa previa. In this condition, transvaginal color Doppler 
sonography demonstrates the presence of fetal vessels within the membranes across the internal cervical os 
(right). The yellow arrows point to the vasa previa and the white arrows to the cervix. 
Figure 3: Three-fold nuchal cord (left). False knot of the umbilical cord (right). 
Figure 4: Transverse section of the fetal lower abdomen demonstrating the bladder and the umbilical arteries 
(a). In a fetus with Potter syndrome, there is no visible bladder (?) between the umbilical arteries (b). In this 
fetus, there is only a single umbilical artery (c). 

A varix or aneurysm of the intra-abdominal part of the umbilical vein is recognized as a hypoechoic cyst and the 
diagnosis can be made by color Doppler (Figure 5). Color Doppler can also facilitate the diagnosis of an abnormal 
course of the umbilical vein, including a persistent right umbilical vein (Figures 6 and 7), and absence of the ductus 
venosus with direct connection of the umbilical vein to the right atrium (Figure 7), inferior vena cava or iliac vein2428. 
In two fetuses with Down syndrome, we detected a fistula between the hepatic artery and the ductus venosus 29. 
In monochorionic twins, color Doppler is useful in the identification of placental vascular communications in 
pregnancies with twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, in the detection of retrograde perfusion in twin reversed arterial 
perfusion (TRAP) sequence and in the diagnosis of cord entanglement in monoamniotic twins 30,31. 
Figure 5: Transverse section of the fetal lower abdomen demonstrating two cystic structures (a). Color 
Doppler demonstrates that one cyst is the bladder with both umbilical arteries and the other cyst is a varix of 
the umbilical vein (b). 
RENAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler examination of fetal renal vessels can facilitate the diagnosis of renal malformations. It is best to use a 
coronal view of the fetus, allowing visualization of the descending aorta with both the left and right renal arteries 
(Figure 8). Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of unilateral or bilateral renal agenesis (Figure 9), double arterial 
supply of a normal or a duplex kidney (Figure 8), horseshoe kidney (Figure 10) and pelvic kidney 32-38. 
Figure : Color Doppler examination of fetal renal vessels, a coronal view allowing the visualization of the 
descending aorta with both renal arteries (a), unilateral renal artery (b), absence of bilateral renal arteries (c) 
and absence of bilateral renal arteries + absence of iliac arteries (d). 

Figure 6: Persistence of a right umbilical vein (UV) -yellow arrow, which is seen to the right of the stomach 
(St.) 
Figure : Ductus venosus agenesis (from Jeanty, 1999) 

Figure 7: Longitudinal view of the fetal trunk and abdomen demonstrating the umbilical vein and ductus 
venosus in their course through the liver towards the heart. 
Figure 7: Example of type 3 ductal agenesis, with the umbilical vein joining directly to the inferior vena cava. 
(courtesy Olavarria, www.thefetus.net) 
Figure 8: Coronal view of the descending aorta demonstrating both renal arteries (left). Duplex kidney with 
arterial supply by two renal vessels (right). 

Figure 9: Presence of only the right renal artery in a fetus with agenesis of the left kidney (left). In a fetus 
with bilateral renal agenesis, there are no renal arteries arising from the aorta (right) 
Figure 10: Horseshoe kidney diagnosed by real-time ultrasound (left) is confirmed by color Doppler (right) 
INTRACRANIAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler is helpful in the diagnosis of intracranial arteriovenous fistulae, such as vein of Galen aneurym (Figure 
11) and in distinguishing this vascular malformation from an arachnoid cyst, porencephaly or hydrocephaly 39-42. 
Intracranial arteriovenous fistulae can be also found in other regions of the brain and do not always present as a 
hypoechoic cyst. In such cases, a fistula is suspected by the presence of the associated cardiomegaly and dilated neck 
veins, and the diagnosis is made by targeted examination of the brain with color Doppler. 
Some malformations of the fetal brain are often associated with an abnormal course of intracranial vessels and their 
visualization using color Doppler can be used for confirming the diagnosis. Agenesis or dysgenesis of the corpus 
callosum is associated with an abnormal looping of the pericallosal artery (Figure 12), and, in microcephaly and 
holoprosencephaly, the shape of the circle of Willis may be distorted (Figure 13) 43,44. 

Figure 11: Vein of Galen aneurysm as an intracerebral cystic structure in gray scale (left) and as a vascular 
malformation with color Doppler (right) 
Figure 12: Midsagittal view of the head demonstrating the anterior (pericallosal) cerebral artery in a normal 
fetus (left). In a fetus with agenesis of the corpus callosum, there is abnormal looping and ramification of the 
pericallosal artery (right) 
Figure 13: Circle of Willis in a normal fetus (left). In holoprosencephaly, the anterior artery is part of the 
malformation and the circle is not closed (right). 
INTRATHORACIC VESSELS 
Pulmonary arteries and veins can be seen in their course from the heart into the peripheral pulmonary segments, and 
Doppler measurements in these vessels may be useful in the detection of pulmonary hypoplasia 45-49. In suspected 
diaphragmatic hernia, visualization of liver vessels in the thorax can confirm the diagnosis and has prognostic 
value50,51 
. 

Color Doppler has also been found to be useful in the diagnosis of the very rare condition of unilateral lung 
agenesis52. In bronchopulmonary sequestration, the diagnosis can be made by the demonstration of the feeding 
artery arising directly from the descending aorta (Figure-14) 53,54. Some cardiac defects, such as pulmonary valve 
atresia with ventricular septum defect, are associated with multiple aorto-pulmonary collateral arteries which may 
complicate the neonatal course. 
Figure 14: Pulmonary sequestration (a) with the feeding artery arising directly from the descending aorta 
(b,c). Color Doppler demonstrates that a vessel that arises from the aorta and perfuses the left lung (d,e). 
INTRA-ABDOMINAL VESSELS 
Color Doppler has made it possible to visualize the celiac trunk with the hepatic, superior mesenteric, splenic, adrenal 
and other arteries. In general, the differential diagnosis of abdominal wall defects is easy by gray-scale imaging, but, 
in some cases, color Doppler may be necessary to demonstrate the attachment of the umbilical cord and to help 
distinguish between an omphalocele and a gastroschisis (Figure 15). 
Figure 15: Umbilical vein and ductus venosus in a fetus with exomphalos (left). Gastroschisis with 
demonstration of the descending aorta, the celiac trunk (ct) and the superior mesenteric artery extending into 
the exteriorized bowel (right) 

Figure 16: Fetus with left isomerism (polysplenia). A cross-section in the upper abdomen shows the stomach 
(ST) on the right side, no inferior vena cava and the dilated azygous vein near the aorta (left). In the 
longitudinal coronal view, different flow directions in the aorta and in the azygous vein are demonstrated by 
color Doppler (right). 
However, in these conditions, Doppler measurements in the superior mesenteric artery have not been found to be 
useful in predicting postnatal outcome 55. Color Doppler is useful in the diagnosis of hepatic hemangioma, aortic 
aneurysm, aneurysm of the umbilical vein (Figure 5), and infradiaphragmatic anomalous pulmonary venous 
drainage56-58. In fetuses with left isomerism (polysplenia), color Doppler can facilitate visualization of the dilated 
azygous vein near the descending aorta and confirmation of the absence of the inferior vena cava (Figure 16). 
FETAL TUMORS 
Fetal tumors are rare but, for optimal perinatal management, their differential diagnosis and precise description are 
desirable. In fetal goiter, color Doppler demonstrates high perfusion of the thyroid gland 59,60. Echogenic or cystic 
lesions in the upper part of the kidneys may represent a neuroblastoma, adrenal hemorrhage or congenital adrenal 
hypertrophy, and the differential diagnosis could be facilitated by visualization of the adrenal arteries by color 
Doppler61,62. Color Doppler is also useful in the distinction of sacrococcygeal teratoma, which is vascular (Figure 17), 
from other cystic lesions, such as meningocele or ectodermal cyst 63,64. A teratoma can also be found in other sites, 
like the abdomen, thorax or neck. Color Doppler can be used in diagnosing lymphangioma and hemangioma but, in 
these conditions, flow velocities are very low 65-67. 

Figure 17: Vessels within a sacrococcygeal teratoma demonstrated by color Doppler 
VISUALIZATION OF FLUID MOVEMENTS 
Color Dppler enables not only visualization of blood flow but also movement of fluid. During fetal breathing 
movements, flow can be observed at the level of the mouth, nose and trachea (Figure 18) 68-70. Color Doppler 
facilitates the diagnosis of cleft palate by demonstrating the movement of fluid between mouth and nose during 
breathing movements 71,72. In normal fetuses, there is movement of fluid in the trachea during breathing movements 
and the flow has been shown to be decreased in those fetuses with diaphragmatic hernia and lethal pulmonary 
hypoplasia, but not in those that survive 73. In laryngeal atresia, there is no fluid flow within the dilated trachea 74. 
In fetuses with duodenal stenosis or atresia, to-and-fro fluid movements can be observed within the stomach (Figure 
19), which presumably represent abnormal peristaltic movements. The appearance of this sign may precede the 
development of the double-bubble sign and polyhydramnios 75. Similarly, in fetuses with ureteric dilatation and 
peristalsis, color Doppler may be useful in the diagnosis of vesico-ureteric reflux. In fetuses with suspected genital 
abnormalities, visualization of urination by color Doppler may help to make the diagnosis of hypospadias. 
In fetuses treated with pleuro–amniotic or vesico–amniotic shunts, color Doppler may be useful in demonstrating 
patency of the shunts and continuing drainage of fluid from the fetus into the amniotic fluid. 
Figure 18: Breathing through the nose and mouth in a third-trimester fetus (left). Visualization of the trachea 
in color Doppler also demonstrates flow. Pulsed Doppler examination allows the demonstration of fluid flow 
movements during expiration and inspiration (right) 

Figure 19: Duodenal atresia with the double-bubble sign of dilated stomach and proximal duodenum (left). 
Peristalsis and antiperistalsis waves are associated with to-and-fro fluid movements (red and blue) 
demonstrated by color Doppler (middle and right). 
Figure 20: Breathing through the nose in a third-trimester fetus with unilateral cleft lip and palate. Image 
intact lip and palate (a), cleft lip and palate (b) note the flow at the same time inside nostrils and mouth. (c) 
3D surface mode unilateral cleft lip and palate. 
.. 

DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF OLIGOHYDRAMNIOS 
There are essentially three causes of absence or severe reduction in amniotic fluid at mid-pregnancy: premature 
rupture of the membranes, bilateral renal agenesis or dysplasia, and severe hypoxia with intrauterine growth 
restriction. Color Doppler is useful in distinguishing between oligohydramnios and anhydramnios, where all the 
translucent areas in the amniotic cavity are filled with loops of umbilical cord. In hypoxic growth restriction, the fetal 
measurements are small for gestation, the fetal heart looks dilated and the bowel is echogenic. Doppler demonstrates 
the presence of two renal arteries and absent or reversed end-diastolic frequencies in the umbilical arteries. In renal 
agenesis or dysplasia, umbilical artery Doppler is normal, but no renal vessels are seen (Figure 9) and no bladder 
filling is observed between the intra-abdominal umbilical arteries (Figure 4). In premature rupture of the membranes, 
there are normal renal vessels, normal umbilical flow and normal filling of the bladder. 

REFERENCES 
1. Chaoui R, Kalache K, Bollmann R. Three-dimensional color power angiography in the assessment of fetal 
vascular anatomy under normal and abnormal conditions. In Kupesic S, Kurjak A, eds. Three-Dimensional 
Power Doppler in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 2000:150–8 
2. Chaoui R, Kalache K. Three-dimensional color power imaging: principles and first experience in prenatal 
diagnosis. In Merz E, ed. 3D Ultrasonography in Obstetrics and Gynecology. Philadelphia: Lippincott, Williams 
and Wilkins, 1998:135–42 
3. Di Salvo DN, Benson CB, Laing FC, Brown DL, Frates MC, Doubilet PM. Sonographic evaluation of the 
placental cord insertion site. Am J Roentgenol 1998;170:1295–8 
4. Raga F, Ballester MJ, Osborne NG, Bonilla Musoles F. Role of color flow Doppler ultrasonography in 
diagnosing velamentous insertion of the umbilical cord and vasa previa. A report of two cases. J Reprod Med 
1995;40:804–8 
5. Arts H, van Eyck J. Antenatal diagnosis of vasa previa by transvaginal color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;3:276–8 
6. Daly Jones E, Hollingsworth J, SepulvedaW. Vasa praevia: second trimester diagnosis using colour flow 
imaging. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1996;103:284–6 
7. Meyer WJ, Blumenthal L, Cadkin A, Gauthier DW, Rotmensch S. Vasa previa: prenatal diagnosis with 
transvaginal color Doppler flow imaging. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1993;169:1627–9 
8. Oyelese KO, Schwarzler P, Coates S, Sanusi FA, Hamid R, Campbell S. A strategy for reducing the mortality 
rate from vasa previa using transvaginal sonography with color Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:434–8 
9. Chou MM, Ho ESC, Lu F, Lee YH. Prenatal diagnosis of placenta previa/accreta with color Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:293–6 
10. Lerner JP, Deane S, Timor-Tritsch IE. Characterization of placenta accreta using transvaginal sonography 
and color Doppler imaging. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:198–201 
11. Zoppini C, Acaia B, Lucci G, Pugni L, Tassis B, Nicolini U. Varying clinical course of large placental 
chorioangiomas. Report of 3 cases. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12:61–4 
12. D’Ercole C, Cravello L, Boubli L, Labit C, Millet V, Potier A, Blanc B. Large chorioangioma associated with 
hydrops fetalis: prenatal diagnosis and management. Fetal Diagn Ther 1996;11:357–60 
13. Pilu G, Falco P, Guazzarini M, Sandri F, Bovicelli L. Sonographic demonstration of nuchal cord and abnormal 
umbilical artery waveform heralding fetal distress. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12: 125–7 
14. Jauniaux E, Mawissa C, Peellaerts C, Rodesch F. Nuchal cord in normal third-trimester pregnancy: a color 
Doppler imaging study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:417–19 
15. Sepulveda W, Shennan AH, Bower S, Nicolaidis P, Fisk NM. True knot of the umbilical cord: a difficult 
prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:106–8 
16. Gembruch U, Baschat AA. True knot of the umbilical cord: transient constrictive effect to umbilical venous 
blood flow demonstrated by Doppler sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;8: 53–6 
17. Tennstedt C, Chaoui R, Bollmann R, Dietel M. Angiomyxoma of the umbilical cord in one twin with cystic 
degeneration of Wharton’s jelly. A case report. Pathol Res Pract 1998;194:55–8 
18. SepulvedaW, Flack NJ, Bower S, Fisk NM. The value of color Doppler ultrasound in the prenatal diagnosis of 
hypoplastic umbilical artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:143–6 
19. Persutte WH, Hobbins J. Single umbilical artery: a clinical enigma in modern prenatal diagnosis. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1995;6:216–29 
20. Abuhamad AZ, ShafferW, Mari G, Copel JA, Hobbins JC, Evans AT. Single umbilical artery: does it matter 
which artery is missing? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:728–32 

21. Jauniaux E. The single artery umbilical cord: it is worth screening for antenatally? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1995;5:75–6 
22. SepulvedaW, Mackenna A, Sanchez J, Corral E, Carstens E. Fetal prognosis in varix of the intrafetal umbilical 
vein. J Ultrasound Med 1998;17:171–5 
23. Rizzo G, Arduini D. Prenatal diagnosis of an intra-abdominal ectasia of the umbilical vein with color Doppler 
ultrasonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:55–7 
24. Hill LM, Mills A, Peterson C, Boyles D. Persistent right umbilical vein: sonographic detection and subsequent 
neonatal outcome. Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:923–5 
25. Chaoui R, Göldner B, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of two cases with absence of the ductus venosus 
associated with an atypical course of the umbilical vein: implications for the possible role of the ductus 
venosus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994;4:179 
26. Ariyuki Y, Hata T, Manabe A, Hata K, Kitao M. Antenatal diagnosis of persistent right umbilical vein. J Clin 
Ultrasound 1995;23:324–6 
27. Moore L, Toi A, Chitayat D. Abnormalities of the intra-abdominal fetal umbilical vein: reports of four cases 
and a review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:21–5 
28. Hartung J, Chaoui R, Kalache K, Heling KS, Bollmann R. Abnormalities of the fetal umbilical vein: prenatal 
diagnosis and fetal outcome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:52 
29. Hartung J, Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of an intrahepatic arteriovenous fistula 
associated with Down syndrome: a report of two cases. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;15:in press 
30. Hecher K, Ville Y, Nicolaides KH. Color Doppler ultrasonography in the identification of communicating 
vessels in twin–twin transfusion syndrome and acardiac twins. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14:37–40 
31. Schwarzler P, Ville Y, Moscoso G, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R, Chaoui R. Diagnosis of twin reversed arterial 
perfusion sequence in the first trimester by transvaginal color Doppler ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;13:143–6 
32. Mackenzie FM, Kingston GO, Oppenheimer L. The early prenatal diagnosis of bilateral renal agenesis using 
transvaginal sonography and color Doppler ultrasonography. J Ultrasound Med 1994;13:49–51 
33. SepulvedaW, Stagiannis KD, Flack NJ, Fisk NM. Accuracy of prenatal diagnosis of renal agenesis with color 
flow imaging in severe second-trimester oligohydramnios. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1995;173:1788–92 
34. DeVore GR. The value of color Doppler sonography in the diagnosis of renal agenesis. J Ultrasound Med 
1995;14:443–9 
35. Sepulveda W, Romero R, Pryde PG, Wolfe HM, Addis JR, Cotton DB. Prenatal diagnosis of sirenomelus with 
color Doppler ultrasonography. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1377–9 
36. King KL, Kofinas AD, Simon NV, Clay D. Antenatal ultrasound diagnosis of fetal horseshoe kidney. J 
Ultrasound Med 1991;10:643–4 
37. Hill LM, Grzybek P, Mills A, HoggeWA. Antenatal diagnosis of fetal pelvic kidney. Obstet Gynecol 
1994;83:333–6 
38. Meizner I, Yitzhak M, Levi A, Barki Y, Barnhard Y, Glezerman M. Fetal pelvic kidney: a challenge in prenatal 
diagnosis? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;5:391–3 
39. Dan U, Shalev E, Greif M,Weiner E. Prenatal diagnosis of fetal brain arteriovenous malformation: the use of 
color Doppler imaging. J Clin Ultrasound 1992;20:149–51 
40. Paladini D, Palmieri S, D’Angelo A, Martinelli P. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of cerebral arteriovenous 
fistula. Obstet Gynecol 1996;88:678–81 
41. SepulvedaW, Platt CC, Fisk NM. Prenatal diagnosis of cerebral arteriovenous malformation using color 
Doppler ultrasonography: case report and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995;6:282–6 
42. Heling KS, Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of a Galen vein aneurysm using color Doppler and 3D 
power Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;15:in press 

43. Guzman ER, Walters C, Sharma S, Tierney R, Palermo A, Vintzileos AM. Two-dimensional gray-scale imaging 
and color Doppler in the detection of the corpus callosum and pericallosal artery. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;14:53 
44. Pilu G, Falco P, Milano V, Perolo A, Bovicelli L. Prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly assisted by vaginal 
sonography and power Doppler. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11:357–60 
45. Rasanen J, Huhta JC,Weiner S,Wood DC, Ludomirski A. Fetal branch pulmonary arterial vascular impedance 
during the second half of pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1441–9 
46. Chaoui R, Taddei F, Rizzo G, Bast C, Lenz F, Bollmann R. Doppler echocardiography of the main stems of the 
pulmonary arteries in the normal human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;11: 173–9 
47. Roth P, Agnani G, Arbez Gindre F, Pauchard JY, Burguet A, Schaal JP, Maillet R. Use of energy color Doppler 
in visualizing fetal pulmonary vascularization to predict the absence of severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Gynecol Obstet Invest 1998;46:153–7 
48. Chaoui R, Kalache K, Tennstedt C, Lenz F, Vogel M. Pulmonary arterial Doppler in fetuses with lung 
hypoplasia. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol 1999:84:179–85 
49. Yoshimura S, Masuzaki H, Miura K, Muta K, Gotoh H, Ishimaru T. Diagnosis of fetal pulmonary hypoplasia by 
measurement of blood flow velocity waveforms of pulmonary arteries with Doppler ultrasonography. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1999;180:441–6 
50. Sherer DM, Eglinton GS, Goncalves LF, Lewis KM, Queenan JT. Prenatal color and pulsed Doppler 
sonographic documentation of intrathoracic umbilical vein and ductus venosus, confirming extensive hepatic 
herniation in left congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Am J Perinatol 1996;13: 159–62 
51. Botash RJ, Spirt BA. Color Doppler imaging aids in the prenatal diagnosis of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Ultrasound Med 1993;12:359–61 
52. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Paris S, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of right lung agenesis using color Doppler and 
magnetic resonance imaging. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12:360–2 
53. Morin L, Crombleholme TM, Louis F, D’Alton ME. Bronchopulmonary sequestration: prenatal diagnosis with 
clinicopathologic correlation. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol 1994;6:479–81 
54. Smulian JC, Guzman ER, Ranzini AC, Benito CW, Vintzileos AM. Color and duplex Doppler sonographic 
investigation of in utero spontaneous regression of pulmonary sequestration. J Ultrasound Med 
1996;15:789–92 
55. Abuhamad AZ, Mari G, Cortina RM, CroitoruDP, Evans AT. Superior mesenteric artery Doppler velocimetry 
and ultrasonographic assessment of fetal bowel in gastroschisis: a prospective longitudinal study. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:985–90 
56. Mejides AA, Adra AM, O’Sullivan MJ, Nicholas MC. Prenatal diagnosis and therapy for a fetal hepatic vascular 
malformation. Obstet Gynecol 1995;85:850–3 
57. Abuhamad AZ, Lewis D, Inati MN, Johnson DR, Copel JA. The use of color flow Doppler in the diagnosis of 
the fetal hepatic hemangioma. J Ultrasound Med 1993;4:223–6 
58. DiSessa TG, Emerson DS, Felker RE, Brown DL, Cartier MS, Becker JA. Anomalous systemic and pulmonary 
venous pathways diagnosed in utero by ultrasound. J Ultrasound Med 1990;9:311–17 
59. Soliman S, McGrath F, Brennan B, Glazebrook K. Color Doppler imaging of the thyroid gland in a fetus with 
congenital goiter: a case report. Am J Perinatol 1994;11:21–3 
60. Luton D, Fried D, Sibony O, Vuillard E, Tebeka B, Boissinot C, Leger J, Polak M, Oury JF, Blot P. Assessment 
of fetal thyroid function by colored Doppler echography. Fetal Diagn Ther 1997;12: 24–7 
61. Schwarzler P, Bernard JP, Senat MV, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of fetal adrenal masses: differentiation 
between hemorrhage and solid tumor by color Doppler sonography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1999;13:351–5 
62. Goldstein I, Gomez K, Copel JA. The real-time and color Doppler appearance of adrenal neuroblastoma in a 
third-trimester fetus. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:854–6 
63. Sherer DM, Fromberg RA, RindfuszDW, Harris BH, Sanz LE. Color Doppler aided prenatal diagnosis of a type 
1 cystic sacrococcygeal teratoma simulating a meningomyelocele. Am J Perinatol 1997;14:13–15 

.. 
Doppler in Obstetrics 
Copyright © 2002 by The Fetal Medicine Foundation 
64. Bloechle M, Bollmann R,Wit J, Buttenberg S, Kursawe R, Guski H. Neuroectodermal cyst may be a rare 
differential diagnosis of fetal sacrococcygeal teratoma: first case report of a prenatally observed 
neuroectodermal cyst. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:64–7 
65. Bulas DI, Johnson D, Allen JF, Kapur S. Fetal hemangioma – sonographic and color flow Doppler findings. J 
Ultrasound Med 1992;11:499–501 
66. Goncalves LF, Pereira ET, Parente LM, Vitorello DA, Barbosa UC, Saab Neto JA. Cutaneous hemangioma of 
the thigh: prenatal diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:128–30 
67. Raman S, Ramanujam T, Lim CT. Prenatal diagnosis of an extensive haemangioma of the fetal leg: a case 
report. J Obstet Gynaecol Res 1996; 22:375–8 
68. Bruner JP, Coggins T. Assessment of fetal breathing movements using three different ultrasound modalities. 
J Clin Ultrasound 1995;23:551–3 
69. Suzuki M, Saito H, Yanaihara T. Assessment of fetal nasal fluid flow by two-dimensional color Doppler 
ultrasonography during pregnancy. J Matern Fetal Med 1999;8:159–63 
70. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Bollmann R. Doppler assessment of tracheal and nasal fluid flow during fetal 
breathing movements: preliminary observations. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1997;9:257–61 
71. Aubry M-C, Aubry J-P. Prenatal diagnosis of cleft palate: contribution of color Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1992;2:221–4 
72. Monni G, Ibba RM, Olla G, Cao A, Crisponi G. Color Doppler ultrasound and prenatal diagnosis of cleft palate. 
J Clin Ultrasound 1995;23:189–91 
73. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Hartung J, Wernecke KD, Bollmann R. Doppler assessment of tracheal fluid flow 
during fetal breathing movements in cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1998;12:27–32 
74. Kalache KD, Chaoui R, Tennstedt C, Bollmann R. Prenatal diagnosis of laryngeal atresia in two cases of 
congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS). Prenat Diagn 1997;17:577–81 
75. Rizzo G, Capponi A, Arduini D, Romanini C. Prenatal diagnosis of gastroesophageal reflux by color and 
pulsed Doppler ultrasonography in a case of congenital pyloric atresia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995; 
6:290–2 

The 11–13+6 weeks scan 
Kypros H. Nicolaides 

The 11–13+6 weeks scan
Fetal Medicine Foundation, London 2004

Dedication 
to 
Herodotos & Despina 

Contents 
Introduction 
1. First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 
Rosalinde Snijders, Kypros Nicolaides ......... 7
Diagnosis of chromosomal defects .......... 7
Screening for chromosomal defects ..........11
Patient-specific risk for chromosomal defects ...... 13
Nuchal translucency thickness ........... 21
Womens’ attitudes to 1st versus 2nd trimester screening .. . 42
2. Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 
Victoria Heath, Kypros Nicolaides ..........45
First trimester ultrasonography ........... 45
Second trimester ultrasonography ..........58
3. Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 
Athena Souka, Constantin von Kaisenberg, Kypros Nicolaides 71
Outcome of fetuses with increased nuchal translucency 72
Abnormalities associated with increased nuchal translucency . 74
Pathophysiology of increased nuchal translucency ..... 85
Management of pregnancies with increased nuchal
translucency ..................88
4. Multiple pregnancy 
Neil Sebire, Kypros Nicolaides ......... 95
Prevalence and epidemiology .......... 95
Determination of zygosity and chorionicity .......97
Chorionicity and pregnancy complications .......98
Chromosomal defects in multiple pregnancies ..... . 105


Introduction 
In 1866 Langdon Down noted that common characteristics of patients with 
trisomy 21 are skin deficient in elasticity, giving the appearance of being too 
large for the body, and flat face with a small nose. In the 1990s, it was realized 
that the excess skin of individuals with Down’s syndrome can be visualized by 
ultrasonography as increased nuchal translucency in the third month of 
intrauterine life. Fetal nuchal translucency thickness at the 11–13+6 weeks 
scan has been combined with maternal age to provide an effective method of 
screening for trisomy 21; for an invasive testing rate of 5%, about 75% of 
trisomic pregnancies can be identified. When maternal serum free ß-human 
chorionic gonadotropin and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A at 
11–13+6 weeks are also taken into account, the detection rate of chromosomal 
defects is about 85–90%. In 2001, it was found that in 60–70% of fetuses 
with trisomy 21 the nasal bone is not visible at the 11–13+6 weeks scan and 
examination of the nasal bone can increase the detection rate of screening by 
the first trimester scan and serum biochemistry to more than 95%. 
In addition to its role in the assessment of risk for trisomy 21, increased 
nuchal translucency thickness can also identify a high proportion of other 
chromosomal defects and is associated with major abnormalities of the heart 
and great arteries, and a wide range of genetic syndromes. 
Other benefits of the 11–13+6 weeks scan include confirmation that the 
fetus is alive, accurate dating of the pregnancy, early diagnosis of major fetal 
abnormalities, and the detection of multiple pregnancies. The early scan also 
provides reliable identification of chorionicity, which is the main determinant 
of outcome in multiple pregnancies. 
As with the introduction of any new technology into routine clinical practice, 
it is essential that those undertaking the 11–13+6 weeks scan are adequately 
trained and their results are subjected to rigorous audit. The Fetal Medicine 
Foundation, has introduced a process of training and certification to help to 
establish high standards of scanning on an international basis. The Certificate 
of Competence in the 11–13+6 weeks scan is awarded to those sonographers 
that can perform the scan to a high standard and can demonstrate a good 
knowledge of the diagnostic features and management of the conditions 
identified by this scan. 


1
FIRST TRIMESTER 
DIAGNOSIS OF CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS 
In 1866, Langdon Down reported that in individuals with 
trisomy 21, the condition that came to bear his name, the skin 
appears to be too large for the body, the nose is small and the face 
is flat. In the last decade it has become possible to observe 
these features by ultrasound examination in the third month of 
intrauterine life. 
About 75% of trisomy 21 fetuses have increased nuchal translucency 
(NT) thickness and 60–70% have absent nasal bone 
(Figures 1 and 2). 
DIAGNOSIS OF CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS 
Non-invasive diagnosis 
During the last 30 years, extensive research has aimed at developing 
a non-invasive method for prenatal diagnosis based on the 
isolation and examination of fetal cells found in the maternal 
circulation. About 1 in 103–107 nucleated cells in maternal blood 
are fetal. The proportion of fetal cells can be enriched to about 1 
in 10–100 by techniques such as magnetic cell sorting (MACS) 
or fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) after attachment of 
magnetically labelled or fluorescent antibodies on to specific fetal 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Figure 1. Fetus with subcutaneous collection of fluid at the back of the neck. Image kindly provided by 
Dr Eva Pajkrt, University of Amsterdam. 
Figure 2. Ultrasound picture of a 12-week fetus with trisomy 21, demonstrating increased nuchal 
translucency thickness and absent nasal bone. 
cell surface markers. The resulting sample is unsuitable for traditional 
cytogenetic analysis because it is still highly contaminated 
with maternal cells. However, with the use of chromosome-
specific DNA probes and fluorescent in situ hybridization 
(FISH), it is possible to suspect fetal trisomy by the presence of 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

three-signal nuclei in some of the cells of the maternal blood 
enriched for fetal cells. 
On the basis of currently available technology, examination of 
fetal cells from maternal peripheral blood is more likely to find 
an application as a method for assessment of risk, rather than 
the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal defects. The 
sensitivity of this method is comparable to serum screening. 
However, unlike serum biochemistry testing, which is relatively 
easy to apply for mass population screening, analysis of fetal cells 
from maternal blood is both labor intensive and requires highly 
skilled operators. The extent to which the techniques for enrichment 
of fetal cells could be improved, to achieve a higher yield 
of the necessary cells, as well as become automated, to allow 
simultaneous analysis of a large number of samples, remains to 
be seen. 
Recent interest has focused on the presence of cell-free fetal 
DNA in maternal plasma and the ability to quantify the concentration 
of male fetal DNA in pregnancies with male fetuses using 
real-time quantitative PCR. There is contradictory evidence 
concerning the concentration of cell-free fetal DNA in trisomy 
21 pregnancies with some studies reporting that the levels are 
increased and in others there was no significant difference from 
chromosomally normal pregnancies. The extent to which cell-free 
fetal DNA will become another maternal serum marker in 
screening for trisomy 21 remains to be seen. 
Non-invasive diagnosis 
• Examination of fetal cells from maternal peripheral blood is 
more likely to find an application as a method for assessment 
of risk, rather than the non-invasive prenatal diagnosis of 
chromosomal defects. 
• There is contradictory evidence concerning the concentration 
of cell-free fetal DNA in trisomy 21 pregnancies. 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Invasive diagnosis 
Amniocentesis 
There is only one randomized trial which compared the risks of 
amniocentesis to controls. In this study, 4,606 low-risk, healthy 
women, 25–34 years old, at 14–20 weeks of gestation, were 
randomly allocated to amniocentesis or ultrasound examination 
alone (Tabor et al 1986). The total fetal loss rate in the patients 
having amniocentesis was 1% higher than in the controls. The 
study also reported that amniocentesis was associated with an 
increased risk of respiratory distress syndrome and pneumonia. 
Amniocentesis is also possible at 10–14 weeks of gestation. 
However, randomized studies have demonstrated that after early 
amniocentesis the rate of fetal loss is about 2% higher and 
the incidence of talipes equinovarus is 1.6% higher than after 
first-trimester chorionic villus sampling or second-trimester 
amniocentesis. 
Chorionic villus sampling 
Randomized studies have demonstrated that the rate of fetal 
loss following first-trimester transabdominal chorionic villus 
sampling is the same as with second-trimester amniocentesis. 
There is controversy as to whether the rate of fetal loss after 
transcervical chorionic villus sampling is higher or not. 
It is likely that in centres with experience in ultrasound guided 
invasive procedures the risks of amniocentesis and chorionic 
villous sampling, irrespective of route, are the same. 
There is an association between chorionic villus sampling before 
10 weeks and fetal transverse limb abnormalities, micrognathia 
and microglossia. It is therefore imperative that chorionic villus 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

sampling is performed only after 11 weeks by appropriately 
trained operators. 
Invasive testing 
•Diagnosis of fetal chromosomal defects requires invasive 
testing. 
•The risk of miscarriage from chorionic villus sampling in the 
first trimester is the same as for amniocentesis in the second 
trimester. 
•Amniocentesis should not be performed before 15 weeks. 
•Chorionic villous sampling should not be performed before 
11 weeks. 
•Invasive tests should be carried out by appropriately trained 
and experienced operators. 
SCREENING FOR CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS 
In prenatal screening for trisomy 21, the term screen positive rate 
is used interchangeably with the invasive testing rate, because most 
women with a positive screening test undergo an invasive test, 
and with false positive rate (FPR) because the vast majority of 
fetuses in this group are normal. 
The first method of screening for trisomy 21, introduced in the 
early 1970s, was based on the association with advanced maternal 
age. It was apparent that amniocentesis carried a risk of miscarriage 
and this in conjunction with the financial cost implications, 
meant that prenatal diagnosis could not be offered to 
the entire pregnant population. Consequently, amniocentesis was 
initially offered only to women with a minimum age of 40 years. 
Gradually, as the application of amniocentesis became more 
widespread and it appeared to be ‘safe’, the ‘high-risk’ group was 
redefined to include women with a minimum age of 35 years; 
this ‘high-risk’ group constituted 5% of the pregnant population. 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

In the last 30 years, two dogmatic policies have emerged in terms 
of screening. The first, mainly observed in countries with private 
healthcare systems, adhered to the dogma of the 35 years of age 
or equivalent risk; since the maternal age of pregnant women has 
increased in most developed countries, the screen-positive group 
now constitute about 15% of pregnancies. The second policy, 
instituted in countries with national health systems, has adhered 
to the dogma of offering invasive testing to the 5% group of 
women with the highest risk; in the last 20 years, the cut-off age 
for invasive testing has therefore increased from 35 to 38 years. 
In screening by maternal age with a cut-off age of 38 years, 5% 
of the population is classified as ‘high risk’ and this group 
contains about 30% of trisomy 21 babies. 
In the late 1980s, a new method of screening was introduced that 
takes into account not only maternal age but also the concentration 
of various fetoplacental products in the maternal circulation. 
At 16 weeks of gestation the median maternal serum concentrations 
of a-fetoprotein (AFP), uconjugated estriol (uE3), human 
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) (total and free-b) and inhibin-A 
in trisomy 21 pregnancies are sufficiently different from normal 
to allow the use of combinations of some or all of these 
substances to select a ‘high-risk’ group. This method of screening 
is more effective than maternal age alone and, for the same 
rate of invasive testing (about 5%), it can identify about 50–70% 
of the fetuses with trisomy 21. 
In the 1990s, screening by a combination of maternal age and 
fetal NT thickness at 11–13+6 weeks of gestation was introduced. 
This method has now been shown to identify about 75% 
of affected fetuses for a screen-positive rate of about 5%. 
Subsequently, maternal age was combined with fetal NT and 
maternal serum biochemistry (free b-hCG and PAPP-A) in the 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Sampling 
•
•
Chorionic 
Villous Counselling 
Screening 
Ultrasound 
Biochemistry 
Figure 3. Assessment of risk for chromosomal defects can be achieved by the combination of maternal 
age, ultrasound examination for measurement of fetal nuchal translucency and assessment for the 
presence/absence of the nasal bone and biochemical measurement of maternal serum free b-hCG and 
PAPP-A in an one-stop clinic at 11–13+6 weeks of gestation. After counselling, the patient can decide if 
she wants fetal karyotyping, which can be carried out by chorionic villus sampling in the same visit. 
first-trimester to identify about 85–90% of affected fetuses. 
Furthermore, the development of new methods of biochemical 
testing, within 30 min of taking a blood sample, made it possible 
to introduce One-Stop Clinics for Assessment of Risk (Figure 3). 
In 2001, it was found that in 60–70% of fetuses with trisomy 21 
the nasal bone is not visible by ultrasound at 11–13+6 weeks and 
preliminary results suggest that this finding can increase the 
detection rate of the first trimester scan and serum biochemistry 
to more than 95% (Table 1). 
PATIENT-SPECIFIC RISK FOR CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS 
Every woman has a risk that her fetus/baby has a chromosomal 
defect. In order to calculate the individual risk, it is necessary to 
take into account the background or a priori risk, which depends 
on maternal age and gestation, and multiply this by a series of 
factors or likelihood ratios, which depend on the results of a series 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Table 1. Comparison of the detection rates (DR), for a false positive rate of 5%, of different methods of 
screening for trisomy 21. In prenatal screening, the term screen positive rate is used interchangeably with 
the invasive rate, because most women with a positive screening test undergo an invasive test, and with 
false positive rate (FPR) because the vast majority of fetuses in this group are normal. 
Method of screening DR (%) 
Maternal age (MA) 30 
MA and maternal serum biochemistry at 15–18 weeks 50–70 
MA and fetal nuchal translucency (NT) at 11–13+6 wks 70–80 
MA and fetal NT and maternal serum free b-hCG and 85–90 
PAPP-A at 11–13+6 wks 
MA and fetal NT and fetal nasal bone (NB) at 11–13+6 wks 90 
MA and fetal NT and NB and maternal serum free b-hCG and 95 
PAPP-A at 11–13+6 wks 
hCG human chorionic gonadotropin, PAPP-A: pregnancy-associated plasma protein A 
of screening tests carried out during the course of the pregnancy 
to determine the patient-specific risk. 
The likelihood ratio for a given sonographic or biochemical 
measurement is calculated by dividing the percentage of chromosomally 
abnormal fetuses by the percentage of normal fetuses 
with that measurement. 
Every time a test is carried out the a priori risk is multiplied by 
the likelihood ratio of the test to calculate a new risk, which then 
becomes the a priori risk for the next test (Snijders and 
Nicolaides 1996). This process of sequential screening necessitates 
that the different tests are independent of each other. If the 
tests are not independent of each other then more sophisticated 
techniques, involving multivariate statistics, can be used to 
calculate the combined likelihood ratio. With the introduction of 
OSCAR, the process of sequential screening can all be achieved 
in one session at about 12 weeks of pregnancy (Figure 3). 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Sequential screening 
•Every woman has a risk that her fetus/baby has a chromosomal 
defect. 
•The background or a priori risk depends on maternal age 
and gestation. 
•The individual patient-specific risk is calculated by multiplying 
the a priori risk with a series of likelihood ratios, which 
depend on the results of a series of screening tests carried out 
during the course of the pregnancy. 
•Every time a test is carried out the a priori risk is multiplied by 
the likelihood ratio of the test to calculate a new risk, which 
then becomes the a priori risk for the next test. 
Maternal age and gestation 
The risk for many of the chromosomal defects increases with 
maternal age (Figure 4). Additionally, because fetuses with 
chromosomal defects are more likely to die in utero than normal 
fetuses, the risk decreases with gestational age (Figure 5). 
0.1 
1 
10 
20 25 30 35 40 44 
TriTriTrii.0 0001 
.0 001 
0.01 
Maternal age (yrs) 
Risk % 
somy 21 
somy 18 
somy 13 
XXX/XXY/XYY 
45XO 
Trploidy 
Figure 4. Maternal age-related risk for chromosomal abnormalities. 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Tri0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 
TriTrii%
somy 21 
100 
somy 18 
somy 13 
Trploidy 
XXX/XXY/XYY 
45XO 
Gestation (wks) 
Figure 5. Gestational age-related risk for chromosomal abnormalities. The lines represent the relative risk 
according to the risk at 10 weeks of gestation. 
Estimates of the maternal age-related risk for trisomy 21 at birth 
are based on surveys carried out before the introduction of 
prenatal diagnosis (Hecht and Hook 1994). In the last 15 years, 
with the introduction of maternal serum biochemical testing and 
ultrasound screening for chromosomal defects at different stages 
of pregnancy, it has become necessary to establish maternal age 
and gestational age-specific risks for chromosomal defects 
(Snijders et al 1995, 1999). Such estimates were derived by 
comparing, in women of the same age, the prevalence of trisomy 
21 at birth to the prevalence at the time of second-trimester 
amniocentesis or first-trimester chorionic villus sampling. 
The rates of spontaneous fetal death in trisomy 21 between 12 
weeks (when NT screening is carried out) and 40 weeks is about 
30% and between 16 weeks (when second trimester maternal 
serum biochemical testing is carried out) and 40 weeks is about 
20%. 
Similar methods were used to produce estimates of risks for other 
chromosomal defects. The risk for trisomies 18 and 13 increases 
with maternal age and decreases with gestation; the rate of 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

miscarriage or fetal death between 12 weeks and 40 weeks is 
about 80% (Table 2). Turner syndrome is usually due to loss of 
the paternal X chromosome and, consequently, the frequency 
of conception of 45,XO embryos, unlike that of trisomies, is 
unrelated to maternal age. The prevalence is about 1 per 1500 at 
12 weeks, 1 per 3000 at 20 weeks and 1 per 4000 at 40 weeks. 
For the other sex chromosome abnormalities (47,XXX, 47,XXY 
and 47,XYY), there is no significant change with maternal age 
and since the rate of fetal death is not higher than in chromosomally 
normal fetuses, the overall prevalence (about 1 per 500) 
does not decrease with gestation. Polyploidy affects about 2% of 
recognized conceptions but it is highly lethal and thus very rarely 
observed in live births; the prevalences at 12 and 20 weeks are 
about 1 per 2000 and 1 per 250 000, respectively. 
Effect of maternal age and gestation on risk 
•The risk for trisomies increases with maternal age. 
•The risk for Turner syndrome and triploidy does not change 
with maternal age. 
•The earlier the gestation, the higher the risk for chromosomal 
defects. 
•The rates of fetal death in trisomy 21 between 12 weeks 
(when NT screening is carried out) and 40 weeks is about 
30% and between 16 weeks (when second trimester maternal 
serum biochemical testing is carried out) and 40 weeks is 
about 20%. 
•In trisomies 18 and 13 and Turner syndrome, the rate of fetal 
death between 12 and 40 weeks is about 80%. 
Previous affected pregnancy 
The risk for trisomies in women who have had a previous fetus 
or child with a trisomy is higher than the one expected on the 
basis of their age alone. In women who had a previous pregnancy 
with trisomy 21, the risk of recurrence in the subsequent 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Table 2. Estimated risk for trisomies 21, 18 and 13 (1/number given in the table) in relation to maternal age and gestation.
Maternalage (yrs) 
Trisomy 21Gestation (wks) 
Trisomy 18Gestation (wks) 
Trisomy 13Gestation (wks) 
12 
16 
20 
40 
12 
16 
20 
40 
12 
16 
20 
40 
20 
1068 
1200 
1295 
1527 
2484 
3590 
4897 
18013 
7826 
11042 
14656 
42423 
25 
946 
1062 
1147 
1352 
2200 
3179 
4336 
15951 
6930 
9778 
12978 
37567 
30 
626 
703 
759 
895 
1456 
2103 
2869 
10554 
4585 
6470 
8587 
24856 
31 
543 
610 
658 
776 
1263 
1825 
2490 
9160 
3980 
5615 
7453 
21573 
32 
461 
518 
559 
659 
1072 
1549 
2114 
7775 
3378 
4766 
6326 
18311 
33 
383 
430 
464 
547 
891 
1287 
1755 
6458 
2806 
3959 
5254 
15209 
34 
312 
350 
378 
446 
725 
1047 
1429 
5256 
2284 
3222 
4277 
12380 
35 
249 
280 
302 
356 
580 
837 
1142 
4202 
1826 
2576 
3419 
9876 
36 
196 
220 
238 
280 
456 
659 
899 
3307 
1437 
2027 
2691 
7788 
37 
152 
171 
185 
218 
354 
512 
698 
2569 
1116 
1575 
2090 
6050 
38 
117 
131 
142 
167 
272 
393 
537 
1974 
858 
1210 
1606 
4650 
39 
89 
100 
108 
128 
208 
300 
409 
1505 
654 
922 
1224 
3544 
40 
68 
76 
82 
97 
157 
227 
310 
1139 
495 
698 
927 
2683 
41 
51 
57 
62 
73 
118 
171 
233 
858 
373 
526 
698 
2020 
42 
38 
43 
46 
55 
89 
128 
175 
644 
280 
395 
524 
1516 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

pregnancy is 0.75% higher than the maternal and gestational 
age-related risk for trisomy 21 at the time of testing. Thus, for a 
woman aged 35 years who has had a previous baby with trisomy 
21, the risk at 12 weeks of gestation increases from 1 in 249 
(0.40%) to 1 in 87 (1.15%), and, for a woman aged 25 years, it 
increases from 1 in 946 (0.106%) to 1 in 117 (0.856%). 
The possible mechanism for this increased risk is that a small 
proportion (less than 5%) of couples with a previously affected 
pregnancy have parental mosaicism or a genetic defect that interferes 
with the normal process of dysjunction, so in this group the 
risk of recurrence is increased substantially. In the majority of 
couples (more than 95%), the risk of recurrence is not actually 
increased. Currently available evidence suggests that recurrence 
is chromosome-specific and, therefore, in the majority of cases, 
the likely mechanism is parental mosaicism. 
Recurrence of chromosomal defects 
• If a woman has had a previous fetus or baby with a trisomy, 
the risk in the current pregnancy is 0.75% higher than her a 
priori risk. 
• Recurrence is chromosome-specific. 
Fetal nuchal translucency 
Fetal NT normally increases with gestation (crown–rump 
length). In a fetus with a given crown–rump length, every NT 
measurement represents a likelihood ratio which is multiplied by 
the a priori maternal and gestational age-related risk to calculate 
a new risk. The larger the NT, the higher the likelihood ratio 
becomes and therefore the higher the new risk. In contrast, the 
smaller the NT measurement, the smaller the likelihood ratio 
becomes and therefore the lower the new risk (Figure 6). 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

0.01 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
20 25 30 35 40 45 
i 
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Maternal age (yrs) 
Risk (%) 
5.0 mm 
3.5 mm 
3.0 mm 
2.5 mm 
a prior
Figure 6. Maternal age-related risk for trisomy 21 at 12 weeks of gestation (a priori) and the effect of 
fetal nuchal translucency thickness (NT). 
Nasal bone and other first-trimester sonographic markers 
At 11–13+6 weeks the nasal bone is not visible by ultrasonography 
in about 60–70% of fetuses with trisomy 21 and in 
about 2% of chromosomally normal fetuses. Abnormalities in the 
flow velocity waveform from the ductus venosus are observed 
in about 80% of fetuses with trisomy 21 and in 5% of 
chromosomally normal fetuses. 
Similarly, the prevalence of other sonographic markers, such as 
exomphalos, megacystis and single umbilical artery, are higher 
in certain chromosomal abnormalities than in chromosomally 
normal fetuses. Each of these sonographic markers is associated 
with a likelihood ratio, which can be multiplied by the a priori 
risk to calculate a new risk. 
Maternal serum biochemistry in the first-trimester 
The level of free b-hCG in maternal blood normally decreases 
with gestation. In trisomy 21 pregnancies free b-hCG is 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

increased. The level of PAPP-A in maternal blood normally 
increases with gestation and in trisomy 21 pregnancies the level is 
decreased. For a given gestation, each b-hCG and PAPP-A level 
represents a likelihood ratio that is multiplied by the a priori risk 
to calculate the new risk. The higher the level of b-hCG and the 
lower the level of PAPP-A the higher the risk for trisomy 21 
(Figure 7). 
NUCHAL TRANSLUCENCY THICKNESS 
Cystic hygromas, nuchal edema and nuchal translucency 
During the second and third trimesters of pregnancy, abnormal 
accumulation of fluid behind the fetal neck can be classified as 
nuchal cystic hygroma or nuchal edema. In about 75% of fetuses 
with cystic hygromas, there is a chromosomal abnormality and, in 
about 95% of cases, the abnormality is Turner syndrome. Nuchal 
edema has a diverse etiology; chromosomal abnormalities are 
found in about one-third of the fetuses and, in about 75% of 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
25 30 35 40 45 
0.01 
20 
i 
Ri(%) 
0.33 MoM 
0.50 MoM 
0.25 MoM 
0.1 
1 
10 
100 
25 30 35 40 45 
i 
0.01 
20 
4.0 MoM 
3.0 MoM 
2.0 MoM 
ß-hCGMaternal Age (yrs) 
PAPP-Aa priorsk 
Maternal Age (yrs) 
Risk (%) 
a prior
Figure 7. Maternal age-related risk for trisomy 21 at 12 weeks of gestation (a priori) and the effect of 
maternal serum free b-hCG (left) and PAPP-A (right). 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

cases, the abnormality is trisomy 21 or 18. Edema is also associated 
with fetal cardiovascular and pulmonary defects, skeletal 
dysplasias, congenital infections and metabolic and hematological 
disorders; consequently, the prognosis for chromosomally normal 
fetuses with nuchal edema is poor. 
In the first trimester, the term translucency is used, irrespective 
of whether it is septated or not and whether it is confined to the 
neck or envelopes the whole fetus. During the second trimester, 
the translucency usually resolves and, in a few cases, it evolves 
into either nuchal edema or cystic hygromas with or without 
generalized hydrops. Neither the incidence of chromosomal 
defects nor the prognosis can be predicted by the ultrasonographic 
appearance of the lesion. 
Increased NT is associated with trisomy 21, Turner syndrome and 
other chromosomal defects as well as many fetal malformations 
and genetic syndromes. The incidence of these abnormalities 
is related to the thickness, rather than the appearance, of NT. 
Furthermore, it is possible to standardize and audit the results of 
a measurement but not those of a subjective appearance. 
Nuchal translucency – definition 
•Nuchal translucency is the sonographic appearance of subcutaneous 
accumulation of fluid behind the fetal neck in the 
first trimester of pregnancy. 
•The term translucency is used, irrespective of whether it is 
septated or not and whether it is confined to the neck or 
envelopes the whole fetus. 
•The incidence of chromosomal and other abnormalities is 
related to the size, rather than the appearance of NT. 
•During the second trimester, the translucency usually resolves 
and, in a few cases, it evolves into either nuchal edema or 
cystic hygromas with or without generalized hydrops. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Measurement of nuchal translucency 
The ability to achieve a reliable measurement of NT is dependent 
on appropriate training and adherence to a standard technique in 
order to achieve uniformity of results among different operators. 
Gestation and crown-rump length 
The optimal gestational age for measurement of fetal NT is 11 
weeks to 13 weeks and 6 days. The minimum fetal crown–rump 
length should be 45 mm and the maximum 84 mm. 
There are two reasons for selecting 11 weeks as the earliest 
gestation for measurements of NT. Firstly, screening necessitates 
the availability of a diagnostic test and chorionic villous sampling 
before this gestation is associated with transverse limb reduction 
defects. Secondly, many major fetal defects can be diagnosed at 
the NT scan, provided the minimum gestation is 11 weeks. For 
example, diagnosis or exclusion of acrania and therefore anencephaly, 
cannot be made before 11 weeks because sonographic 
assessment of ossification of the fetal skull is not reliable before 
this gestation. Examination of the four-chamber view of the heart 
and main arteries is possible only after 10 weeks. At 8–10 weeks 
all fetuses demonstrate herniation of the midgut that is visualized 
as a hyperechogenic mass in the base of the umbilical cord, and 
it is therefore unsafe to diagnose or exclude exomphalos at this 
gestation. The fetal bladder can be visualized in only 50% of 
fetuses at 10 weeks, in 80% at 11 weeks and in all cases by 
12 weeks. 
The reasons for selecting 13 weeks and 6 days as the upper limit 
are firstly, to provide women with affected fetuses the option 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

of first rather than second trimester termination, secondly, the 
incidence of abnormal accumulation of nuchal fluid in chromosomally 
abnormal fetuses is lower at 14–18 weeks than before 
14 weeks, and thirdly, the success rate for taking a measurement 
at 10–13 weeks is 98–100%, falling to 90% at 14 weeks because 
the fetus becomes vertical making it more difficult to obtain the 
appropriate image. 
Image and measurement 
In the assessment of fetal NT the ultrasound machine should be 
of high resolution with a video-loop function and callipers that 
provide measurements to one decimal point. Fetal NT can be 
measured successfully by transabdominal ultrasound examination 
in about 95% of cases; in the others, it is necessary to perform 
transvaginal sonography. The results from transabdominal and 
transvaginal scanning are similar. 
Only the fetal head and upper thorax should be included in the 
image for measurement of NT (Figure 8a). The magnification 
should be as large as possible and always such that each slight 
movement of the callipers produces only a 0.1 mm change in the 
measurement. In magnifying the image, either pre or post freeze 
zoom, it is important to turn the gain down. This avoids the 
mistake of placing the calliper on the fuzzy edge of the line which 
causes an underestimate of the nuchal measurement. 
A good sagittal section of the fetus, as for measurement of fetal 
crown–rump length, should be obtained and the NT should be 
measured with the fetus in the neutral position. When the fetal 
neck is hyperextended the measurement can be increased by 
0.6 mm and when the neck is flexed, the measurement can be 
decreased by 0.4 mm. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
(e) (f) 
Figure 8. Ultrasound pictures of 12-weeks fetus. In all six images there is a good sagittal section of the 
fetus. Image (a) is appropriate for measurement of the nuchal translucency (NT) because only the fetal 
head and upper thorax are included and the nuchal membrane, which is thin, can be seen separate from 
the amniotic membrane. In (b) the magnification is too small for accurate measurement of NT. In (c) the 
fetal neck is hyperextended and in (d) the neck is too flexed. In (e) the maximum measurement of NT 
should be taken. In (f) the umbilical cord is round the neck. In this case the NT should be measured both 
above and below the cord and the average of the two measurements should be used in the calculation 
of risk. 
Care must be taken to distinguish between fetal skin and amnion 
because, at this gestation, both structures appear as thin membranes 
(Figure 8a). This is achieved by waiting for spontaneous 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

fetal movement away from the amniotic membrane; alternatively, 
the fetus is bounced off the amnion by asking the mother to 
cough and/or by tapping the maternal abdomen. 
The maximum thickness of the subcutaneous translucency 
between the skin and the soft tissue overlying the cervical spine 
should be measured (Figure 8e). The callipers should be placed 
on the lines that define the NT thickness – the crossbar of the 
calliper should be such that it is hardly visible as it merges with 
the white line of the border and not in the nuchal fluid. During 
the scan, more than one measurement must be taken and the 
maximum one should be recorded. 
The umbilical cord may be round the fetal neck in 5–10% of 
cases and this finding may produce a falsely increased NT. In 
such cases, the measurements of NT above and below the cord 
are different and, in the calculation of risk, it is more appropriate 
to use the average of the two measurements (Figure 8f ). 
There are no clinically relevant effects on NT measurements 
by ethnic origin, parity or gravidity, cigarette smoking, diabetic 
control, conception by assisted reproduction techniques, bleeding 
in early pregnancy or fetal gender. 
The intra-observer and inter-observer differences in measurements 
of fetal NT are less than 0.5 mm in 95% of cases. 
Deviation in measurement from normal 
Fetal NT increases with crown–rump length and therefore it 
is essential to take gestation into account when determining 
whether a given NT thickness is increased. In a study involving 
96,127 pregnancies, the median and 95th centile at a 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

crown-rump-length of 45 mm were 1.2 and 2.1 mm and the 
respective values at crown rump length of 84 mm were 1.9 and 
2.7 mm (Snijders et al 1998). 
In screening for chromosomal defects patient-specific risks are 
derived by multiplying the a priori maternal age and gestation-
related risk by a likelihood ratio, which depends on the difference 
(Delta value in mm) in fetal NT measurement from the normal 
median for the same crown-rump length (Figures 9–11). 
In screening using maternal serum biochemical markers a different 
approach has been used to take into account the gestational 
age related change in marker levels. This method involves 
converting the measured concentration into a multiple of the 
median (MoM) of unaffected pregnancies of the same gestation. 
Essentially, the Gaussian distributions of log10 (NT MoM) in 
trisomy 21 and unaffected pregnancies are derived and the 
heights of the distributions at a particular MoM, which is the 
likelihood ratio for trisomy 21, is used to modify the a priori 
maternal age-related risk to derive the patient-specific risk. 
35 45 55 65 75 85 
0.0 
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
8.0 
Crown-rump length (mm) 
Nuchal translucency (mm) 
Figure 9. Nuchal translucency measurement in 326 trisomy 21 fetuses plotted on the normal range for 
crown–rump length (95th and 5th centiles). 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

0 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
-1 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 
Nuchal translucency deviation (mm) 
Frequency (%) 
Figure 10. Distribution of fetal nuchal translucency thickness expressed as deviation from the normal 
median for crown–rump length in chromosomally normal fetuses (black bars) and 326 with trisomy 21 
(blue bars). 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
-0.5 0 1 20.5 1.5 2.5 
Nuchal translucency deviation (mm) 
Likelihood ratio 
Figure 11. Likelihood ratios for trisomy 21 in relation to the deviation in fetal nuchal translucency 
thickness from the normal median for crown–rump length. 
In screening by NT the Delta approach provides accurate 
patient-specific risks (Spencer et al 2003). In contrast, the MoM 
approach was found to be inappropriate for this purpose, because 
none of the three basic assumptions that underpin this method 
are valid. Firstly, in the unaffected population the distributions 
of NT MoM and log10(NT MoM) are not Gaussian, secondly, 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

the SD’s do not remain constant with gestation and thirdly, the 
median MoM in the trisomy 21 pregnancies is not a constant 
proportion of the median for unaffected pregnancies. The MoM 
approach results in women being given an overestimate of risk 
for trisomy at 11 weeks and a considerable underestimate of risk 
at 13 weeks. 
Nuchal translucency – measurement 
•The gestation should be 11–13+6 weeks and the fetal crown– 
rump length should be 45–84 mm. 
•A mid-sagittal section of the fetus should be obtained and the 
NT should be measured with the fetus in the neutral position. 
•Only the fetal head and upper thorax should be included in 
the image. The magnification should be as large as possible 
and always such that each slight movement of the callipers 
•The maximum thickness of the subcutaneous translucency 
between the skin and the soft tissue overlying the cervical 
spine should be measured. Care must be taken to distinguish 
between fetal skin and amnion. 
•The callipers should be placed on the lines that define the NT 
thickness – the crossbar of the calliper should be such that it 
is hardly visible as it merges with the white line of the border 
and not in the nuchal fluid. 
•During the scan, more than one measurement must be taken 
and the maximum one should be recorded. 
produces only a 0.1 mm change in the measurement. 
Training and quality assessment in the measurement of NT 
Appropriate training of sonographers and adherence to a 
standard technique for the measurement of NT are essential 
prerequisites for good clinical practice. Furthermore, the success 
of a screening program necessitates the presence of a system for 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

regular audit of results and continuous assessment of the quality 
of images. 
All sonographers performing fetal scans should be capable of 
reliably measuring the crown–rump length and obtaining a 
proper sagittal view of the fetal spine. For such sonographers, 
it is easy to acquire, within a few hours, the skill to measure 
NT thickness. However, the ability to measure NT and obtain 
reproducible results improves with training. Good results are 
achieved after 80 scans for the transabdominal route and 100 
scans transvaginally. 
Several studies have demonstrated that ongoing regular audit of 
images and the distribution of measurements of NT is essential 
for assessing the quality of a centre and is also useful in identifying 
individual sonographers whose results deviate from the mean 
performance. The inter-examination variation in measurements 
is reduced considerably after an initial learning phase and after 
feedback to the sonographers on the distribution of their 
measurements and the quality of their images. 
The Fetal Medicine Foundation (FMF), which is a UK 
registered charity, has established a process of training and 
quality assurance for the appropriate introduction of NT screening 
into clinical practice. Training is based on a theoretical 
course, practical instruction on how to obtain the appropriate 
image and make the correct measurement of NT, and presentation 
of a logbook of images. These are examined to determine 
if the magnification is adequate, the section of the fetus is truly 
sagittal and the head is in the neutral position, the amnion is seen 
separately from the nuchal membrane and the callipers are placed 
appropriately. Ongoing quality assurance is based on assessment 
of the distribution of fetal NT measurements (Figure 12) and 
examination of a sample of images obtained by each sonographer 
involved in screening. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

31Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defectsFigure 12. Distribution of fetal nuchal translucency thickness. In (a) the distribution is good, in (b) themeasurements are underestimated and in (c) the measurements are overestimated.
0.01.02.03.04.05.06.0455055606570758085Crown-rump length (mm)
Nuchal translucency (mm)
0.01.02.03.04.0455055606570758085Crown-rump length (mm)
Nuchal translucency (mm)
0.01.02.03.04.0455055606570758085Crown-rump length (mm)
Nuchal translucency (mm)
(a)
(b)
(c)

Nuchal translucency – training and quality assurance 
•Appropriate training of sonographers and adherence to a 
standard technique for the measurement of NT are essential 
prerequisites for good clinical practice. 
•The success of a screening program necessitates the presence 
of a system for regular audit of results and continuous assessment 
of the quality of images. 
•Training is based on a theoretical course, practical instruction 
on how to obtain the appropriate image and make the 
correct measurement of NT, and presentation of a logbook of 
images. 
•Ongoing quality assurance is based on assessment of the 
distribution of fetal NT measurements and examination of a 
sample of images obtained by each sonographer involved in 
screening. 
Nuchal translucency thickness and risk for chromosomal defects 
In 1992 a study, in which fetal NT was measured before CVS for 
fetal karyotyping, reported that in a high proportion of chromosomally 
abnormal fetuses the NT thickness was increased 
(Nicolaides et al 1992). 
This association was subsequently confirmed in several other 
studies in the early 1990s. Thus, in the combined data from 17 
series involving a total of 1,690 patients with increased fetal NT 
the incidence of chromosomal defects was 29% (Nicolaides 
2004). However, there were large differences between the studies 
in the incidence of chromosomal defects, ranging from 11% to 
88%, because of differences in the maternal age distributions of 
the populations examined and the definition of the minimum 
abnormal NT thickness, which ranged from 2 mm to 10 mm. 
Studies in the mid 1990’s demonstrated that firstly, in normal 
pregnancies, fetal NT thickness increases with gestation, 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

secondly, in trisomy 21 and other major chromosomal defects 
fetal NT is increased, and thirdly, the risk for trisomies can be 
derived by multiplying the a priori maternal age and gestation-
related risk by a likelihood ratio, which depends on the degree of 
deviation in fetal NT measurement from the normal median for 
that crown–rump length (Nicolaides et al 1994, Pandya et al 
1995). 
It was estimated that, in a pregnant population with a mean 
maternal age of 28 years, using the risk cut-off of 1 in 300 to 
define the screen positive group would detect about 80% of 
trisomy 21 fetuses for a false positive rate of 5%. 
Nuchal translucency – calculation of patient-specific risk 
• The risk for trisomies is derived by multiplying the a priori 
maternal age and gestation-related risk by the NT likelihood 
ratio. 
• The NT likelihood ratio depends on the degree of deviation 
in fetal NT measurement from the normal median for that 
crown–rump length. 
Implementation of nuchal translucency screening in routine practice 
Several prospective interventional studies have examined the 
implementation of NT screening in routine practice (Nicolaides 
2004). 
In some of the studies the screen positive group was defined by a 
cut-off in fetal NT or a combined risk derived from the maternal 
age and deviation in fetal NT from the normal median for fetal 
crown-rump length. 
The important findings of these studies are, firstly, fetal NT was 
successfully measured in more than 99% of cases, secondly, there 
were inevitable variations in false positive and detection rates 
between the studies because of differences in the maternal age 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

distribution of their populations and in fetal NT or risk cut-offs 
used, and thirdly, in the combined data on more than 200,000 
pregnancies, including more than 900 fetuses with trisomy 21, 
fetal NT screening identified more than 75% of fetuses with 
trisomy 21 and other major chromosomal defects for a false positive 
rate of 5%, or the detection rate was about 60% for a false 
positive rate of 1% (Nicolaides 2004). 
In the largest study, coordinated by the FMF, 100,311 singleton 
pregnancies were examined by 306 appropriately trained 
sonographers in 22 UK centers (Snijders et al 1998). In all cases 
the fetal NT and crown–rump length were measured and individual 
patient-specific risks, based on maternal age, gestational 
age and fetal NT were calculated. Follow-up was obtained from 
96,127 cases, including 326 with trisomy 21 and 325 with other 
chromosomal defects (Table 3). The median gestation at the time 
Table 3. Multicentre study coordinated by the Fetal Medicine Foundation. Number of pregnancies with 
nuchal translucency (NT) thickness above the 95th centile and an estimated risk for trisomy 21, based on 
maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency and crown-rump length, of 1 in 300 or more (Snijders et al 
1998). 
Fetal karyotype N th centile Risk =1 in 300 
Normal 95,476 4,209 (4.4%) 7,907 (8.3%) 
326 234 (71.2%) 268 (82.2%) 
119 89 (74.8%) 97 (81.5%) 
46 33 (71.7%) 37 (80.4%) 
Turner syndrome 54 47 (87.0%) 48 (88.9%) 
Triploidy 19 (59.4%) 20 (62.5%) 
Other* 64 41 (64.1%) 51 (79.7%) 
Total 96,127 4,767 (5.0%) 8,428 (8.8%) 
NT >95Trisomy 21 
Trisomy 18 
Trisomy 13 
32 
*Deletions, partial trisomies, unbalanced translocations, sex chromosome aneuploidies 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

of screening was 12 weeks and the median maternal age was 
31 years. 
The estimated risk for trisomy 21 was 1 in 300 or more in 8% of 
the normal pregnancies, in 82% of those with trisomy 21 and 
in 78% with other chromosomal defects. For a screen-positive 
rate of 5%, the detection rate was 77% (95% confidence interval 
72–82%). 
The issue of spontaneous fetal death 
Screening for chromosomal defects in the first, rather than the 
second trimester, has the advantage of earlier prenatal diagnosis 
and consequently less traumatic termination of pregnancy for 
those couples who choose this option. A potential disadvantage 
is that earlier screening preferentially identifies those chromosomally 
abnormal pregnancies that are destined to miscarry. 
Approximately 30% of affected fetuses die between 12 weeks of 
gestation and term. This issue of preferential spontaneous death 
in fetuses with chromosomal defects is, of course, a potential 
criticism of all methods of antenatal screening, including second-
trimester maternal serum biochemistry, because the rate of fetal 
death between 16 weeks and term is about 20%. 
In prenatal screening studies it is impossible to know how many 
of the trisomy 21 pregnancies that were terminated would have 
resulted in live births. However, it is possible to estimate the 
impact of prenatal screening on the prevalence of trisomy 21 in 
live births. This can be done by comparing the number of 
affected live births with the number estimated on the basis of the 
maternal age-related prevalence of trisomy 21 in live births and 
the maternal age distribution of the population screened. In the 
FMF screening study, by a combination of maternal age and 
fetal NT, a risk cut-off of 1 in 300 was associated with a false 
positive rate of 8% and a detection rate of 82% (Snijders et al 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

1998). It was estimated that prenatal screening followed by 
invasive diagnostic testing and selective termination of affected 
fetuses would have reduced the potential live birth prevalence of 
trisomy 21 by 78–82%. 
Nuchal translucency – effectiveness of screening for trisomy 21 
•Prospective studies in more than 200,000 pregnancies, 
including more than 900 fetuses with trisomy 21, have 
demonstrated that NT screening can identify more than 75% 
of fetuses with trisomy 21 for a false positive rate of 5%. 
•Increased NT does not necessarily identify those trisomic 
fetuses that are destined to die in utero. 
•The observed detection rate of trisomy 21 with first trimester 
NT screening is only 2–3% higher than the detection rate of 
affected pregnancies that would potentially result in livebirths. 
Observational studies 
The ability to achieve a reliable measurement of NT is dependent 
on appropriate training, adherence to a standard technique and 
motivation of the sonographer. All three components are well 
illustrated by the differences in results between interventional 
and observational studies, in which the sonographers were asked 
to record the fetal NT measurements but not act on the results 
(Nicolaides 2004). Thus, successful measurement of NT was 
achieved in more than 99% of cases in the interventional studies, 
but in only 75% of cases in the observational studies. Furthermore 
in the interventional studies there was increased NT in 
76.8% of the trisomy 21 and 4.2% of the chromosomally normal 
fetuses, compared to the respective rates of 38.4% and 5.0% in 
the observational studies. 
In the observational studies, the scans were often carried out at 
inappropriate gestations and the sonographers were either not 
trained adequately or they were not sufficiently motivated to 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

measure NT. For example, in one of the studies, in which 
sonographers were instructed to take no extra scanning time 
other than that necessary for measurement of the crown-rump 
length, fetal NT was successfully measured in only 66% of cases 
(Roberts et al 1995). In another study, the fetal crown-rump 
length was less than 33 mm in 54% of cases and the 
sonographers, who were instructed to measure fetal NT within 
three minutes, were unable to do so in 42% of cases (Kornman 
et al 1996). These methodological problems are further highlighted 
by a study of 47,053 singleton pregnancies examined at 
6–16 weeks (Wald et al 2003a). In 23% of the patients no valid 
NT measurement was taken because the scans were carried out 
at inappropriate gestations or the sonographers were unable to 
obtain a measurement or none of the images were deemed to be 
of an acceptable quality. 
Further evidence on the difference between observational and 
interventional studies is provided by Crossley et al (2002). In this 
observational study, 17,229 pregnancies were recruited and fetal 
NT was successfully measured in 73% of cases. In a subsequent 
study of more than 2,000 pregnancies in which the results of 
the scan were given to the women, fetal NT was successfully 
measured in 99.8% of cases. 
Nuchal translucency and maternal serum biochemistry 
Trisomic pregnancies are associated with altered maternal serum 
concentrations of various feto-placental products, including AFP, 
free b-hCG, uE3, inhibin A and PAPP-A. Screening in the 
second trimester by maternal age and various combinations of 
free b-hCG, AFP, uE3 and Inhibin A can identify 50–75% of 
trisomy 21 pregnancies for a false positive rate of 5%. Screening 
in the first trimester by a combination of maternal age and serum 
free b-hCG and PAPP-A identifies about 60% of affected 
pregnancies for a false positive rate of 5%. However, an essential 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

component of biochemical screening is accurate dating of the 
pregnancy by ultrasound, otherwise the detection rate is reduced 
by about 10%. 
Fetal NT and maternal serum testing in the first-trimester 
In trisomy 21 pregnancies at 12 weeks, the maternal serum 
concentration of free b-hCG (about 2 MoM) is higher than in 
chromosomally normal fetuses whereas PAPP-A is lower (about 
0.5 MoM). The difference in maternal serum free b-hCG 
between normal and trisomy 21 pregnancies increases with 
advancing gestation and the difference in PAPP-A decreases 
with gestation. These temporal variations in marker levels, their 
interrelation and their association with maternal weight should be 
taken into account when developing risk algorithms in order to 
produce accurate patient-specific risks. 
There is no significant association between fetal NT and 
maternal serum free b-hCG or PAPP-A in either trisomy 21 or 
chromosomally normal pregnancies and therefore the ultrasononographic 
and biochemical markers can be combined to 
provide more effective screening than either method individually 
(Spencer et al 1999). Six prospective screening studies have 
confirmed the feasibility and effectiveness of combining fetal NT 
and maternal serum free b-hCG and PAPP-A. In the combined 
data on a total of 38,804 pregnancies, including 182 with trisomy 
21, the detection rate for trisomy 21 at a 5% false positive rate 
was 86% (Nicolaides 2004). 
In trisomies 18 and 13 maternal serum free b-hCG and 
PAPP-A are decreased. In cases of sex chromosomal anomalies 
maternal serum free b-hCG is normal and PAPP-A is low. In 
paternally derived triploidy maternal serum free b-hCG is greatly 
increased, whereas PAPP-A is mildly decreased. Maternally 
derived triploidy is associated with markedly decreased maternal 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

serum free b-hCG and PAPP-A. Screening by a combination of 
fetal NT and maternal serum PAPP-A and free b-hCG can 
identify about 90% of all these chromosomal abnormalities for a 
screen positive rate of 1%, in addition to the 5% necessary in 
screening for trisomy 21. 
An important development in biochemical analysis is the introduction 
of a new technique (random access immunoassay analyzer 
using time-resolved-amplified-cryptate-emission), which 
provides automated, precise and reproducible measurements 
within 30 minutes of obtaining a blood sample. This has made it 
possible to combine biochemical and ultrasonographic testing as 
well as to counsel in one-stop clinics for early assessment of fetal 
risk (OSCAR) (Bindra et al 2002, Spencer et al 2003b). 
Fetal NT and maternal serum testing in the second-trimester 
In women having second-trimester biochemical testing following 
first-trimester NT screening the a priori risk needs to be adjusted 
to take into account the first-trimester screening results. 
Prospective studies of screening by a combination of fetal NT in 
the first trimester and maternal serum biochemistry in the second 
trimester reported that for a false positive rate of 5% the detection 
rate of trisomy 21 (85–90%) is similar to combined screening in 
the first trimester (Nicolaides 2004). 
Integration of first and second trimester testing 
A statistical model combining first-trimester fetal NT and 
maternal serum PAPP-A with second-trimester free b-hCG, uE3 
and inhibin A, estimated that for a false positive rate of 5% the 
detection rate of trisomy 21 could be 94% (Wald et al 1999). 
This test assumes complete compliance by the pregnant women 
in firstly, participating in a two stage process separated by one 
month, secondly, in having an ultrasound scan without receiving 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

information as to whether the fetus looks normal or not, and 
thirdly, accepting second rather than first trimester diagnosis and 
termination. It is therefore likely that even if the estimates of this 
hypothetical test are found to be true in prospective studies, it 
will not gain widespread clinical acceptability. 
Some of the logistical problems in the implementation of an 
integrated test are highlighted by the results of a multicentre 
observational study (SURUSS) investigating first and second 
trimester screening for trisomy 21 (Wald et al 2003a). The aim 
was to obtain a measurement of fetal NT in the first trimester and 
collect maternal serum and urine samples in the first and second 
trimesters. Intervention was based on the second trimester serum 
results and all other data were analyzed retrospectively. However, 
of the 47,053 women that were recruited, only 60% completed all 
components of the protocol. In this study there were 101 fetuses 
with trisomy 21 and satisfactory NT images were obtained only 
from 75 of the cases. The data were used to derive a statistical 
model suggesting that for a 5% false positive rate, 93% of trisomy 
21 fetuses could be detected by the integrated test. However, it is 
likely that this model is inaccurate. For example, the predicted 
detection rates, for a 5% false positive rate, were 71% for the 
double test, 77% for the triple test and 83% for the quadruple 
test, which are substantially higher than the respective rates 
of 61%, 66% and 75% reported by the same authors in their 
prospective screening studies (Wald et al 2003b). 
A similar study in the USA (FASTER trial), reported its 
findings in the subgroup of 33,557 pregnancies with complete 
first and second trimester data, including 84 cases of trisomy 21 
(Malone et al 2004). It was estimated that, for a 5.4% false 
positive rate, 90% of trisomy 21 fetuses could be detected. 
Prospective studies have demonstrated that such results are 
achievable by screening with fetal NT and maternal serum 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

free b-hCG and PAPP-A in the first-trimester (Bindra et al 
2002, Spencer et al 2003b). It is therefore essential that, in 
screening, attention is paid to the provision of high quality sonographic 
and biochemical services for early diagnosis of chromosomal 
defects, rather than the development of theoretical models 
which would delay diagnosis until the second trimester and are, 
in any case, unlikely to be implemented in clinical practice. 
Screening by nuchal translucency and serum biochemistry 
•In trisomy 21 pregnancies at 11–13+6 weeks, the maternal 
serum concentration of free b-hCG is higher (about 2 MoM) 
and PAPP-A is lower (about 0.5 MoM) than in chromosomally 
normal fetuses. 
•There is no significant association between fetal NT and 
maternal serum free b-hCG or PAPP-A in either trisomy 21 or 
chromosomally normal pregnancies. The ultrasononographic 
and biochemical markers can be combined to provide more 
effective screening than either method individually. 
•Prospective studies, in more than 50,000 pregnancies, including 
more than 250 fetuses with trisomy 21, have demonstrated 
that screening by a combination of fetal NT and either 
first or second trimester maternal serum biochemistry can 
identify 85–90% of fetuses with trisomy 21 for a false positive 
rate of 5%. 
•In trisomies 18 and 13 maternal serum free b-hCG and 
PAPP-A are decreased. In sex chromosomal anomalies maternal 
serum free b-hCG is normal and PAPP-A is low. In paternally 
derived triploidy maternal serum free b-hCG is greatly 
increased, whereas PAPP-A is mildly decreased. Maternally 
derived triploidy is associated with markedly decreased 
maternal serum free b-hCG and PAPP-A. Screening by a 
combination of fetal NT and maternal serum PAPP-A and 
free b-hCG can identify about 90% of all these chromosomal 
abnormalities for a screen positive rate of 1%, in addition to 
the 5% in screening for trisomy 21. 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

WOMENS’ ATTITUDES TO 1ST VERSUS 2ND TRIMESTER SCREENING 
Studies investigating the preference of pregnant women in terms 
of the methods of screening, have reported that the vast majority 
prefer this to be carried out in the first rather than in the second 
trimester. A criticism of NT screening has been that some 
women with increased fetal NT will face unnecessary decisions 
regarding invasive testing and ultimately pregnancy termination 
in an affected pregnancy that would otherwise have ended in 
spontaneous miscarriage. In a survey of women’s preferences, 
about 70% stated that they would still choose NT screening even 
if all the Down’s syndrome pregnancies identified by this method 
miscarried before the second trimester (Mulvey and Wallace 
2000). The women wanted to know if their fetus had had Down’s 
syndrome regardless of the pregnancy outcome and they also 
valued the knowledge of an underlying reason for a miscarriage 
if it occurred. 
Clinical importance of respect for autonomy 
Respect for autonomy is a central principle in medical ethics and 
law. This ethical principle obliges the physician to elicit and 
implement the patient’s preferences. The relevance of respect for 
autonomy to first trimester screening is two-fold. Firstly, early 
diagnosis of fetal abnormality and the option of early termination 
of pregnancy are important to many women. Secondly, most first 
trimester screening tests provide reassurance for many women 
who would prefer not to have an invasive procedure if the 
risk is low. Consequently, the provision of a high-quality first 
trimester screening service significantly enhances the autonomy 
of pregnant women (Chasen et al 2001). 
The vast majority of pregnant women prefer screening and 
diagnosis to be performed in the first, rather than in the second 
trimester. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

REFERENCES 
Bindra R, Heath V, Liao A, Spencer K, Nicolaides KH. One stop clinic for assessment 
of risk for trisomy 21 at 11–14 weeks: A prospective study of 15,030 pregnancies. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002;20:219–25. 
Chasen ST, Skupski DW, McCullough LB, Chervenak FA. Prenatal informed consent 
for sonogram: the time for first-trimester nuchal translucency has come. J Ultrasound 
Med 2001;20:1147–52. 
Crossley JA, Aitken DA, Cameron AD, McBride E, Connor JM. Combined ultrasound 
and biochemical screening for Down’s syndrome in the first trimester: a Scottish 
multicentre study. BJOG 2002;109:667–76. 
Down LJ. Observations on an ethnic classification of idiots. Clin Lectures and Reports, 
London Hospital 1866;3:259–62. 
Hecht CA, Hook EB. The imprecision in rates of Down syndrome by 1-year maternal 
age intervals: a critical analysis of rates used in biochemical screening. Prenat Diagn 
1994;14:729–38. 
Kornman LH, Morssink LP, Beekhuis JR, DeWolf BTHM, Heringa MP, Mantingh A. 
Nuchal translucency cannot be used as a screening test for chromosomal abnormalities 
in the first trimester of pregnancy in a routine ultrasound practice. Prenat Diagn 
1996;16:797–805. 
Malone FD, Wald NJ, Canick JA, Ball RH, Nyberg DA, Comstock CH, Bukowski R, 
et al. First- and second-trimester evaluation of risk (FASTER) trial: principal results of 
the NICHD multicenter Down syndrome screening study. SMFM 2004, Abstract 1. 
Mulvey S, Wallace EM. Women’s knowledge of and attitudes to first and second 
trimester screening for Down’s syndrome. BJOG 2000;107:1302–5. 
Nicolaides KH, Azar G, Byrne D, Mansur C, Marks K. Fetal nuchal translucency: 
ultrasound screening for chromosomal defects in first trimester of pregnancy. BMJ 
1992;304:867–9. 
Nicolaides KH, Brizot ML, Snijders RJM. Fetal nuchal translucency: ultrasound screening 
for fetal trisomy in the first trimester of pregnancy. BJOG 1994;101:782–6. 
Nicolaides KH. Nuchal translucency and other first-trimester sonographic markers of 
chromosomal abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;191:45–67. 
Pandya PP, Snijders RJM, Johnson SJ, Brizot M, Nicolaides KH. Screening for fetal 
trisomies by maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency thickness at 10 to 14 weeks 
of gestation. BJOG 1995;102:957–62. 
Roberts LJ, Bewley S, Mackinson AM, Rodeck CH. First trimester fetal nuchal translucency: 
Problems with screening the general population 1. BJOG 1995;102:381–5. 
Chapter 1 • First trimester diagnosis of chromosomal defects 

Snijders RJM, Sebire NJ, Cuckle H, Nicolaides KH. Maternal age and gestational 
age-specific risks for chromosomal defects. Fetal Diag Ther 1995;10:356–67. 
Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Sequential screening. In: Nicolaides KH, editor. Ultrasound 
markers for fetal chromosomal defects. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon Publishing, 
1996, pp109–13. 
Snijders RJM, Noble P, Sebire N, Souka A, Nicolaides KH. UK multicentre project 
on assessment of risk of trisomy 21 by maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency 
thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation. Lancet 1998;351:343–6. 
Snijders RJM, Sundberg K, Holzgreve W, Henry G, Nicolaides KH. Maternal age and 
gestation-specific risk for trisomy 21. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:167–70. 
Spencer K, Souter V, Tul N, Snijders R, Nicolaides KH. A screening program 
for trisomy 21 at 10–14 weeks using fetal nuchal translucency, maternal serum 
free b-human chorionic gonadotropin and pregnancy-associated plasma protein-A. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;13:231–7. 
Spencer K, Bindra R, Nix ABJ, Heath V, Nicolaides KH. Delta- NT or NT MoM: which 
is the most appropriate method for calculating accurate patient-specific risks for 
trisomy 21 in the first trimester? Ultrasound Obstet GynecoI 2003a;22:142–8. 
Spencer K, Spencer CE, Power M, Dawson C, Nicolaides KH. Screening for chromosomal 
abnormalities in the first trimester using ultrasound and maternal serum 
biochemistry in a one stop clinic: A review of three years prospective experience. 
BJOG 2003b;110:281–6. 
Tabor A, Philip J, Madsen M, Bang J, Obel EB, Norgaard-Pedersen B. Randomised 
controlled trial of genetic amniocentesis in 4,606 low-risk women. Lancet 
1986;1:1287–93. 
Wald NJ, Watt HC, Hackshaw AK. Integrated screening for Down’s syndrome on the 
basis of tests performed during the first and second trimesters. N Engl J Med 
1999;341:461–7. 
Wald NJ, Rodeck C, Hackshaw AK, Walters J, Chitty L, Mackinson AM; SURUSS 
Research Group. First and second trimester antenatal screening for Down’s syndrome: 
the results of the Serum, Urine and Ultrasound Screening Study (SURUSS). Health 
Technol Assess 2003a;7:1–77. 
Wald NJ, Huttly WJ, Hackshaw AK. Antenatal screening for Down’s syndrome with 
the quadruple test. Lancet 2003b;361:835–6. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

2
SONOGRAPHIC FEATURES OF CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS 
Each chromosomal defect has its own syndromal pattern of 
detectable abnormalities. This chapter describes the sonographic 
features of trisomy 21 and other major chromosomal defects in 
the first and second trimesters of pregnancy. 
FIRST TRIMESTER ULTRASONOGRAPHY 
At 11–13+6 weeks, all major chromosomal defects are associated 
with increased NT thickness (Snijders et al 1998). In trisomies 
21, 18 and 13 the pattern of increase in NT is similar and the 
average NT in these defects is about 2.5 mm above the normal 
median for crown-rump length. In Turner syndrome, the median 
NT is about 8 mm above the normal median. 
In addition to increased NT, in trisomy 21, 60–70% of fetuses 
have absent nasal bone, 25% have a short maxilla, and 80% 
have abnormal Doppler waveforms in the ductus venosus. In 
trisomy 18, there is early onset fetal growth restriction, a tendency 
for bradycardia and exomphalos in 30% of cases, absent 
nasal bone in 55% and single umbilical artery in 75%. In trisomy 
13, there is tachycardia in about 70% of the cases and early 
onset fetal growth restriction, megacystis, holoprosencephaly or 
exomphalos in about 40% of the cases. In Turner syndrome, 
there is tachycardia in about 50% of cases and early onset fetal 
growth restriction. In triploidy, there is early onset asymmetrical 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

fetal growth restriction, bradycardia in 30% of cases, holoprosencephaly, 
exomphalos or posterior fossa cyst in about 40% and 
molar changes in the placenta in about 30%. 
Absence of fetal nasal bone 
In 1866 Langdon Down noted that a common characteristic of 
patients with trisomy 21 is a small nose. Anthropometric studies 
in patients with Down’s syndrome have reported that the 
nasal root depth is abnormally short in 50% of cases (Farkas et al 
2001). Similarly, post mortem radiological studies in aborted 
fetuses with trisomy 21 have reported absence of ossification or 
hypoplasia of the nasal bone in about 50% of cases. Sonographic 
studies at 15–24 weeks of gestation reported that about 65% of 
trisomy 21 fetuses have absent or short nasal bone. 
The fetal nasal bone can be visualized by sonography at 11–13+6 
weeks of gestation (Cicero et al 2001). Several studies have demonstrated 
a high association between absent nasal bone at 11–13+6 
weeks and trisomy 21, as well as other chromosomal abnormalities 
(Nicolaides 2004). In the combined data from these studies on a 
total of 15,822 fetuses the fetal profile was successfully examined 
in 97.4% cases and the nasal bone was absent in 1.4% of the chromosomally 
normal fetuses and in 69% of fetuses with trisomy 21. 
An important finding of these studies was that the incidence 
of absent nasal bone decreased with fetal crown-rump length, 
increased with NT thickness and was substantially higher in 
Afro-Caribbeans than in Caucasians. Consequently, in the calculation 
of likelihood ratios in screening for trisomy 21 adjustments 
must be made for these confounding factors (Cicero et al 2004). 
Integrated first-trimester sonographic and biochemical screening 
A case-control study comprising of 100 trisomy 21 and 400 
chromosomally normal singleton pregnancies at 11–13+6 weeks 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

of gestation examined the potential performance of screening for 
trisomy 21 by a combination of sonography for measurement of 
fetal NT and assessment of the presence or absence of the fetal 
nasal bone and measurement of maternal serum free b-hCG and 
PAPP-A (Cicero et al 2003). It was estimated that for a false 
positive rate of 5%, the detection rate of trisomy 21 would be 97%. 
Examination of the nasal bone 
•The gestation should be 11–13+6 weeks and the fetal 
crown–rump length should be 45–84 mm. 
•The image should be magnified so that the head and the 
upper thorax only are included in the screen. 
•A mid-sagittal view of the fetal profile should be obtained 
with the ultrasound transducer held in parallel to the direction 
of the nose. 
•In the image of the nose there should be three distinct lines. 
The top line represents the skin and the bottom one, which is 
thicker and more echogenic than the overlying skin, represents 
the nasal bone. A third line, almost in continuity with the 
skin, but at a higher level, represents the tip of the nose. 
•At 11–13+6 weeks the fetal profile can be successfully 
examined in more than 95% of cases. 
•In chromosomally normal fetuses the incidence of absent 
nasal bone is less than 1% in Caucasian populations and 
about 10% in Afro-Caribbeans. 
•The nasal bone is absent in 60–70% of trisomy 21 fetuses, 
in about 50% of trisomy 18 fetuses and 30% of trisomy 13 
fetuses. 
•For a false positive rate of 5%, screening by a combination of 
sonography for fetal NT and nasal bone and maternal serum 
free b-hCG and PAPP-A can potentially identify more than 
95% of trisomy 21 pregnancies. 
•It is imperative that sonographers undertaking risk assessment 
by examination of the fetal profile receive appropriate 
training and certification of their competence in performing 
such a scan. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

Crown–rump length 
Trisomy 18 and triploidy are associated with moderately severe 
growth restriction, trisomy 13 and Turner syndrome with mild 
growth restriction, whereas in trisomy 21 growth is essentially 
normal (Figure 1; Nicolaides et al 1996). 
Crown-rump length and chromosomal defects 
• Trisomy 18 and triploidy are associated with moderately 
severe growth restriction 
• Trisomy 13 and Turner syndrome are associated with mild 
growth restriction 
• In trisomy 21 growth is essentially normal 
70 75 80 85 90 95 100 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
20 
Gestation (days) 
Crown-rump-length (mm) 
Figure 1. Fetal crown-rump length in fetuses with triploidy plotted on the reference range (mean, 95th 
and 5th centiles) with gestation of chromosomally normal fetuses. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Maxillary length 
Langdon Down observed that in individuals with trisomy 21 
‘the face is flat’. This may be the consequence of underdevelopment 
of the maxilla. Anthropometric and radiological 
studies in patients with Down’s syndrome have demonstrated 
underdevelopment of the maxilla in more than 50% of cases 
(Farkas et al 2001). 
The fetal maxilla can be easily visualized and measured by 
sonography at 11–13+6 weeks of gestation (Cicero et al 2004). 
A mid-sagittal view of the fetal profile is first obtained and 
the transducer is then gently angled laterally so that both the 
maxillary bone and mandible, including the ramus and condylar 
process, can be seen (Figure 2). In chromosomally normal 
fetuses maxillary length increases linearly with gestation by about 
0.1 mm for each 1 mm increase in crown-rump length. In the 
trisomy 21 fetuses the median maxillary length is significantly 
below the normal median for crown-rump length by 0.7 mm. 
Figure 2. Ultrasound picture of a 12-weeks fetus demonstrating measurement of maxillary length. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

However, there is a significant association between maxillary 
bone length and NT thickness and in fetuses with absent 
nasal bone the maxilla is shorter than in those with present nasal 
bone. Consequently, the independent contribution of maxillary 
length in screening for trisomy 21 remains to be determined. In 
fetuses with other chromosomal defects there are no significant 
differences from normal in the maxillary length. 
Ear length 
In postnatal life, short ears constitute the most consistent clinical 
characteristic of patients with Down’s syndrome. The fetal ears 
can be easily visualized and measured by sonography at 11–13+6 
weeks of gestation (Sacchini et al 2003). Although in trisomy 
21 fetuses the median ear length is significantly below the 
normal median for crown-rump length, the degree of deviation 
from normal is too small for this measurement to be useful in 
screening for trisomy 21. 
Femur and humerus length 
Trisomy 21 is characterised by short stature and during the 
second trimester the condition is associated with relative shortening 
of the femur and more so the humerus. At 11–13+6 
weeks in trisomy 21 fetuses the median femur and humerus 
lengths are significantly below the appropriate normal median 
for crown-rump length but the degree of deviation from normal 
is too small for these measurements to be useful in screening 
(Longo et al 2004). 
Single umbilical artery 
A single umbilical artery, found in about 1% of deliveries, is 
associated with malformations of all major organ systems and 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

chromosomal defects. In the first-trimester the umbilical arteries 
can be visualized by color flow mapping on either side of the 
bladder and in continuity with the umbilical cord insertion to the 
fetus in an oblique transverse section of the lower fetal abdomen. 
At 11–13+6 weeks single umbilical artery is found in about 3% 
of chromosomally normal fetuses and in 80% of fetuses with 
trisomy 18 (Rembouskos et al 2003). In the fetuses with single 
umbilical artery the observed number of cases of trisomy 21 
is not significantly different from the number estimated on the 
basis of maternal age and fetal NT. In contrast, a single umbilical 
artery is associated with a seven fold increase in risk of trisomy 
18. However, a high proportion of trisomy 18 fetuses have other 
major defects that are easily detectable at the 11–13+6 weeks scan 
and many other abnormalities that are detectable at 16–20 weeks. 
It is therefore unlikely that the finding of a single umbilical artery 
per se should be an indication for fetal karyotyping. 
Megacystis 
The fetal bladder can be visualized by sonography in about 80% 
of fetuses at 11 weeks of gestation and in all cases by 13 weeks. 
At this gestation the fetal bladder length is normally less than 
6 mm. Fetal megacystis in the first-trimester, defined by a longitudinal 
bladder diameter of 7 mm or more, is found in about 1 in 
1,500 pregnancies (Figure 3). When the longitudinal bladder 
diameter is 7–15 mm the incidence of chromosomal defects, 
mainly trisomies 13 and 18, is about 20%, but in the chromosomally 
normal group there is spontaneous resolution of the 
megacystis in about 90% of cases (Liao et al 2003). In contrast, 
in megacystis with bladder diameter greater than 15 mm the 
incidence of chromosomal defects is about 10% and in the chromosomally 
normal group the condition is invariably associated 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

Figure 3. Ultrasound picture of a 12-weeks fetus with megacystis. 
with progressive obstructive uropathy. Megacystis is associated 
with increased NT, which is observed in about 75% of those with 
chromosomal defects and in about 30% of those with normal 
karyotype. After taking into account maternal age and fetal 
NT the presence of megacystis increases the likelihood for 
trisomy 13 or 18 by a factor of 6.7. 
Exomphalos 
At 11–13+6 weeks the prevalence of exomphalos (Figure 4) is 
about 1 in 1000, which is four times higher than in live births. 
The incidence of chromosomal defects, mainly trisomy 18, is 
about 60%, compared to about 30% at mid-gestation and 15% in 
neonates. The risk for trisomy 18 increases with maternal age 
and, since this trisomy is associated with a high rate of intrauterine 
death, its prevalence decreases with gestational age. In contrast, 
the rate of fetal death in chromosomally normal fetuses with 
exomphalos is not higher than in fetuses without this abnormality. 
Consequently, the prevalence of exomphalos and the associated 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Figure 4. Ultrasound picture of a 12-weeks trisomy 18 fetus with exomphalos and increased nuchal 
translucency thickness. 
risk for chromosomal defects increase with maternal age and 
decrease with gestational age (Snijders et al 1995). 
Choroid plexus cysts, pyelectasis and cardiac echogenic foci 
At 11–14 weeks the prevalences of choroid plexus cysts, 
pyelectasis and cardiac echogenic foci were 2.2, 0.9 and 0.6% 
(Whitlow et al 1998). Preliminary results suggest that, as in the 
second trimester, the prevalence of these markers may be higher 
in chromosomally abnormal than normal fetuses. However, 
calculation of likelihood ratios requires the study of many 
more chromosomally abnormal fetuses to determine the true 
prevalence of these markers. 
Placental volume 
The placental volume, determined at 11–13+6 by 3D ultrasound, 
increases with fetal crown-rump length. In trisomy 21 fetuses, 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

placental volume is not significantly different from normal but 
in trisomy 18 placental volume is substantially decreased. 
Fetal heart rate 
In normal pregnancy, the fetal heart rate (FHR) increases 
from about 100 bpm at 5 weeks of gestation to 170 bpm at 10 
weeks and then decreases to 155 bpm by 14 weeks. At 10–13+6 
weeks, trisomy 13 and Turner syndrome are associated with 
tachycardia, whereas in trisomy 18 and triploidy there is fetal 
bradycardia (Figure 5; Liao et al 2001). In trisomy 21, there is 
a mild increase in FHR. Measurement of FHR is unlikely 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
160 
170 
180 
190 
200 
40 50 60 70 80 
Crown-rump length (mm) Fetal heart rate (bpm) 
5
Figure 5. Fetal heart rate in fetuses with trisomy 13 plotted on the reference range (mean, 95th and 
th centiles) with crown-rump length of the chromosomally normal fetuses. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

to improve first trimester screening for trisomy 21 but it is a 
useful measurement in identifying fetuses with trisomy 13. 
Doppler in the ductus venosus 
The ductus venosus is a unique shunt directing well-oxygenated 
blood from the umbilical vein to the coronary and cerebral 
circulations by preferential streaming through the foramen ovale 
into the left atrium. Blood flow in the ductus has a characteristic 
waveform with high velocity during ventricular systole (S-wave) 
and diastole (D-wave), and forward flow during atrial contraction 
(a-wave). In the second and third trimesters of pregnancy 
abnormal flow with absent or reverse a-wave is observed in 
impending or overt cardiac failure. 
At 10–13+6 weeks abnormal ductal flow (Figure 6) is associated 
with chromosomal defects, cardiac abnormalities and adverse 
pregnancy outcome (Matias et al 1998, Borrell et al 2003). 
Studies from specialist centres, in more than 5,000 pregnancies, 
including about 280 fetuses with trisomy 21, have demonstrated 
that at 10–13+6 weeks there is abnormal flow in the ductus 
venosus in about 80% of trisomy 21 fetuses and in about 5% 
of chromosomally normal fetuses (Nicolaides 2004). There is 
no or only a weak association between increased fetal NT and 
the incidence of abnormal ductal flow. These findings indicate 
that assessment of the ductus venosus can be combined with 
measurement of fetal NT to improve the effectiveness of early 
sonographic screening for trisomy 21. 
Examination of ductal flow is time-consuming and requires 
highly skilled operators and at present it is uncertain if this 
assessment will be incorporated into the routine first-trimester 
scan. However, it could be used in specialist centres to 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

Figure 6. Flow velocity waveforms from the fetal ductus venosus at 12 weeks’ gestation demonstrating 
normal pattern (top) and abnormal a-wave (bottom). 
re-evaluate the risk in patients with borderline results after 
screening by fetal NT and maternal serum biochemistry. 
Abnormal flow in the ductus venosus and chromosomal defects 
•At 11–13+6 weeks abnormal ductal flow is observed in 5% 
of chromosomally normal fetuses and in about 80% of fetuses 
with trisomy 21. 
•Assessment of the ductus venosus can be combined with 
measurement of fetal NT to improve the effectiveness of early 
sonographic screening for trisomy 21. 
•Examination of ductal flow is time-consuming and requires 
highly skilled operators. It is therefore unlikely to be used in 
routine screening, but it could be used in specialist centres to 
re-evaluate the risk in patients with borderline results after 
screening by fetal NT and maternal serum biochemistry. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Doppler in other vessels 
Uterine arteries 
Uterine artery Doppler studies at 11–13+6 weeks found no significant 
differences in pulsatility index between chromosomally 
normal and abnormal fetuses. Consequently, the high rates of 
fetal death and fetal growth restriction of the major chromosomal 
defects are unlikely to be the consequence of impaired placentation 
in the first trimester of pregnancy. Uterine artery Doppler is not a 
useful screening test for chromosomal defects. 
Umbilical artery 
Umbilical artery Doppler is not useful in screening for trisomy 21. 
However, in trisomy 18, impedance to flow is increased and in 
about 20% of cases there is persistent reversal of end-diastolic flow 
(REDF). 
Umbilical vein 
In second and third-trimester fetuses, pulsatile umbilical venous 
flow is a late and ominous sign of fetal compromise. At 11–13+6 
weeks there is pulsatile flow in the umbilical vein in about 
25% of chromosomally normal fetuses and in 90% of fetuses 
with trisomy 18 or 13. However, in fetuses with trisomy 21, the 
prevalence of pulsatile venous flow is not significantly different 
from that in chromosomally normal fetuses. 
Jugular vein and carotid artery 
There are no significant associations between the pulsatility index 
in the fetal jugular vein and carotid artery and fetal NT and 
no significant differences between the chromosomally normal 
and abnormal fetuses. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

SECOND TRIMESTER ULTRASONOGRAPHY 
In the second trimester scan, as in the first trimester, each chromosomal 
defect has its own syndromal pattern of detectable abnormalities 
( Table 1; Snijders and Nicolaides 1996, Nicolaides et al 
1992). It is therefore recommended that, when an abnormality/ 
marker is detected at routine ultrasound examination, a thorough 
check is made for the other features of the chromosomal defect 
known to be associated with that marker; should additional 
abnormalities be identified, the risk is dramatically increased. In 
the case of apparently isolated abnormalities, the decision of 
Table 1. Common chromosomal defects in fetuses with sonographic abnormalities. 
Trisomy 21 Trisomy 18 Trisomy 13 Triploidy Turner 
Ventriculomegaly + + + + 
Holoprosencephaly + 
Choroid plexus cysts + 
Dandy Walker complex + + 
Facial cleft + + 
Micrognathia + + 
Nasal hypoplasia + 
Nuchal edema + + + 
Cystic hygromas + 
Diaphragmatic hernia + + 
Cardiac defect + + + + + 
Exomphalos + + 
Duodenal atresia + 
Esophageal atresia + + 
Renal defects + + + + + 
Short limbs + + + + 
Clinodactyly + 
Overlapping fingers + 
Polydactyly + 
Syndactyly + 
Talipes + + + 
Fetal growth restriction + + + 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

whether to carry out an invasive test depends on the type of 
abnormality. 
Second trimester scan: phenotypic expression of chromosomal 
defects 
•Trisomy 21 is associated with nasal hypoplasia, increased 
nuchal fold thickness, cardiac defects, intracardiac echogenic 
foci, duodenal atresia and echogenic bowel, hydronephrosis, 
shortening of the femur and more so of the humerus, sandal 
gap and clinodactyly or mid-phalanx hypoplasia of the fifth 
finger. 
•Trisomy 18 is associated with strawberry-shaped head, choroid 
plexus cysts, absent corpus callosum, enlarged cisterna magna, 
facial cleft, micrognathia, nuchal edema, heart defects, diaphragmatic 
hernia, esophageal atresia, exomphalos, usually 
with bowel only in the sac, single umbilical artery, renal 
abnormalities, echogenic bowel, myelomeningocoele, growth 
restriction and shortening of the limbs, radial aplasia, 
overlapping fingers and talipes or rocker bottom feet. 
•Trisomy 13 is associated with holoprosencephaly, microcephaly, 
facial abnormalities, cardiac abnormalities, enlarged 
and echogenic kidneys, exomphalos and post axial polydactyly. 
•Triploidy where the extra set of chromosomes is paternally 
derived is associated with a molar placenta and the pregnancy 
rarely persists beyond 20 weeks. When there is a double 
maternal chromosome contribution, the pregnancy may persist 
into the third trimester. The placenta is of normal consistency 
but thin and the fetus demonstrates severe asymmetrical 
growth restriction. Commonly there is mild ventriculomegaly, 
micrognathia, cardiac abnormalities, myelomeningocoele, 
syndactyly, and ‘hitch-hiker’ toe deformity. 
•Turner syndrome is associated with large nuchal cystic hygromas, 
generalised edema, mild pleural effusions and ascites, 
cardiac abnormalities and horseshoe kidneys, which are 
suspected by the ultrasonographic appearance of bilateral 
mild hydronephrosis. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

Ventriculomegaly 
The birth prevalence of ventriculomegaly is about 1 per 
1,000. Causes include chromosomal and genetic defects, brain 
hemorrhage or infection but in many cases no clear-cut etiology 
is identified. The overall prevalence of chromosomal defects 
in fetal ventriculomegaly is about 10% and the commonest 
chromosomal defects are trisomies 21, 18, 13 and triploidy. The 
prevalence of chromosomal defects is higher in those with mild 
to moderate, rather than severe ventriculomegaly. 
Holoprosencephaly 
The birth prevalence of holoprosencephaly is about 1 per 10,000. 
Although in many cases the cause is a chromosomal defect or a 
genetic disorder in the majority of cases the etiology is unknown. 
The overall prevalence of chromosomal defects in fetal holoprosencephaly 
is about 30% and the commonest chromosomal 
defects are trisomies 13 and 18. Holoprosencephaly is commonly 
associated with a wide variety of mid-facial abnormalities but 
the incidence of chromosomal defects in only increased in fetuses 
with holoprosencephaly and extrafacial abnormalities but not 
in those where the holoprosencephaly is either isolated or it is 
associated with facial abnormalities only. 
Choroid plexus cysts 
These are found in approximately 2% of fetuses at 16–24 weeks 
of gestation but in more than 95% of cases they resolve by 28 
weeks and are of no pathological significance. There is an association 
between choroid plexus cysts and chromosomal defects, 
particularly trisomy 18. However, the vast majority of fetuses 
with trisomy 18 have multiple other abnormalities and therefore, 
the detection of fetal choroid plexus cysts should stimulate 
the sonographer to search for the other features of trisomy 18. If 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

the cysts are apparently isolated the risk for trisomy 18 is only 
marginally increased. 
Dandy-Walker complex 
This refers to a spectrum of abnormalities of the cerebellar 
vermis, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle and enlargement 
of the cisterna magna. The condition is classified into Dandy-
Walker malformation (complete or partial agenesis of the cerebellar 
vermis and enlarged posterior fossa), Dandy-Walker variant 
(partial agenesis of the cerebellar vermis without enlargement 
of the posterior fossa) and mega-cisterna magna (normal vermis 
and fourth ventricle). The birth prevalence of Dandy-Walker 
malformation is about 1 per 30,000. Causes include chromosomal 
defects, more than 50 genetic syndromes, congenital infections 
or teratogens such as warfarin, but it can also be an isolated 
finding. The overall prevalence of chromosomal defects is about 
40%, usually trisomies 18 or 13 and triploidy. 
Facial cleft 
Cleft lip and/or palate is found in approximately 1 per 800 live 
births, and both genetic and environmental factors are implicated 
in their causation. Postnatally, chromosomal defects are found 
in less than 1% of babies with facial cleft. However, in prenatal 
series the prevalence is about 20%, most commonly trisomies 
13 and 18. This apparent discrepancy is because in the prenatal 
studies the populations examined are pre-selected and include 
many fetuses with multiple other abnormalities. 
Micrognathia 
The birth prevalence of micrognathia is about 1 per 1,000. This 
is a non-specific finding in a wide range of genetic syndromes 
and chromosomal defects, mainly trisomy 18 and triploidy. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

In two studies reporting on fetal micrognathia the prevalence 
of chromosomal defects was about 60% but all fetuses had 
additional malformations and/or growth restriction. 
Nasal hypoplasia 
Sonographic studies at 15–24 weeks of gestation reported that 
about 65% of trisomy 21 fetuses have nasal bone hypoplasia, 
defined by a nasal bone that is not visible or with a length of less 
than 2.5 mm (Sonek and Nicolaides 2002, Cicero et al 2003). In 
chromosomally normal fetuses, the prevalence of nasal hypoplasia 
is related to the ethnic origin of the mothers, being less than 
1% in Caucasians and up to 10% in African-Caribbeans. It is 
premature to speculate on the precise detection rates that could 
be achieved in the second trimester by a combination of maternal 
age, serum biochemistry and ultrasound examination for the fetal 
nasal bone and other sonographic markers. Nevertheless, on the 
basis of currently available data, nasal hypoplasia is likely to be 
the single most sensitive and specific second trimester marker of 
trisomy 21. 
Diaphragmatic hernia 
The birth prevalence of diaphragmatic hernia is about 1 per 
4,000 and the condition is usually sporadic. The prevalence of 
chromosomal defects, mainly trisomy 18, is about 20%. 
Cardiac abnormalities 
Abnormalities of the heart and great arteries are found in 4–7 
per 1,000 live births and in about 30 per 1,000 stillbirths. The 
etiology of heart abnormalities is heterogeneous and probably 
depends on the interplay of multiple genetic and environmental 
factors. Heart abnormalities are found in more than 90% of 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

fetuses with trisomy 18 or 13 and 40% of those with trisomy 
21 or Turner syndrome. Prenatal studies of ultrasonographically 
detectable fetal cardiac abnormalities, have reported chromosomal 
defects in about 25% of cases. 
Exomphalos 
The birth prevalence of exomphalos is about 1 per 4,000. The 
condition is usually sporadic but in some cases there may be 
an associated genetic syndrome. Chromosomal defects, mainly 
trisomies 18 and 13, are found in about 30% of cases at mid-
gestation and in 15% of neonates. The prevalence of chromosomal 
defects is four-times higher when the exomphalos sac 
contains only bowel than in cases where the liver is included. 
Esophageal atresia 
The birth prevalence of esophageal atresia is about 1 per 3,000. 
In 90% of cases there is an associated tracheoesophageal fistula. 
The condition is sporadic. Chromosomal defects are found in 
3–4% of affected neonates. Prenatally, chromosomal defects, 
mainly trisomy 18, are found in about 20% of cases. 
Duodenal atresia 
The birth prevalence of duodenal atresia or stenosis is about 1 
per 5,000. In most cases the condition is sporadic, although in 
some cases there is an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. 
Trisomy 21 is found in about 40% of cases. 
Urinary tract abnormalities 
Prenatal studies have established that urinary tract abnormalities 
are commonly found in many chromosomal defects. The risk for 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

chromosomal defects is similar for fetuses with unilateral or 
bilateral involvement, different types of renal abnormalities, 
urethral or ureteric obstruction, and oligohydramnios or normal 
amniotic fluid volume. However, the prevalence of chromosomal 
abnormalities in females is double that in males. The pattern 
of chromosomal defects, and consequently that of associated 
malformations, is related to the different types of renal 
abnormalities. Thus, in mild hydronephrosis, the commonest 
chromosomal defect is trisomy 21, whereas in moderate/severe 
hydronephrosis, multicystic kidneys, or renal agenesis the 
commonest defects are trisomies 18 and 13. 
Limb abnormalities 
Trisomies 21, 18, triploidy and Turner syndrome are associated 
with relative shortening of the long bones. Syndactyly is associated 
with triploidy, clinodactyly and sandal gap with trisomy 21, 
polydactyly with trisomy 13, overlapping fingers, rocker bottom 
feet and talipes with trisomy 18. 
Fetal growth restriction 
Low birth weight is a common feature of many chromosomal 
defects, but the prevalence of chromosomal defects in small for 
gestational age neonates is only about 1%. However, data derived 
from postnatal studies underestimate the association between 
chromosomal defects and growth restriction, since many pregnancies 
with chromosomally abnormal fetuses result in spontaneous 
abortion or intrauterine death. The commonest chromosomal 
defects associated with growth restriction are triploidy and 
trisomy 18. 
The highest prevalence of chromosomal defects is found in those 
cases where in addition to the growth restriction there are fetal 
structural abnormalities, the amniotic fluid volume is normal or 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

increased and in the group with normal Doppler flow velocity 
waveforms from both uterine and umbilical arteries. Therefore, 
growth restriction due to chromosomal defects presents differently 
from growth restriction due to placental insufficiency, which is 
characterized by reduced amniotic fluid volume and increased 
impedance to flow in the uterine and/or umbilical arteries with 
redistribution in the fetal circulation. 
Major abnormalities 
If the second trimester scan demonstrates major abnormalities, it 
is advisable to offer fetal karyotyping, even if these abnormalities 
are apparently isolated. The prevalence of such abnormalities is 
low and therefore the cost implications are small. 
If the abnormalities are either lethal or they are associated with 
severe handicap, such as holoprosencephaly, fetal karyotyping 
constitutes one of a series of investigations to determine the 
possible cause and thus the risk of recurrence. 
If the abnormality is potentially correctable by intrauterine 
or postnatal surgery, such as diaphragmatic hernia, it may be 
logical to exclude an underlying chromosomal defect – especially 
because, for many of these conditions, the usual defect is trisomy 
18 or 13. 
Minor abnormalities or soft markers 
Minor fetal abnormalities or soft markers are common and they 
are not usually associated with any handicap, unless there is an 
underlying chromosomal defect. Routine karyotyping of all pregnancies 
with these markers would have major implications, both 
in terms of miscarriage and in economic costs. It is best to base 
counseling on an individual estimated risk for a chromosomal 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

defect, rather than the arbitrary advice that invasive testing is 
recommended because the risk is ‘high’. 
The estimated risk can be derived by multiplying the a priori 
risk (based on maternal age, gestational age, history of previously 
affected pregnancies and, where appropriate, the results of 
previous screening by NT and/or biochemistry in the current 
pregnancy) by the likelihood ratio of the specific abnormality or 
marker. 
The best estimates of both the positive and negative likelihood 
ratios for each of the common markers of trisomy 21 are given 
in Table 2 (Nyberg et al 2001, Bromley et al 2002, Nicolaides 
2003). 
Major or minor abnormalities are found in about 75% of fetuses 
with trisomy 21 and in 10–15% of chromosomally normal 
fetuses. On the basis of these data the likelihood ratio for trisomy 
21 if there is no detectable abnormality or marker is 0.30. 
In each case the likelihood ratio is derived by dividing the 
prevalence of a given marker in trisomy 21 pregnancies by its 
prevalence in chromosomally normal pregnancies. For example, 
an intracardiac echogenic focus is found in 28.2% of trisomy 
21 fetuses and in 4.4% chromosomally normal fetuses, resulting 
in a positive likelihood ratio of 6.41 (28.2 / 4.4) and a negative 
likelihood ratio of 0.75 (71.8 / 95.6). Consequently, the finding 
of an echogenic focus increases the background risk by a factor 
of 6.41, but at the same time absence of this marker should 
reduce the risk by 25%. 
The same logic applies to each one of the six markers in Table 2. 
Thus, in a 25 year old woman undergoing an ultrasound scan 
at 20 weeks of gestation the a priori risk is about 1 in 1,000. If 
the scan demonstrates an intracardiac echogenic focus, but the 
nuchal fold is not increased, the humerus and femur are not 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Table 2. Prevalence of major and minor abnormalities or markers in the second trimester scan in trisomy 
21 and chromosomally normal fetuses in the combined data of two major series (Nyberg et al 2001, 
Bromley et al 2002). From these data the positive and negative likelihood ratios (with 95% confidence 
interval) for each marker can be calculated. In the last column is the likelihood ratio for each marker 
found in isolation. 
Sonographic Trisomy Normal Positive Negative LR for 
marker 21 LR LR isolated 
marker 
Nuchal fold 107/319 59/9331 53.05 0.67 9.8 
(33.5%) (0.6%) (39.37–71.26) (0.61–0.72) 
Short humerus 102/305 136/9254 22.76 0.68 4.1 
(33.4%) (1.5%) (18.04–28.56) (0.62–0.73) 
Short femur 132/319 486/9331 7.94 0.62 1.6 
(41.4%) (5.2%) (6.77–9.25) (0.56–0.67) 
Hydronephrosis 56/319 242/9331 6.77 0.85 1.0 
(17.6%) (2.6%) (5.16–8.80) (5.16–8.80) 
Echogenic focus 75/266 401/9119 6.41 0.75 1.1 
(28.2%) (4.4%) (5.15–7.90) (0.69–0.80) 
Echogenic bowel 39/293 58/9227 21.17 0.87 3.0 
(13.3%) (0.6%) (14.34–31.06) (0.83–0.91) 
Major defect 75/350 61/9384 32.96 0.79 5.2 
(21.4%) (0.65%) (23.90–43.28) (0.74–0.83) 
LR = Likelihood ratio 
short and there is no hydronephrosis, hyperechogenic bowel or 
major defect, the combined likelihood ratio should be 1.1 
(6.41×0.67×0.68×0.62×0.85×0.87×0.79) and consequently 
her risk remains at about 1 in 1,000. The same is true if the 
only abnormal finding is mild hydronephrosis (likelihood ratio 
of 1). In contrast, if the fetus is found to have both an intracardiac 
echogenic focus and mild hydronephrosis but no other 
abnormalities the combined likelihood ratio should be 8.42 
(6.41×6.77×0.67×0.68×0.62×0.87×0.79) and consequently 
the risk is increased from 1 in 1,000 to 1 in 119. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

There are no data on the interrelation between these second-
trimester ultrasound markers and fetal NT or maternal serum 
free b-hCG or PAPP-A at 11–13+6 weeks. However, there is 
no obvious physiological reason for such an interrelation and it 
is therefore reasonable to assume that they are independent. 
Consequently, in estimating the risk in a pregnancy with a 
marker, it is logical to take into account the results of previous 
screening tests. For example, in a 32-year-old woman at 20 weeks 
of gestation (background risk of 1 in 559), who had an 11–13+6 
week assessment by NT measurement that resulted in a 7-fold 
reduction in risk (to 1 in 3913), after the diagnosis of isolated 
echogenic bowel at the 20-week scan, the estimated risk would 
increase by a factor of three to 1 in 1304. However, for the same 
ultrasound finding in the absence of prior NT screening the risk 
would increase from 1 in 559 to 1 in 186. 
There are some exceptions to this process of sequential screening, 
which assumes independence between the findings of different 
screening results. The findings of nuchal edema or a cardiac 
defect at the mid-trimester scan cannot be considered independently 
of NT screening at 11–13+6 weeks. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

REFERENCES 
Borrell A, Martinez JM, Seres A, Borobio V, Cararach V, Fortuny A. Ductus venosus 
assessment at the time of nuchal translucency measurement in the detection of fetal 
aneuploidy. Prenat Diagn 2003;23:921–6. 
Bromley B, Lieberman E, Shipp TD, Benacerraf BR. The genetic sonogram. A method 
of risk assessment for Down syndrome in the second trimester. J Ultrasound Med 
2002;21:1087–96. 
Cicero S, Curcio P, Papageorghiou A, Sonek J, Nicolaides KH. Absence of nasal 
bone in fetuses with trisomy 21 at 11–14 weeks of gestation: an observational study. 
Lancet 2001;358:1665–7. 
Cicero S, Bindra R, Rembouskos G, Spencer K, Nicolaides KH. Integrated ultrasound 
and biochemical screening for trisomy 21 at 11 to 14 weeks. Prenat Diagn 2003; 
23:306–10. 
Cicero S, Sonek JD, McKenna DS, Croom CS, Johnson L, Nicolaides KH. Nasal bone 
hypoplasia in trisomy 21 at 15–22 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2003;21:15–8. 
Cicero S, Rembouskos G, Vandecruys H, Hogg M, Nicolaides KH. Likelihood ratio for 
trisomy 21 in fetuses with absent nasal bone at the 11–14 weeks scan. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2004;23:218–23. 
Cicero S, Curcio P, Rembouskos G, Sonek J, Nicolaides KH. Maxillary length at 
11–14 weeks of gestation in fetuses with trisomy 21. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2004;24:19–22. 
Down LJ. Observations on an ethnic classification of idiots. Clin Lectures and Reports, 
London Hospital 1866;3:259–62. 
Farkas LG, Katic MJ,Forrest CR, Litsas L. Surface anatomy of the face in Down’s 
syndrome: linear and angular measurements in the craniofacial regions. J Craniofac 
Surg 2001;12:373–9. 
Liao AW, Snijders R, Geerts L, Spencer K, Nicolaides KH. Fetal heart rate in 
chromosomally abnormal fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000;16:610–3. 
Liao AW, Sebire NJ, Geerts L, Cicero S, Nicolaides KH. Megacystis at 10–14 weeks 
of gestation: Chromosomal defects and outcome according to bladder length. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003;21:338–41. 
Longo D, DeFigueiredo D, Cicero S, Sacchini C, Nicolaides KH. Femur and humerus 
length in trisomy 21 fetuses at 11–14 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2004;23:143–7. 
Matias A, Gomes C, Flack N, Montenegro N, Nicolaides KH. Screening for chromosomal 
abnormalities at 11–14 weeks: the role of ductus venosus blood flow. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;2:380–4. 
Chapter 2 • Sonographic features of chromosomal defects 

Nicolaides KH, Sebire NJ, Snijders JM. Crown rump length in chromosomally 
abnormal fetuses. In Nicolaides KH (Ed) The 11–14-week scan-The diagnosis of fetal 
abnormalities. New York: Parthenon Publishing, 1996, pp31–3. 
Nicolaides KH, Snijders RJM, Gosden RJM, Berry C, Campbell S. Ultrasonographically 
detectable markers of fetal chromosomal abnormalities. Lancet 1992; 
340:704–7. 
Nicolaides KH. Screening for chromosomal defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2003;21:313–21. 
Nicolaides KH. Nuchal translucency and other first-trimester sonographic markers of 
chromosomal abnormalities. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004;191:45–67. 
Nyberg DA, Souter VL, El-Bastawissi A, Young S, Luthhardt F, Luthy DA. Isolated 
sonographic markers for detection of fetal Down syndrome in the second trimester of 
pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 2001;20:1053–63. 
Rembouskos G, Cicero S, Longo D, Sacchini C, Nicolaides KH. Single Umbilical 
Artery at 11–14 weeks: relation to chromosomal defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2003;22:567–70. 
Sacchini C, El-Sheikhah A, Cicero S, Rembouskos G, Nicolaides KH. Ear length 
in trisomy 21 fetuses at 11–14 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2003;22:460–3. 
Snijders RJM, Noble P, Sebire N, Souka A, Nicolaides KH. UK multicentre project 
on assessment of risk of trisomy 21 by maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency 
thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation. Lancet 1998;351:343–6. 
Snijders RJM, Brizot ML, Faria M, Nicolaides KH. Fetal exomphalos at 11–14 weeks 
of gestation. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14:569–74. 
Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Sequential screening. In: Nicolaides KH, editor. 
Ultrasound Markers for Fetal Chromosomal Defects. Carnforth, UK: Parthenon 
Publishing, 1996, pp109–13. 
Sonek J, Nicolaides KH. Prenatal ultrasonographic diagnosis of nasal bone 
abnormalities in three fetuses with Down syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2002;186:139–41. 
Whitlow BJ, Lazanakis ML, Kadir RA, Chatzipapas I, Economides DL. The significance 
of choroid plexus cysts, echogenic heart foci and renal pyelectasis in the first 
trimester. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998;12:385–90. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

3
INCREASED NUCHAL TRANSLUCENCY WITH 
NORMAL KARYOTYPE 
Increased fetal NT thickness is a common phenotypic expression 
of trisomy 21 and other chromosomal abnormalities, but it is 
also associated with fetal death and a wide range of fetal malformations, 
deformations, dysgeneses, and genetic syndromes. This 
chapter reviews the outcome of chromosomally normal fetuses 
with increased NT. On the basis of these data it is possible to 
estimate, for each NT group, the chances of intrauterine survival 
and delivery of a healthy baby with no major abnormalities. 
These data are useful in counselling parents of pregnancies with 
increased fetal NT and in planning the appropriate follow-up 
investigations. 
In normal fetuses NT thickness increases with fetal crown-rump 
length (CRL). The median and 95th centile of NT at a CRL of 
45 mm are 1.2, and 2.1 mm and the respective values at CRL of 
84 mm are 1.9 and 2.7 mm (Snijders et al 1998). The 99th centile 
does not change significantly with CRL and it is about 3.5 mm. 
Increased NT, refers to a measurement above the 95th centile and 
the term is used irrespective of whether the collection of fluid 
is septated or not and whether it is confined to the neck or 
envelopes the whole fetus. After 14 weeks, increased NT usually 
resolves but in some cases it evolves into nuchal edema or cystic 
hygromas. 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

Table 1. Relation between nuchal translucency thickness and prevalence of chromosomal defects, 
miscarriage or fetal death and major fetal abnormalities. In the last column is the estimated prevalence 
of delivery of a healthy baby with no major abnormalities. 
Nuchal 
translucency 
Chromosomal 
Defects 
NorFetal death 
mal karyMajor fetal 
abnormalities 
otypeAlive and 
well 
<95th centile 0.2% 1.3% 1.6% 97% 
95th–99th centiles 3.7% 1.3% 2.5% 93% 
3.5–4.4 mm 21.1% 2.7% 10.0% 70% 
4.5–5.4 mm 33.3% 3.4% 18.5% 50% 
5.5–6.4 mm 50.5% 10.1% 24.2% 30% 
=6.5 mm 64.5% 19.0% 46.2% 15% 
OUTCOME OF FETUSES WITH INCREASED NUCHAL TRANSLUCENCY 
The relation between NT thickness and the prevalence of 
chromosomal defects, miscarriage or fetal death and major fetal 
abnormalities is summarized in Table 1 (Souka et al 2004). 
Chromosomal defects 
The prevalence of chromosomal defects increases exponentially 
with NT thickness (Table 1; Snijders et al 1998). In the chromosomally 
abnormal group, about 50% have trisomy 21, 25% 
have trisomy 18 or 13, 10% have Turner syndrome, 5% have 
triploidy and 10% have other chromosomal defects. 
Fetal death 
In chromosomally normal fetuses, the prevalence of fetal death 
increases exponentially with NT thickness from 1.3% in those 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

with NT between the 95th and 99th centiles to about 20% for NT 
of 6.5 mm or more (Table 1; Souka et al 2001, Michailidis 
and Economides 2001). The majority of fetuses that die do so by 
20 weeks and they usually show progression from increased NT 
to severe hydrops. 
Fetal abnormalities 
Major fetal abnormalities are defined as those requiring medical 
and/or surgical treatment or conditions associated with mental 
handicap. Several studies have reported that increased fetal NT 
is associated with a high prevalence of major fetal abnormalities. 
In the combined data of 28 studies on a total of 6153 chromosomally 
normal fetuses with increased NT the prevalence of 
major abnormalities was 7.3% (Souka et al 2004) However, there 
were large differences between the studies in the prevalence 
of major abnormalities, ranging from 3% to 50%, because of 
differences in their definition of the minimum abnormal NT 
thickness, which ranged from 2 mm to 5 mm. 
The prevalence of major fetal abnormalities in chromosomally 
normal fetuses increases with NT thickness, from 1.6%, in those 
with NT below the 95th centile, to 2.5% for NT between the 95th 
and 99th centiles and exponentially thereafter to about 45% for 
NT of 6.5 mm or more (Table 1; Souka et al 2001, Michailidis 
and Economides 2001). 
Developmental delay 
Studies on the long term follow up of chromosomally and 
anatomically normal fetuses with increased NT reported that the 
prevalence of developmental delay is 2–4% (Souka et al 2004). 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

However, it is difficult to assess the true significance of these 
findings because only one of the studies had a control group for 
comparison. Brady et al (1998), performed a clinical follow up 
study of 89 children that in fetal life had NT of 3.5 mm or more 
and 302 children whose fetal NT was less than 3.5 mm. Delay in 
achievement of developmental milestones was observed in one of 
the children in each group. 
ABNORMALITIES ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED NT 
A wide range of fetal abnormalities have been reported in fetuses 
with increased NT and these are summarized in Table 2. 
The observed prevalence for some of the abnormalities, such 
as anencephaly, holoprosencephaly, gastroschisis, renal abnormalities 
and spina bifida, may not be different from that in the 
general population. However, the prevalence of major cardiac 
abnormalities, diaphragmatic hernia, exomphalos, body stalk 
anomaly, skeletal abnormalities, and certain genetic syndromes, 
such as congenital adrenal hyperplasia, fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence, Noonan syndrome, Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome and 
spinal muscular atrophy, appears to be substantially higher than 
in the general population and it is therefore likely that there is a 
true association between these abnormalities and increased NT. 
Cardiac defects 
There is a high association between increased NT and cardiac 
defects in both chromosomally abnormal and normal fetuses 
(Hyett et al 1997, 1999). Eight studies have reported on the 
screening performance of NT thickness for the detection of 
cardiac defects (Souka et al 2004). In total, 67,256 pregnancies 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Table 2. Fetal abnormalities in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency thickness. 
Central nervous system 
defect 
Gastrointestinal defect Fetal anemia 
Acrania / anencephaly Crohn’s disease Blackfan Diamond anaemia 
Agenesis of the corpus callosum Duodenal atresia Congenital erythropoietic porphyria 
Craniosynostosis Esophageal atresia Dyserythropoietic anaemia 
Dandy Walker malformation Small bowel obstruction Fanconi anemia 
Diastematomyelia Parvovirus B19 infection 
Encephalocele Genitourinary defect Thalassaemia-a 
Fowler syndrome Ambiguous genitalia 
Holoprosencephaly Congenital adrenal hyperplasia Neuromuscular defect 
Hydrolethalus syndrome Congenital nephrotic syndrome Fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
Iniencephaly Hydronephrosis Myotonic dystrophy 
Joubert syndrome Hypospadias Spinal muscular atrophy 
Macrocephaly Infantile polycystic kidneys 
Microcephaly Meckel-Gruber syndrome Metabolic defect 
Spina bifida Megacystis Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome 
Trigonocephaly C Multicystic dysplastic kidneys GM1 gangliosidosis 
Ventriculomegaly Renal agenesis Long-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme 
A dehydrogenase deficiency 
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VII 
Facial defect Skeletal defect Smith-Lemli-Opitz syndrome 
Agnathia/micrognathia Achondrogenesis Vitamin D resistant rickets 
Facial cleft Achondroplasia Zellweger syndrome 
Microphthalmia Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy 
Treacher-Collins syndrome Blomstrand Other defect 
osteochondrodysplasia 
Campomelic dwarfism Body stalk anomaly 
Nuchal defect Cleidocranial dysplasia Brachmann-de Lange syndrome 
Cystic hygroma Hypochondroplasia CHARGE association 
Neck lipoma Hypophosphatasia Deficiency of the immune system 
Jarcho-Levin syndrome Congenital lymphedema 
Cardiac defect Kyphoscoliosis EEC syndrome 
Di George syndrome Limb reduction defect Neonatal myoclonic encephalopathy 
Nance-Sweeney syndrome Noonan syndrome 
Pulmonary defect Osteogenesis imperfecta Perlman syndrome 
Cystic adenomatoid Roberts syndrome Stickler syndrome 
malformation 
Diaphragmatic hernia Robinow syndrome Unspecified syndrome 
Fryn syndrome Short-rib polydactyly syndrome Severe developmental delay 
Sirenomelia 
Abdominal wall defect Talipes equinovarus 
Cloacal exstrophy Thanatophoric dwarfism 
Exomphalos VACTER association 
Gastroschisis 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

were examined and the prevalence of major cardiac defects was 
2.4 per 1,000. For a false positive rate of 4.9%, the detection rate 
of cardiac defects was 37.5%. 
A meta-analysis of screening studies reported that the detection 
rates were about 37% and 31% for the respective NT cut-offs 
of the 95th and 99th centiles (Makrydimas et al 2003). In 
chromosomally normal fetuses, the prevalence of major cardiac 
defects increases exponentially with NT thickness from 1.6 per 
1,000 in those with NT below the 95th centile, to about 1% for 
NT of 2.5–3.4 mm, 3% for NT of 3.5–4.4 mm, 7% for NT of 
4.5–5.4 mm, 20% for NT of 5.5–6.4 mm and 30% for NT of 
6.5 mm or more (Souka et al 2004). 
The clinical implication of these findings is that increased NT 
constitutes an indication for specialist fetal echocardiography. 
Certainly, the overall prevalence of major cardiac defects in such 
a group of fetuses (1–2%) is similar to that found in pregnancies 
affected by maternal diabetes mellitus or with a history of a 
previously affected offspring, which are well accepted indications 
for fetal echocardiography. 
At present, there may not be sufficient facilities for specialist 
fetal echocardiography to accommodate the potential increase in 
demand if the 95th centile of nuchal translucency thickness is 
used as the cut-off for referral. In contrast, a cut-off of the 99th 
centile would result in only a small increase in workload and, in 
this population the prevalence of major cardiac defects would be 
very high. 
Patients identified by NT scanning as being at high risk for 
cardiac defects need not wait until 20 weeks for specialist echocardiography. 
Improvements in the resolution of ultrasound 
machines have now made it possible to undertake detailed 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

cardiac scanning in the first trimester of pregnancy. A specialist 
scan from 13 weeks can effectively reassure the majority of 
parents that there is no major cardiac defect. In the cases with 
a major defect, the early scan can either lead to the correct 
diagnosis or at least raise suspicions so that follow-up scans are 
carried out. 
The best strategy of screening for major cardiac abnormalities 
is to carry out specialist fetal echocardiography in patients with 
increased NT at 11–13+6 weeks and in those with an abnormal 
four-chamber view in the routine mid-trimester scan. These 
two indications are complimentry. Thus, major defects, such 
as tetralogy of Fallot, transposition of the great arteries and 
coarctation of the aorta are rarely detected by routine examination 
of the four-chamber view. However, a high proportion of these 
abnormalities present with increased NT. 
Body stalk anomaly 
This lethal, sporadic abnormality is found in about 1 in 10,000 
fetuses at 10–13+6 weeks. The ultrasonographic features are 
major abdominal wall defect, severe kyphoscoliosis and short 
umbilical cord with a single artery (Daskalakis et al 1997). The 
upper half of the fetal body is seen in the amniotic cavity, whereas 
the lower part is in the celomic cavity, suggesting that early 
amnion rupture before obliteration of the celomic cavity is a possible 
cause of the syndrome. Although the fetal NT is increased 
in about 85% of the cases, the karyotype is usually normal. 
Diaphragmatic hernia 
Increased NT thickness is present in about 40% of fetuses with 
diaphragmatic hernia, including more than 80% of those that 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

result in neonatal death due to pulmonary hypoplasia and in 
about 20% of the survivors (Sebire et al 1997). It is possible 
that in fetuses with diaphragmatic hernia and increased NT the 
intrathoracic herniation of the abdominal viscera occurs in the 
first trimester and prolonged compression of the lungs causes 
pulmonary hypoplasia. In the cases where diaphragmatic hernia 
is associated with a good prognosis, the intrathoracic herniation 
of viscera may be delayed until the second or third trimesters of 
pregnancy. 
Exomphalos 
At 11–13+6 weeks the incidence of exomphalos is about 1 in 
1,000 and the incidence of chromosomal defects, mainly trisomy 
18, is about 60% (Snijders et al 1995). Increased NT is 
observed in about 85% of chromosomally abnormal and 40% 
of chromosomally normal fetuses with exomphalos. 
Megacystis 
Fetal megacystis at 11–13+6 weeks of gestation, defined by a 
longitudinal bladder diameter of 7 mm or more, is found 
in about 1 in 1,500 pregnancies. Megacystis is associated with 
increased NT, which is observed in about 75% of those with 
chromosomal abnormalities, mainly trisomy 13, and in about 
30% of those with normal karyotype (Liao et al 2003). 
Genetic syndromes 
The genetic syndromes associated with increased NT are 
summarised in Table 3. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Table 3. Genetic syndromes reported in fetuses with increased nuchal translucency thickness.
Genetic syndrome Inheritance Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalitiesAchondrogenesis AR 1 in 40,000 Lethal skeletal dysplasia. Severe limb shortening, narrow thorax, hypomineralization ofthe vertebral bodies. Mineralization of the skull normal in type II and poor in type I.
Achondroplasia* AD 1 in 26,000 Intelligence and life expectancy are normal. Macrocephaly, depressed nasal bridge,
lumbar lordosis and short limbs, usually after 22 weeks.
Adrenal hyperplasia* AR 1 in 5,000 Deficiency in one of the enzymes of cortisol biosynthesis, resulting in overproduction ofcortisol precursors and androgens. Increased NT, ambiguous genitalia in females.
Asphyxiating thoracic 
dystrophy 
AR 1 in 70,000 Variable prognosis from neonatal death to normal survival. Narrow chest and rhizomeliclimb shortening, which may not become apparent until after 22 weeks.
Beckwith–Wiedemannsyndrome 
Sporadic 1 in 14,000 In some cases, there is mental handicap, which is thought to be secondary toinadequately treated hypoglycemia. About 5% develop tumors during childhood, mostcommonly nephroblastoma and hepatoblastoma. Prenatal sonographic features includemacrosomia and exomphalos.
Blackfan-Diamondanemia 
AD, AR 1 in 200,000 Congenital hypoplastic anemia requiring treatment with steroids and repeated bloodtransfusions. The risk of hematologic malignancies, mainly acute leukemia, is increased.
Thumb defects, hypertelorism, cardiac and urogenital anomalies.
BlomstrandosteochondrodysplasiaAR Rare Lethal skeletal dysplasia. Severe limb shortening, narrow thorax, increased bone density.
Brachmann-Cornelia de 
Lange syndrome 
AD 1 in 160,000 Mental handicap. Fetal growth restriction, short limbs, heart defects, diaphragmatichernia. 
Campomelic dysplasia AR 1 in 200,000 Lethal skeletal dysplasia. Short and bowed lower limbs with narrow thorax.
CHARGE association Sporadic Rare Acronym for Coloboma of the eye, Heart anomaly, choanal Atresia, growth and mentalRetardation, Gonadal hypoplasia and Ear abnormalities and/or deafness. There maynot be any antenatal sonographic findings.
Cleidocranial dysplasia AD Rare Normal life expectancy. Hypoplastic clavicles and nasal bone. 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

The 11–13+6 weeks scan 
Table 3. Continued
Genetic syndrome Inheritance 
Di George syndrome Sporadic 
hypocalcemia, due to hypoplasia of the parathyroid glands, and susceptibility toinfection due to hypoplasia or aplasia of the thymus gland. A variety of cardiacmalformations are seen, including tetralogy of Fallot, interrupted aortic arch, truncusarteriosus, right aortic arch and aberrant right subclavian artery. Short stature and mildto moderate learning difficulties are common.
Dyserythropoietic AD, AR Rare Congenital, usually mild anemia. In some cases there is severe anemia presenting withanemia fetal hydrops.
Ectrodactyly-ectodermal Rare 
dysplasia-cleft palatesyndromeErythropoietic AR Rare Usually presents during childhood with severe cutaneous photosensitivity withporphyria 
and chronic hemolytic anemia. Severe cases present with fetal hydrops.
Fanconi anemia AR Congenital aplastic anemia characterised by pancytopenia and spontaneouschromosome instability. The phenotype and age of onset are variable. There may be noprenatal sonographically detectable abnormalities.
Fetal akinesia AR, Rare 
deformation sporadic associated with fetal myopathy, neuropathy or an underlying connective tissuesequence abnormality. Severe cases present with arthrogryposis and increased NT in the firsttrimester. 
AR Rare 
disorganisation and hemorrhagic necrosis of the developing brain. Prenatal featuresinclude hydranencephaly and arthrogryposis.
Fryn syndrome AR Usually lethal. Diaphragmatic hernia, digital defects, short webbed neck.
Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalities1 in 4,000 Results from de novo 22q11 deletion in 90% of cases. Characterized by neonatalAD Wide variability in phenotypic expression. Split hand and foot, cleft lip and/or palate.
progressive bullous lesions, leading to infection, bone resorption, cutaneous deformity(Gunther’s disease) 
1 in 22,000 
Heterogeneous group of conditions resulting in multiple joint contractures, frequentlyFowler syndrome Proliferative vasculopathy of the central nervous system that leads to disruption,
1 in 15,000 

Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 
Table 3. 
Continued
Genetic syndrome Inheritance 
GM1-Gangliosidosis* 
AR 
Rare 
motor and mental development. Death occurs within the first 10 years of life from chestinfections. Prenatal sonographic findings include visceromegaly and generalized edema.
Hydrolethalus 
AR 
1 in 20,000 
Lethal condition characterized by hydrocephalus, absent corpus callosum, facial cleft,
syndromeHypochondroplasia 
Resembles achondroplasia and is characterised by short-limb dwarfism manifestingduring childhood. Prenatally there may be short limbs and macrocephaly.
Hypophosphatasia 
AR 
Subdivided into perinatal, infantile, childhood and adult forms, according to the age ofonset of symptoms. In the perinatal type there is hypomineralization of the skull andspine, short limbs and narrow thorax.
Infantile polycystic 
AR 
Subdivided into perinatal, neonatal, infantile, and juvenile, depending on the severity ofthe disease and age of presentation. Prenatal sonographic features include large,echogenic kidneys and oligohydramnios.
Jarcho–Levin 
AR 
Heterogeneous disorder characterized by scoliosis and disorganization of the spine.
syndrome 
respiratory insufficiency in infancy. Spondylocostal dysplasia is associated with survivalto adult life but with some degree of physical disability.
Joubert syndrome 
AR 
Rare 
5 years of life. Partial or complete absence of the cerebellar vermis.
Long-chain 
AR 
Rare 
Lethal disorder. Muscular hypotonia, cardiomyopathy, hydrops.
3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme Adehydrogenasedeficiency*
Lymphedema 
Rare 
subtypes, congenital (Milroy disease, present at birth), praecox (pubertal onset) andtarda (midlife onset), with congenital lymphedema being the rarest and most severe ofthe three. There may be no prenatal sonographic findings.
Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalitiesProgressive neurological deterioration, resulting in early and severe retardation of bothmicrognathia, polydactyly, talipes and cardiac septal defects.
AD 
1 in 26,000 
1 in 100,000 
1 in 10,000 
kidney disease 
1 in 500,000 
There are two types. In spondylothoracic dysplasia there is a narrow thorax and lethalProfound mental retardation and developmental delay. Death usually occurs in the firstAD 
Hypoplastic/aplastic lymphatic vessels, usually affecting the lower limbs. Three clinical

Table 3. Continued
Genetic syndrome Inheritance Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalitiesMeckel–GrubersyndromeAR 1 in 10,000 Lethal. Typical features are encephalocele, bilateral polycystic kidneys, polydactyly.
Mucopolysaccharidosistype VII* 
AR Rare Mental retardation, short stature, macrocephaly, hearing loss, corneal opacities andrecurrent lower respiratory tract infection.
Myotonic dystrophy* AD 1 in 25,000 The genetic defect is an amplified trinucleotide repeat in a protein kinase gene onchromosome 19. Age of onset and severity of disease vary with the number ofrepeats. The mutation can worsen progressively in successive generations and thesevere congenital form occurs almost exclusively in the offspring of affected women.
Prenatal sonographic signs may be decreased fetal movements and polyhydramniosin the third trimester.
Nance–SweeneysyndromeAR Rare Intelligence and life expectancy are normal. Short limbs, vertebral abnormalities.
Nephritic syndrome* ARin Finland 
1 in 8,000 Renal failure requiring transplantation within the first 4 years of life. Prenatally maypresent with transient hydrops.
Noonan syndrome AD 1 in 2,000 Life expectancy is probably normal in those without severe heart disease. Mildmental retardation is present in about one-third of cases. The majority of cases arediagnosed postnatally. Prenatal sonographic findings include skin edema,
hydrothorax, polyhydramnios and cardiac defects, such as pulmonic stenosis andhypertrophic cardiomyopathy but these may become apparent only in the thirdtrimester. 
Osteogenesisimperfecta type II* 
AR 1 in 60,000 Lethal skeletal dysplasia. Short limbs and ribs with multiple fractures,
hypomineralization of the skull.
Perlman syndrome AR Rare Similar to Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. Fetal and neonatal mortality is more than60% and, in survivors, there is a high incidence of neurodevelopmental delay.
Sonographic features include progressive macrosomia and enlarged kidneys. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 
Table 3. Continued
Genetic syndrome Inheritance Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalitiesAR Rare 
puffing. Characterized by symmetrical limb defects of variable severity(tetraphocomelia), facial cleft, microcephaly and growth restriction.
AR Rare 
anomalies. 
AR Rare 
syndrome 
type III (Naumoff) has wide metaphyses with spurs; type IV (Beemer–Langer) ischaracterized by median cleft lip, extremely short ribs and proruberant abdomenwith umbilical hernia. Prenatal sonographic findings include short limbs, narrowthorax and polydactyly.
Smith–Lemli–Opitz AR 
syndrome* 
external genitalia in the male.
AR Progressive muscle weakness leading to death before two years of age because ofrespiratory failure. Decreased fetal movements are commonly reported andsymptoms usually start at birth or up to six months of age.
Progressive myopia beginning in the first decade of life, resulting in retinaldetachment and blindness, sensorineural hearing loss, marfanoid habitus withnormal height, premature degenerative changes in various joints. There may be noprenatal sonographic findings but in some cases there is a facial cleft, ormicrognathia. 
Thalassaemia-a* The alpha locus determines a polypeptide chain, the á-chain, which is present inMediterranean adult hemoglobin (a2/b2), fetal hemoglobin (a2/c2) and embryonic hemoglobinand Asian (a2/d2). Normally there are four alpha gene copies. Absence of all four a-genes 
populations a-thalassemia, which presents with hydrops fetalis,
usually in the second trimester. 
Roberts syndrome Associated with the cytogenetic finding of premature centromere separation andRobinow syndrome Skeletal defect with short forearms, frontal bossing, hypertelorism and vertebralShort-rib polydactyly Lethal skeletal dysplasia. There are four types. Type I (Saldino–Noonan) has narrowmetaphyses; type II (Majewski) has facial cleft and disproportionally shortened tibiae;
1 in 20,000 High perinatal and infant mortality and severe mental retardation. Prenatalsonographic features include polydactyly, cardiac defects, ambiguous or femaleSpinal muscular 1 in 7,000 
atrophy type 1* 
Stickler syndrome AD 1 in 10,000 
AR Common in 
results in homozygous 

Table 3. Continued
Genetic syndrome Inheritance Birth prevalence Prognosis and common sonographically detectable abnormalitiesThanatophoricdysplasia* 
Sporadic 1 in 10,000 Lethal skeletal dysplasia. Severe limb shortening, narrow thorax, enlarged head withprominent forehead. 
Treacher Collins 
syndromeAD 1 in 50,000 Normal life expectancy. Micrognathia, deformities of the ears.
Trigonocephaly ‘C’ 
syndrome 
AR 1 in 15,000 About half of the affected individuals die in infancy while survivors are severelymentally handicapped with progressive microcephaly.Trigonocephaly, short nose,
prominent maxilla. 
VACTER association Sporadic, AR 1 in 6,000 Acronym for Vertebral abnormalities, Anal atresia, Cardiac defects, Tracheo-
Esophageal fistula with esophageal atresia, Radial and Renal defects. Prognosisdepends on the particular combination and severity of the abnormalities present.
Mental function is usually normal.
Vitamin D resistentricketsAR Rare None. 
Zellweger syndrome* AR 1 in 25,000 Death occurs in the first two years of life, most commonly due to chest infections andliver failure. Prenatal features include hypertelorism, brain and cardiac defects,
hepatomegaly, growth restriction.
*Genetic syndromes which are amenable to prenatal diagnosis by DNA analysis 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF INCREASED FETAL NT 
The heterogeneity of conditions associated with increased NT 
suggests that there may not be a single underlying mechanism for 
the collection of fluid under the skin of the fetal neck. Possible 
mechanisms include cardiac dysfunction, venous congestion in 
the head and neck, altered composition of the extracellular 
matrix, failure of lymphatic drainage, fetal anemia or hypoproteinemia 
and congenital infection. 
Pathophysiology of increased nuchal translucency 
•Cardiac dysfunction 
•Venous congestion in the head and neck 
•Altered composition of the extracellular matrix 
•Failure of lymphatic drainage 
•Fetal anemia 
•Fetal hypoproteinemia 
•Fetal infection. 
Cardiac dysfunction 
Central to the hypothesis that heart failure contributes to 
increased NT is the observation that in both chromosomally 
abnormal and normal fetuses there is a high association between 
increased NT and abnormalities of the heart and great arteries. 
Furthermore, Doppler studies have reported abnormal flow in 
the ductus venosus in fetuses with chromosomal and/or major 
cardiac defects and increased NT (Matias et al 1999). 
Venous congestion in the head and neck 
Venous congestion in the head and neck could result from 
constriction of the fetal body as encountered in amnion rupture 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

sequence, superior mediastinal compression found in diaphragmatic 
hernia or the narrow chest in skeletal dysplasias. However, 
in at least some of the cases of skeletal dysplasias, such as 
osteogenesis imperfecta, an additional or alternative mechanism 
for the increased NT may be the altered composition of the 
extracellular matrix. 
Altered composition of the extracellular matrix 
Many of the component proteins of the extracellular matrix are 
encoded on chromosomes 21, 18 or 13. Immunohistochemical 
studies, examining the skin of chromosomally abnormal fetuses, 
have demonstrated specific alterations of the extracellular matrix 
which may be attributed to gene dosage effects (von Kaisenberg 
et al 1998). Altered composition of the extracellular matrix may 
also be the underlying mechanism for increased fetal NT in an 
expanding number of genetic syndromes, which are associated 
with alterations in collagen metabolism (such as achondrogenesis 
type II, Nance–Sweeney syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta 
type II), abnormalities of fibroblast growth factor receptors (such 
as achondroplasia and thanatophoric dysplasia) or disturbed 
metabolism of peroxisome biogenesis factor (such as Zellweger 
syndrome). 
Failure of lymphatic drainage 
A possible mechanism for increased NT is dilatation of the 
jugular lymphatic sacs, because of developmental delay in the 
connection with the venous system, or a primary abnormal dilatation 
or proliferation of the lymphatic channels interfering with 
a normal flow between the lymphatic and venous systems. 
Immunohistochemical studies in nuchal skin tissue from fetuses 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

with Turner syndrome have shown that the lymphatic vessels in 
the upper dermis are hypoplastic (von Kaisenberg et al 1999). 
In chromosomally normal fetuses with increased NT, deficient 
lymphatic drainage, due to hypoplastic or aplastic lymphatic 
vessels, is found in association with Noonan syndrome and 
congenital lymphedema. In congenital neuromuscular disorders, 
such as fetal akinesia deformation sequence, myotonic dystrophy 
and spinal muscular atrophy, increased NT may be the consequence 
of impaired lymphatic drainage due to reduced fetal 
movements. 
Fetal anemia 
Fetal anemia is associated with a hyperdynamic circulation and 
fetal hydrops develops when the hemoglobin deficit is more than 
7 g/dL (Nicolaides et al 1988). This is true for both immune and 
non-immune hydrops fetalis. However, in red blood cell isoimmunization 
severe fetal anemia does not occur before 16 weeks of 
gestation, presumably because the fetal reticuloendothelial system 
is too immature to result in destruction of antibody coated 
erythrocytes. Consequently, red blood cell isoimmunization does 
not present with increased fetal NT. In contrast, genetic causes 
of fetal anemia (a-thalassemia, Blackfan-Diamond anemia, 
congenital erythropoietic porphyria, dyserythropoietic anemia, 
Fanconi anemia) and possibly congenital infection-related anemia 
can present with increased fetal NT. 
Fetal hypoproteinemia 
Hypoproteinemia is implicated in the pathophysiology of both 
immune and non-immune hydrops fetalis (Nicolaides et al 
1995). In the first trimester, hypoproteinemia due to proteinuria 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

may be the underlying mechanism for the increased NT in 
fetuses with congenital nephrotic syndrome. 
Fetal infection 
In about 10% of cases of ‘unexplained’ second- or third-trimester 
fetal hydrops, there is evidence of recent maternal infection 
and, in these cases, the fetus is also infected. In contrast, in 
pregnancies with increased fetal NT and normal karyotype, only 
1.5% of the mothers have evidence of recent infection and the 
fetuses are rarely infected (Sebire et al 1997). 
These findings suggest that, in pregnancies with increased fetal 
NT, the prevalence of maternal infection with the TORCH 
group of organisms is not higher than in the general population. 
Furthermore, in cases of maternal infection, the presence of 
increased fetal NT does not signify the presence of fetal infection 
with these organisms. Therefore, increased NT in chromosomally 
normal fetuses need not stimulate the search for maternal 
infection unless the translucency evolves into second- or third-
trimester nuchal edema or generalized hydrops. 
The only infection that has been reported in association with 
increased NT is Parvovirus B19. In this condition the increased 
NT has been attributed to myocardial dysfunction or fetal 
anemia due to suppression of hemopoiesis. 
MANAGEMENT OF PREGNANCIES WITH INCREASED NT 
The relation between NT thickness and chromosomal defects, 
miscarriage or fetal death and prevalence of major fetal defects is 
summarized in Table 1. On the basis of these data it is possible 
to estimate, for each NT group, the chances of intrauterine 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

survival and delivery of a healthy baby with no major defects. 
These data are useful in counselling parents of pregnancies with 
increased fetal NT and in planning the appropriate follow-up 
investigations (Figure 1). 
pi 
nA a c 
i 
eov s n 
c t 
TORCH & P irus r e 
Genet 
a eTORCH & P n 
Genet 
11-14 weeks 
Fetal karyoty ng 
Anomaly scan 
Chromosomal defects 
Major abnormalities 
Normal karyotype 
No abnormalities 
14-16 weeks 
omaly scan 
Echocardiography 
No abnormalities 
Resolving nuchal 
Major abnormalities 
No abnormalities 
Persistent nuchal 
rv 
esting 
20 weeks 
Anomaly scan 
Echocardiography 
No abnormalities 
Major abnormalities 
No abnormalities 
Persistent nuchal eic t 
rvovirus scre 
sting 
Figure 1. Management of pregnancies with increased nuchal translucency thickness. 
Fetal NT below the 99th centile 
In pregnancies with fetal NT below the 99th centile (3.5 mm) 
the decision by the parents in favour or against fetal karyotyping 
will depend on the patient-specific risk for chromosomal defects, 
which is derived from the combination of maternal age, 
sonographic findings and serum free b-hCG and PAPP-A at 
11–13+6 weeks. 
The parents can be reassured that the chances of delivering a 
baby with no major abnormalities is about 97% for NT below the 
95th centile and 93% for NT between the 95th and 99th centiles. 
Furthermore, many of the major fetal abnormalities can be diagnosed 
or suspected at the time of the high-resolution scan at 
11–13+6 weeks. 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

In terms of the subsequent management of the pregnancy it 
would be best to carry out a detailed fetal scan at 20 weeks 
to determine fetal growth and diagnose or exclude major 
abnormalities that could not be identified at the 11–13+6 weeks 
scan. 
In the 4% of fetuses with NT between the 95th and 99th centiles, 
special care should be taken to firstly, confirm that the nuchal 
fold thickness is not increased, secondly, to examine the fetal 
anatomy with the knowledge that the prevalence of major abnormalities 
is about 2.5%, rather than 1.6% in those with NT below 
the 95th centile, and thirdly, to examine the fetal heart. It would 
be preferable if specialist fetal echocardiography is carried out 
but the feasibility of this will primarily depend on the availability 
of such service. 
Fetal NT above the 99th centile 
A fetal NT above 3.5 mm is found in about 1% of pregnancies. 
The risk of major chromosomal defects is very high and 
increases from about 20% for NT of 4.0 mm to 33% for NT of 
5.0 mm, 50% for NT of 6.0 mm and 65% for NT of 6.5 mm 
or more. Consequently, the first line of management of such 
pregnancies should be the offer of fetal karyotyping by CVS. 
In patients with a family history of the genetic syndromes which 
are associated with increased NT and are amenable to prenatal 
diagnosis by DNA analysis (Table 3), the CVS sample can also 
be used for the diagnosis or exclusion of these syndromes. In 
addition, a detailed scan should be carried out at 11–13+6 weeks 
in search of the many major abnormalities that have been 
reported in association with increased NT (Table 3). 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Resolution of increased NT 
In the chromosomally normal group, a detailed scan, including 
fetal echocardiography, should be carried out at 14–16 weeks to 
determine the evolution of the NT and to diagnose or exclude 
many fetal defects. If this scan demonstrates resolution of the 
NT and absence of any major abnormalities the parents can be 
reassured that the prognosis is likely to be good and the chances 
of delivering a baby with no major abnormalities is more than 
95%. 
The only necessary additional investigation is a detailed scan at 
20–22 weeks for the exclusion or diagnosis of both major abnormalities 
and the more subtle defects that are associated with the 
genetic syndromes listed in Table 3. If none of these is found, the 
parents can be counseled that the risk of delivering a baby with a 
serious abnormality or neurodevelopmental delay may not be 
higher than in the general population. 
Evolution to nuchal edema 
Persistence of unexplained increased NT at the 14–16 weeks 
scan or evolution to nuchal edema or hydrops fetalis at 20–22 
weeks, raise the possibility of congenital infection or a genetic 
syndrome. Maternal blood should be tested for toxoplasmosis, 
cytomegalovirus, and parvovirus B19. Follow-up scans to define 
the evolution of the edema should be carried out every four 
weeks. Additionally, consideration should be given to DNA 
testing for certain genetic conditions, such as spinal muscular 
atrophy, even if there is no family history for these conditions. 
In pregnancies with unexplained nuchal edema at the 20–22 
weeks scan the parents should be counseled that there is a 10% 
risk of evolution to hydrops and perinatal death or a livebirth 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

with a genetic syndrome, such as Noonan syndrome. The risk of 
neurodevelopmental delay is 3–5%. 
•Increased fetal NT thickness at 11–13+6 weeks is a common 
phenotypic expression of chromosomal defects and a wide 
range of fetal malformations and genetic syndromes. 
•The prevalence of fetal abnormalities and adverse pregnancy 
outcome increases exponentially with NT thickness. However, 
the parents can be reassured that the chances of delivering 
a baby with no major abnormalities is more than 90% if the 
fetal NT is between the 95th and 99th centiles, about 70% for 
NT of 3.5–4.4 mm, 50% for NT 4.5–5.4 mm, 30% for NT of 
5.5–6.4 mm and 15% for NT of 6.5 mm or more. 
•The vast majority of fetal abnormalities associated with 
increased NT can be diagnosed by a series of investigations 
that can be compled by 14 weeks of gestation. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

REFERENCES 
Brady AF, Pandya PP, Yuksel B, Greenough A, Patton MA, Nicolaides KH. Outcome 
of chromosomally normal livebirths with increased fetal nuchal translucency at 10–14 
weeks’ gestation. J Med Genet 1998;35:222–4. 
Hyett JA, Moscoso G, Nicolaides KH. Abnormalities of the heart and great arteries in 
first trimester chromosomally abnormal fetuses. Am J Med Genet 1997;69:207–16. 
Hyett J, Perdu M, Sharland G, Snijders R, Nicolaides KH. Using fetal nuchal translucency 
to screen for major congenital cardiac defects at 10–14 weeks of gestation: 
population based cohort study. BMJ 1999;318:81–5. 
Liao AW, Sebire NJ, Geerts L, Cicero S, Nicolaides KH. Megacystis at 10–14 weeks 
of gestation: Chromosomal defects and outcome according to bladder length. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003;21:338–41. 
Makrydimas G, Sotiriadis A, Ioannidis JP. Screening performance of first-trimester 
nuchal translucency for major cardiac defects: a meta-analysis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2003;189:1330–5. 
Matias A, Huggon I, Areias JC, Montenegro N, Nicolaides KH. Cardiac defects in 
chromosomally normal fetuses with abnormal ductus venosus blood flow at 10–14 
weeks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1999;14:307–10. 
Michailidis GD, Economides DL. Nuchal translucency measurement and pregnancy 
outcome in karyotypically normal fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;17:102–5. 
Nicolaides KH, Warenski JC, Rodeck CH. The relationship of fetal plasma protein 
concentration and hemoglobin level to the development of hydrops in rhesus 
isoimmunization. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;1:152:341–4. 
Nicolaides KH, Soothill PW, Clewell WH, Rodeck CH, Mibashan R, Campbell S. Fetal 
haemoglobin measurement in the assessment of red cell isoimmunisation. Lancet 
1988;1:1073–5. 
Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Davenport M, Greenough A, Nicolaides KH. Fetal nuchal 
translucency thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation and congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:943–7. 
Sebire NJ, Bianco D, Snijders RJM, Zuckerman M, Nicolaides KH. Increased fetal 
nuchal translucency thickness at 10–14 weeks: is screening for maternal-fetal infection 
necessary? BJOG 1997;104:212–5. 
Snijders RJM, Brizot ML, Faria M, Nicolaides KH. Fetal exomphalos at 11–14 weeks 
of gestation. J Ultrasound Med 1995;14:569–74. 
Snijders RJM, Noble P, Sebire N, Souka A, Nicolaides KH. UK multicentre project 
on assessment of risk of trisomy 21 by maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency 
thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation. Lancet 1998;351:343–6. 
Chapter 3 • Increased nuchal translucency with normal karyotype 

Souka AP, von Kaisenberg CS, Hyett JA, Sonek JD, Nicolaides KH. Increased nuchal 
translucency with normal karyotype. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2004; in press 
Souka AP, Krampl E, Bakalis S, Heath V, Nicolaides KH. Outcome of pregnancy in 
chromosomally normal fetuses with increased nuchal translucency in the first trimester. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;18:9–17. 
von Kaisenberg CS, Krenn V, Ludwig M, Nicolaides KH, Brand-Saberi B. Morphological 
classification of nuchal skin in fetuses with trisomy 21, 18 and 13 at 12–18 
weeks and in a trisomy 16 mouse. Anat Embryol 1998;197:105–24. 
von Kaisenberg CS, Nicolaides KH, Brand-Saberi B. Lymphatic vessel hypoplasia in 
fetuses with Turner syndrome. Hum Reprod 1999;14:823–6. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

4
MULTIPLE PREGNANCY 
Multiple pregnancy results from the ovulation and subsequent 
fertilisation of more than one oocyte. In such case the fetuses 
are genetically different (polyzygotic or non-identical). Multiple 
pregnancy can also result from splitting of one embryonic mass 
to form two or more genetically identical fetuses (monozygotic). 
In all cases of polyzygotic multiple pregnancy each zygote 
develops its own amnion, chorion and placenta (polychorionic). 
In monozygotic pregnancies, there may be sharing of the same 
placenta (monochorionic), amniotic sac (monoamniotic) or even 
fetal organs (conjoined or Siamese). 
When the single embryonic mass splits into two within three days 
of fertilisation, which occurs in one-third of monozygotic twins, 
each fetus has its own amniotic sac and placenta (diamniotic and 
dichorionic) (Figure 1). When embryonic splitting occurs after 
the third day following fertilisation, there are vascular communications 
within the two placental circulations (monochorionic). 
Embryonic splitting after the 9th day following fertilisation results 
in monoamniotic monochorionic twins and splitting after the 12th 
day results in conjoined twins. 
PREVALENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY 
Twins account for about 1% of all pregnancies with two-thirds 
being dizygotic and one-third monozygotic. 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Placentas 
Sacs 
Fetuses 
33% 
DICHORIONIC 
MONOCHORIONIC 
65% 
MONOAMNI2% 
OASI MESE 
TIC
Days0 3 912 
Figure 1. In monozygotic twins embryonic splitting within the first three days of fertilisation results in a 
diamniotic and dichorionic pregnancy, splitting between days 3 and 9 results in a diamniotic monochorionic 
pregnancy, splitting between days 9 and 12 results in a monoamniotic monochorionic pregnancy, 
and splitting after the 12th day results in conjoined twins. 
The prevalence of dizygotic twins varies with ethnic group (up to 
5-times higher in certain parts of Africa and half as high in parts 
of Asia), maternal age (2% at 35 years), parity (2% after four 
pregnancies) and method of conception (20% with ovulation 
induction). 
The prevalence of monozygotic twins is similar in all ethnic 
groups and does not vary with maternal age or parity, but may 
be 2–3 times higher following in-vitro fertilisation procedures, 
possibly because with these methods the architecture of the zona 
pellucida is altered although the mechanism remains uncertain. 
In the last 20 years the rate of twinning has increased. This 
increase is most marked for dizygotic twins. It is estimated that 
about one third of the increase in multiple births is a consequence 
of childbearing later in life, but the majority of the effect is due to 
the use of assisted reproduction techniques. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

DETERMINATION OF ZYGOSITY AND CHORIONICITY 
Zygosity can only be determined by DNA fingerprinting, which 
requires amniocentesis, chorion villus sampling or cordocentesis. 
Determination of chorionicity can be performed by ultrasonography 
and relies on the assessment of fetal gender, number of 
placentas, and characteristics of the membrane between the two 
amniotic sacs (Monteagudo et al 1994). 
Different-sex twins are dizygotic and therefore dichorionic, but 
in about two-thirds of twin pregnancies the fetuses are of the 
same sex and these may be either monozygotic or dizygotic. 
Similarly, if there are two separate placentas the pregnancy is 
dichorionic, but in the majority of cases the two placentas are 
adjacent to each other and there are often difficulties in distinguishing 
between dichorionic-fused and monochorionic placentas. 
In dichorionic twins the inter-twin membrane is composed of a 
central layer of chorionic tissue sandwiched between two layers of 
amnion, whereas in monochorionic twins there is no chorionic 
layer present. The best way to determine chorionicity is by an 
ultrasound examination at 6–9 weeks of gestation. Dichorionic 
twins can be easily distinguished by the presence of a thick 
septum between the chorionic sacs. This septum becomes progressively 
thinner to form the chorionic component of the inter-
twin membrane, but remains thicker and easier to identify at the 
base of the membrane as a triangular tissue projection, or lambda 
sign (Bessis et al 1981, Sepulveda et al 1996, 1997, Monteagudo 
et al 2000). 
Sonographic examination of the base of the inter-twin membrane 
at 10–13+6 weeks of gestation for the presence or absence of the 
lambda sign (Figure 2) provides reliable distinction between 
dichorionic and monochorionic pregnancies. With advancing 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Figure 2. Ultrasound appearance of monochorionic (left) and dichorionic (right) twin pregnancies at 
12 weeks of gestation. Note that in both types there appears to be a single placental mass but in the 
dichorionic type there is an extention of placental tissue into the base of the intertwin membrane forming 
the lambda sign. 
gestation there is regression of the chorion laeve and the ‘lambda’ 
sign becomes progressively more difficult to identify. Thus by 20 
weeks only 85% of dichorionic pregnancies demonstrate the 
lambda sign. 
Therefore, absence of the lambda sign at 20 weeks, and presumably 
thereafter, does not constitute evidence of monochorionicity 
and does not exclude the possibility of dichorionicity or dizygosity. 
Conversely, because none of the pregnancies classified as monochorionic 
at the 10–13+6 week scan subsequently develop the 
lambda sign, the identification of this feature at any stage of 
pregnancy should be considered as evidence of dichorionicity. 
CHORIONICITY AND PREGNANCY COMPLICATIONS 
Miscarriage 
In singleton pregnancies with a live fetus demonstrated at the 
11–13+6 weeks scan the rate of subsequent miscarriage or fetal 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

death before 24 weeks is about 1%. The rate of fetal loss in 
dichorionic twins is about 2% and in monochorionic twins it 
is about 10% (Sebire et al 1997a). This high mortality confined 
to monochorionic pregnancies is the consequence of severe 
early-onset TTTS. 
Reduction of the excess fetal loss in twins, compared to singletons, 
can only be achieved through early identification of monochorionic 
pregnancies by ultrasound examination at 11–13+6 weeks, 
close surveillance and appropriate treatment, with endoscopic 
laser coagulation of the communicating placental vessels, in those 
that develop severe TTTS (Ville et al 1995, Senat et al 2004). 
Perinatal mortality 
The perinatal mortality rate in twins is about 5-times higher than 
in singletons. This increased mortality, which is mainly due to 
prematurity-related complications, is higher in monochorionic 
(5%) than dichorionic (2%) twin pregnancies (Sebire et al 1997a). 
In monochorionic twins, an additional complication to prematurity 
is TTTS. 
Early preterm delivery 
The most important complication of any pregnancy is delivery 
before term and especially before 32 weeks. Almost all babies 
born before 24 weeks die and almost all born after 32 weeks 
survive. Delivery between 24 and 32 weeks is associated with 
a high chance of neonatal death and handicap in the survivors. 
The chance of spontaneous delivery between 24 and 32 weeks 
is about 1% in singletons, 5% in dichorionic and 10% in 
monochorionic twin pregnancies (Sebire et al 1997a). 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Growth restriction 
In singleton pregnancies the prevalence of babies with birth 
weight below the 5th centile is 5%, in dichorionic twins it is 
about 20% and in monochorionic twins it is 30% (Sebire et al 
1997a, 1998a). Furthermore, the chance of growth restriction of 
both twins is about 2% in dichorionic and 8% in monochorionic 
pregnancies. 
In singleton pregnancies the two main factors determining fetal 
growth are genetic potential and placental function. In monochorionic 
twin pregnancies both factors should be the same for 
the two fetuses. Consequently, inter-twin disparities in growth 
are likely to reflect the degree of unequal splitting of the initial 
single cell mass or the magnitude of imbalance in the flow of 
fetal blood through placental vascular communications between 
the two circulations. In contrast, since about 90% of dichorionic 
pregnancies are dizygotic, inter-twin disparities in size would be 
due to differences in genetic constitution of the fetuses and their 
placentas. 
Pre-eclampsia 
The prevalence of pre-eclampsia is about 4-times greater in 
twin than in singleton pregnancies but it is not significantly different 
between monochorionic and dichorionic twins (Savvidou 
et al 2001). 
Death of one fetus 
Intrauterine death of a fetus in a twin pregnancy may be associated 
with adverse outcome for the co-twin but the type and 
degree of risk is dependent on the chorionicity of the pregnancy. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

In singleton pregnancies death and retention of the fetus may 
be associated with maternal disseminated intravascular coagulation; 
however, in twin pregnancies with one dead fetus this 
complication has only rarely been reported. 
Death of one fetus in dichorionic pregnancies carries a risk to 
the remaining fetus, mainly due to preterm delivery, which may 
be the consequence of release of cytokines and prostaglandins 
by the resorbing dead placenta. In dichorionic twins the risk of 
death or handicap in such cases is about 5–10% whereas in 
monochorionic twins, there is at least a 30% risk of death or 
neurological handicap to the co-twin due to hypotensive episodes 
in addition to the risk of preterm delivery. The acute hypotensive 
episode is the result of hemorrhage from the live fetus into the 
dead fetoplacental unit (Fusi et al 1991). Intrauterine blood 
transfusion within 24 hours of death of the co-twin may prevent 
fetal death. 
Structural defects 
Structural fetal defects in twin pregnancies can be grouped into 
those which also occur in singletons and those specific to the 
twinning process; the latter being unique to monozygotic twins. 
For any given defect the pregnancy may be concordant or discordant 
in terms of both the presence or type of abnormality and 
its’ severity. The prevalence of structural defects per fetus in 
dizygotic twins is the same as in singletons, whereas the rate in 
monozygotic twins is 2–3 times higher (Burn et al 1991, Baldwin 
et al 1994). Concordance of defects (both fetuses being affected) 
is uncommon, being found in about 10% of dichorionic and 20% 
of monochorionic pregnancies. 
Multiple pregnancies discordant for a fetal abnormality can 
essentially be managed expectantly or by selective fetocide of the 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

abnormal twin (Sebire et al 1997b). In cases where the abnormality 
is non-lethal but may well result in serious handicap the 
parents need to decide whether the potential burden of a handicapped 
child is enough to risk the loss of the normal twin from 
fetocide-related complications. In cases where the abnormality is 
lethal it may be best to avoid such risk to the normal fetus, unless 
the condition itself threatens the survival of the normal twin. 
In the case of dichorionic pregnancies fetocide can be carried 
out by intracardiac injection of potassium chloride, whereas in 
monochorionic pregnancies fetocide necessitates occlusion of the 
umbilical cord vessels. 
Twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome 
In monochorionic twin pregnancies there are placental vascular 
anastomoses which allow communication of the two fetoplacental 
circulations; these anastomoses may be arterio-arterial, venovenous, 
or arterio-venous in nature. Anatomical studies demonstrated 
that arterio-venous anastomoses are deep in the placenta 
but the feeding vessels are invariably superficial (Benirschke et al 
1973). In about 30% of monochorionic twin pregnancies, imbalance 
in the net flow of blood across the placental vascular arteriovenous 
communications from one fetus, the donor, to the other, 
the recipient, results in twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome; in 
about half of these the condition is severe. 
Severe disease, with the development of polyhydramnios, becomes 
apparent at 16–24 weeks of pregnancy. The pathognomonic 
features of severe TTTS by ultrasonographic examination 
are the presence of a large bladder in the polyuric recipient fetus 
in the polyhydramniotic sac and ‘absent’ bladder in the anuric 
donor that is found ‘stuck’ and immobile at an edge of the 
placenta or the uterine wall where it is held fixed by the collapsed 
membranes of the anhydramniotic sac (Figure 3). 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Figure 3. Severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome at 20 weeks of gestation. In the polyuric 
recipient there is polyhydramnios and the anuric donor is held fixed to the placenta by the collapsed 
membranes of the anhydramniotic sac. 
Early prediction of twin-to twin transfusion syndrome 
Ultrasonographic features of the underlying hemodynamic 
changes in severe TTTS may be present from as early as 11– 
13+6 weeks of gestation and manifest as increased NT thickness 
in one or both of the fetuses. In monochorionic twin pregnancies 
at 11–13+6, the prevalence of increased NT thickness in at least 
one of the fetuses in those that subsequently develop TTTS is 
about 30%, compared to 10% in those that do not develop 
TTTS (Sebire et al 2000). 
Another early ultrasound marker of severe TTTS may be abnormal 
Doppler flow velocity waveform in the ductus of the recipient 
twin (Matias et al 2000). Intertwin discrepancies in crown-rump 
length are not predictive of subsequent development of TTTS. 
An early manifestation of disparity in amniotic fluid volume due 
to TTTS is inter-twin membrane folding (Figure 4). In about 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Figure 4. Monochorionic twin pregnancy at 16 weeks of gestation affected by early twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome showing folding of the inter-twin membrane, pointing towards the recipient amniotic sac 
and the increased echogenicity of the amniotic fluid in the donor sac. 
30% of monochorionic twin pregnancies at 15–17 weeks of 
gestation there is a membrane folding, and in about half of such 
cases (15% of total) there is progression to the polyhydramnios/ 
anhydramnios sequence of severe TTTS; in the other 15% there 
is moderate TTTS with large discrepancies in amniotic fluid 
volume and fetal size persisting throughout pregnancy (Sebire 
et al 1998b). 
In two-thirds of monochorionic twin pregnancies, there is no 
membrane folding and these pregnancies are not at increased risk 
for miscarriage or perinatal death due to TTTS. 
Twin reversed arterial perfusion sequence 
The most extreme manifestation of twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome, found in approximately 1% of monozygotic twin pregnancies, 
is acardiac twinning. This twin disorder has been named 
twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence because the 
underlying mechanism is thought to be disruption of normal 
vascular perfusion and development of the recipient twin due to 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

an umbilical arterial-to-arterial anastomosis with the donor or 
pump-twin (Van Allen et al 1983). At least 50% of donor twins 
die due to congestive heart failure or severe preterm delivery, due 
to polyhydramnios. All perfused twins die due to the associated 
multiple malformations. Prenatal treatment is by occlusion of the 
blood flow to the acardiac twin by ultrasound-guided diathermy 
of the umbilical cord or laser coagulation of the umbilical cord 
vessels within the abdomen of the acardiac twin, which is carried 
out at about 16 weeks of gestation. 
Importance of prenatal determination of chorionicity 
•Chorionicity, rather than zygosity, is the main factor determining 
pregnancy outcome. 
•In monochorionic twins the rates of miscarriage, perinatal 
death, preterm delivery, fetal growth restriction and fetal 
abnormalities are much higher than in dichorionic twins. 
•Death of a monochorionic fetus is associated with a high 
chance of sudden death or severe neurological damage in the 
co-twin. 
CHROMOSOMAL DEFECTS IN MULTIPLE PREGNANCIES 
In multiple pregnancies compared to singletons, prenatal diagnosis 
of chromosomal abnormalities is complicated because, 
firstly, the techniques of invasive testing may provide uncertain 
results or may be associated with higher risks of miscarriage and, 
secondly, the fetuses may be discordant for an abnormality, in 
which case one of the options for the subsequent management of 
the pregnancy is selective fetocide. 
Selective fetocide can result in spontaneous abortion or severe 
preterm delivery, which may occur several months after the 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

procedure. The risk for these complications is related to the 
gestation at fetocide. Selective fetocide after 16 weeks is associated 
with a three-fold increase in risk compared to reduction 
before 16 weeks, and there is an inverse correlation between the 
gestational age at fetocide with the gestation at delivery (Evans 
et al 1994). 
Amniocentesis in twins is effective in providing a reliable 
karyotype for both fetuses and the procedure-related fetal loss 
rate is about 2%. In the case of chorionic villus sampling, the 
procedure-related fetal loss rate is about 1%, but in about 1% of 
cases there may be a diagnostic error, either due to sampling the 
same placenta twice or cross-contamination. The main advantage 
of chorionic villus sampling is that it provides results sufficiently 
early to allow for safer selective fetocide. 
Screening by maternal age 
In dizygotic pregnancies, the maternal age-related risk for chromosomal 
abnormalities for each twin is the same as in singleton 
pregnancies and therefore the chance that at least one fetus is 
affected by a chromosomal defect is twice as high as in singleton 
pregnancies. Furthermore, since the rate of dizygotic twinning 
increases with maternal age the proportion of twin pregnancies 
with chromosomal abnormalities is higher than in singleton 
pregnancies. 
In monozygotic twins, the risk for chromosomal abnormalities 
is the same as in singleton pregnancies and in the vast majority 
of cases both fetuses are affected. 
The relative proportion of spontaneous dizygotic to monozygotic 
twins in Caucasian populations is about two-to-one and therefore 
the prevalence of chromosomal abnormalities affecting at least 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

one fetus in twin pregnancies would be expected to be about 
1.6 times higher than in singletons.
In counselling parents it is possible to give more specific estimates 
of one and/or both fetuses being affected depending on chorionicity. 
Thus in monochorionic twins the parents can be counseled 
that both fetuses would be affected and this risk is similar to 
that in singleton pregnancies. If the pregnancy is dichorionic, 
then the parents can be counseled that the risk of discordancy 
for a chromosomal abnormality is about twice that in singleton 
pregnancies whereas the risk that both fetuses would be affected 
can be derived by squaring the singleton risk ratio. For example, 
in a 40 year old woman with a risk for trisomy 21 of about 1 in 
100 based on maternal age, in a dizygotic twin pregnancy the risk 
that one fetus would be affected would be 1 in 50 (1 in 100 plus 
1 in 100), whereas the risk that both fetuses would be affected 
is 1 in 10,000 (1 in 100 × 1 in 100). This is in reality an oversimplification, 
since, unlike monochorionic pregnancies that are 
always monozygotic, only about 90% of dichorionic pregnancies 
are dizygotic. 
Screening by second trimester maternal serum biochemistry 
In singleton pregnancies, screening for trisomy 21 by a combination 
of maternal age and second trimester maternal serum 
biochemistry can detect 50–70% of trisomy 21 cases for a 5% false 
positive rate (Cuckle 1998). 
In twin pregnancies, the median value for maternal serum 
markers, such as AFP, hCG, free b-hCG and inhibin-A are about 
twice those for singleton pregnancies. When this is taken into 
account in the mathematical modeling for calculation of risks it 
was estimated that serum screening in twins may identify about 
45% of affected fetuses for a 5% false positive rate (Cuckle 1998). 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Even if prospective studies demonstrate that serum testing in 
twins is effective, the following problems would still need to 
be addressed; (a) the detection rate for an acceptable low false 
positive rate, especially since invasive testing in multiple pregnancies 
is technically more demanding, (b) in the presence of a 
‘screen positive’ result, there is no feature to suggest which 
fetus may be affected, and (c) if the pregnancy is discordant for 
chromosomal defect, further management by way of selective 
termination carries increased risk in the second compared to 
the first trimester. 
Screening by fetal nuchal translucency thickness 
In dichorionic twin pregnancies, the detection rate (75–80%) and 
false positive rate (5% per fetus or 10% per pregnancy) of fetal 
NT in screening for trisomy 21 are similar to those in singleton 
pregnancies (Sebire et al 1996a, 1996b). Patient specific-risks for 
trisomy 21 are calculated for each fetus based on maternal age 
and fetal NT. Effective screening and diagnosis of major chromosomal 
abnormalities can be achieved in the first trimester, 
allowing the possibility of earlier and therefore safer selective 
fetocide for those parents that choose this option. 
An important advantage of screening by fetal NT in dichorionic 
twins is that when there is discordancy for a chromosomal abnormality, 
the presence of a sonographically detectable marker helps 
to ensure the correct identification of the abnormal twin should 
the parents choose selective termination. 
In monochorionic pregnancies, the false-positive rate of NT 
screening (8% per fetus or 14% per pregnancy) is higher than in 
dichorionic twins, because increased NT is an early manifestation 
of TTTS. The risk for trisomy 21 is calculated for each fetus, 
based on maternal age and fetal NT and then the average risk 
between the two fetuses is considered to be the risk for the 
pregnancy as a whole. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

Screening by fetal NT thickness and maternal serum biochemistry 
In normal twin pregnancies, compared to singletons, the median 
maternal serum free b-hCG and PAPP-A, adjusted for maternal 
weight, are about 2.0 MoM. In trisomy 21 twin pregnancies 
the median level of free b-hCG is significantly higher and 
PAPP-A lower than than in normal twins. At a false positive rate of 
10% (compared to 5% in singletons) screening by a combination 
of fetal NT and maternal serum biochemistry could identify 
85–90% of trisomy 21 pregnancies (Spencer and Nicolaides 
2003). Chorionicity is not associated with significant differences in 
maternal serum free b-hCG or PAPP-A values in first trimester. 
Management of twin pregnancies with chromosomal abnormalities 
When both fetuses are chromosomally abnormal the parents usually 
chose termination of pregnancy. In pregnancies discordant for 
chromosomal defects the main options are either selective fetocide 
or expectant management. In such cases the decision is essentially 
based on the relative risk of selective fetocide causing miscarriage 
and hence death of the normal baby, compared to the potential 
burden of caring for a handicapped child (Sebire et al 1997c). 
Selective fetocide after 16 weeks of gestation is associated with 
three-fold increase in risk of spontaneous abortion compared to 
reduction before 16 weeks and there is and inverse correlation 
between the gestation at fetocide with the gestation at delivery 
(Evans et al 1994). It is possible that the resorbing dead 
fetoplacental tissue triggers an intrauterine inflammatory process 
that is proportional to the amount of dead tissue and therefore 
the gestation at fetocide. Such an inflammatory process could 
result in the release of cytokines and prostaglandins which would 
in turn induce uterine activity with consequent miscarriage/ 
preterm labour. 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

In pregnancies discordant for trisomy 21 the usual choice is 
selective fetocide, because with expectant management the majority 
of affected babies would survive. In the case of more lethal 
defects, such as trisomy 18, about 85% of affected fetuses die 
in-utero and those that are live born usually die within the first 
year of life. In this respect, expectant management may be the 
preferred option; this would certainly avoid the procedure-related 
complications from selective fetocide. The alternative view is that 
the amount of dead fetoplacental tissue (and therefore the risk for 
consequent miscarriage or preterm labour) would be less after 
fetocide at 12 weeks rather than spontaneous death of the trisomy 
18 fetus at a latter stage of pregnancy. 
Screening for trisomy 21 in monochorionic twins 
•In monozygotic twins, the risk for chromosomal abnormalities 
is the same as in singleton pregnancies. 
•In monochorionic pregnancies, the false-positive rate of NT 
screening (8% per fetus or 14% per pregnancy) is higher 
than in dichorionic twins, because increased NT is an early 
manifestation of TTTS. 
•The risk for trisomy 21 is calculated for each fetus, based on 
maternal age, fetal NT and maternal serum biochemistry and 
then the average risk between the two fetuses is considered to 
be the risk for the pregnancy as a whole. 
Screening for trisomy 21 in dichorionic twins 
•Screening by a combination of fetal NT and maternal 
serum biochemistry identifies about 85–90% of trisomy 21 
fetuses for a false positive rate of 10% (compared to 5% in 
singletons). 
•In pregnancies discordant for chromosomal defects the 
main options are either selective fetocide or expectant 
management. 
•Selective fetocide after 16 weeks of gestation is associated 
with three-fold increase in risk of spontaneous abortion 
compared to reduction before 16 weeks. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

REFERENCES 
Baldwin VJ. Anomalous development of twins. In Pathology of Multiple Pregnancy. 
In Baldwin VJ (Ed). Springer-Verlag, New York, 1994, pp169–97. 
Benirschke K, Kim CK. Multiple pregnancy. N Eng J Med 1973;288:1276–84. 
Bessis R, Papiernik E. Echographic imagery of amniotic membranes in twin pregnancies. 
In: Gedda L, Parisi P, eds. Twin research 3: Twin biology and multiple 
pregnancy. New York: Alan R. Liss, 1981, pp183–7. 
Burn J. Disturbance of morphological laterality in humans. Ciba Found Symp 
1991;162:282–96. 
Cuckle H. Down’s syndrome screening in twins. J Med Screen 1998;5:3–4. 
Evans MI, Goldberg JD, Dommergues M, Wapner RJ, Lynch L, Dock BS, et al. Efficacy 
of second-trimester selective termination for fetal abnormalities: international collaborative 
experience among the world’s largest centers. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1994;171:90–4. 
Fusi L, MacOharland P, Fisk N, Nicolini U, Wigglesworth J. Acute twin-twin transfusion: 
a possible mechanism for brain damaged survivors after intrauterine death of 
a monozygotic twin. Obstet Gynecol 1991;78:517–22. 
Matias A, Montenegro N, Areias JC. Anticipating twin-twin transfusion syndrome in 
monochorionic twin pregnancy. Is there a role for nuchal translucency and ductus 
venosus blood flow evaluation at 11–14 weeks? Twin Res 2000;3:65–70. 
Monteagudo A, Timor-Tritsch I, Sharma S. Early and simple determination of chorionic 
and amniotic type in multifetal gestations in the first 14 weeks by high frequency 
transvaginal ultrasound. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:824–9. 
Monteagudo A, Timor-Tritsch IE. Second- and third-trimester ultrasound evaluation 
of chorionicity and amnionicity in twin pregnancy. A simple algorithm. J Reprod Med 
2000;45:476–80. 
Savvidou MD, Karanastasi E, Skentou C, Geerts L, Nicolaides KH. Twin chorionicity 
and pre-eclampsia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001;18:228–31. 
Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Hughes K, Sepulveda W, Nicolaides KH. Screening for trisomy 
21 in twin pregnancies by maternal age and fetal nuchal translucency thickness 
at 10–14 weeks of gestation. BJOG 1996a;103:999–1003. 
Sebire NJ, Noble PL, Psarra A, Papapanagiotou G, Nicolaides KH. Fetal karyotyping 
in twin pregnancies: selection of technique by measurement of fetal nuchal translucency. 
BJOG 1996b;103:887–90. 
Sebire NJ, Sepulveda W, Hughes KS, Noble P, Nicolaides KH. Management of twin 
pregnancies discordant for anencephaly. BJOG 1997b;104:216–9. 
Chapter 4 • Multiple pregnancy 

Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Hughes K, Sepulveda W, Nicolaides KH. The hidden 
mortality of monochorionic twin pregnancies. BJOG 1997a;104:1203–7. 
Sebire NJ, Snijders RJM, Santiago C, Papapanagiotou G, Nicolaides KH. Management 
of twin pregnancies with fetal trisomies. BJOG 1997c;104:220–2. 
Sebire NJ, Carvalho M, D’Ercole C, Souka A, Nicolaides KH. Intertwin disparity 
in fetal size in monochorionic and dichorionic twin pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 
1998a;91:82–5. 
Sebire NJ, Souka A, Carvalho M, Nicolaides KH. Inter-twin membrane folding as an 
early feature of developing twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1998b;11:324–27. 
Sebire NJ, Souka A, Skentou H, Geerts L, Nicolaides KH. Early prediction of severe 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. Hum Reprod 2000;15:2008–10. 
Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, Paupe A, Winer N, Ville Y. Endoscopic laser 
surgery versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome. 
N Engl J Med 2004;351:136–44. 
Sepulveda W, Sebire NJ, Hughes K, Odibo A, Nicolaides KH. The lambda sign 
at 10–14 weeks of gestation as a predictor of chorionicity in twin pregnancies. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996;7:421–3. 
Sepulveda W, Sebire NJ, Hughes K, Kalogeropoulos A, Nicolaides KH. Evolution 
of the lambda or twin/chorionic peak sign in dichorionic twin pregnancies. Obstet 
Gynecol 1997;89:439–41. 
Spencer K, Nicolaides KH. Screening for trisomy 21 in twins using first trimester ultrasound 
and maternal serum biochemistry in a one-stop clinic: a review of three years 
experience. BJOG 2003;110:276–80. 
Van Allen MI, Smith DW & Shepard TH. Twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) 
sequence: study of 14 twin pregnancies with acardius. Semin Perinatol 1983; 
7:285–93. 
Ville Y, Hyett J, Hecher K, Nicolaides KH. Preliminary experience with endoscopic 
laser surgery for severe twin-twin transfusion syndrome. N Engl J Med 1995; 
332:224–7. 
The 11–13+6 weeks scan 

an update in 

obstetrics and 

gynecology 

precis 
ReproductiveEndocrinologySecond Edition 

Precis: An Update in Obstetrics & Gynecology represents the knowledge and experience 
of experts in the field and does not necessarily reflect College policy. Methods and techniques 
of clinical practice that are currently acceptable and used by recognized authorities 
are described in this publication. The recommendations do not dictate an exclusive course 
of treatment or of practice. Variations taking into account the needs of the individual 
patient, resources, and limitations unique to the institution or type of practice may be 
appropriate. 

Medicine is an ever-changing field. As new research and clinical experience emerge, 
changes in treatment and drug therapy are required. Every effort has been made to ensure 
that the drug dosage schedules contained herein are accurate and in accordance with standards 
accepted at the time of publication. Readers are advised, however, to check the product 
information literature of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that there have 
been no changes in the dosage recommended or in the contraindications for administration. 
This is of particular importance for new or infrequently used drugs. 

The assistance of Roger Smith, MD, in reviewing and assembling material for this 
CD-ROM of Precis: Reproductive Endocrinology, Second Edition is greatly appreciated. 

Copyright © 2002 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and its 
licensors. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher. Requests for photocopies should be directed to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. 

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
409 12th Street, SW 
PO Box 96920 
Washington, DC 20090-6920 

12345/65432 


CONTRIBUTORS v 

PREFACE vii 

Introduction 1 

Basic Principles 3 
Hormone Action 3 
Endocrine Assays: Their Appropriate Use and 

Interpretation 8 
Genetic Principles 18 


Sexual Development and Puberty 32 
Sexual Differentiation in the Fetus 33 
Ambiguous Genitalia 35 
Pubertal Development 38 
Abnormalities of Puberty 42 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 51 
The Mature Ovary 51 
Hypothalamic Secretion of Gonadotropin-

Releasing Hormone 54 
Gonadotropin Regulation of the Menstrual 
Cycle 57 
Steroid Hormone Effects on the Female 
Reproductive Tract 60 
Premenstrual Syndrome 61 

Disorders of Ovulation and 
Menstruation 67 
The Approach to the Patient with Abnormal 

Menstruation 67 
Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 73 
Hyperprolactinemia and Other Pituitary 

Disorders 79 

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and 
Other Androgen Excess Disorders 83 
Premature Ovarian Failure 93 

Contents 

Other Endocrine Problems 100 
Thyroid Diseases 100 
Adrenal Gland Disorders 105 
Prostaglandins and Dysmenorrhea 113 
Endometriosis 116 

Infertility 124 
Evaluation of Infertility 124 
Overview of Management 132 
Ovulation Induction 136 
Assisted Reproductive Technologies 141 
Future Directions in Infertility Treatment 148 
Ethical Issues 149 

Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 156 
Definition of Pregnancy Loss 156 
Recurrence Risk 156 
Etiology of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 156 
Evaluation for Pregnancy Loss 159 
Follow-up 160 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 162 
Combination Oral Contraceptives 162 
Progestin-Only Pills 164 
Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate 165 
Monthly Injectable Combination Contraceptives 

165 
Hormone-Releasing Intrauterine Devices 165 
Transdermal Contraceptive Patch 166 
Contraceptive Vaginal Ring 166 
Levonorgestrel Implants 166 
Emergency Contraception with Oral 

Contraceptives 167 

Menopause 169 
Physiology 169 
Approach to Therapy 174 
Alternative Therapies for Menopause 184 


CONTENTS 

Audiovisual Aids 
VIDEO 1. Endometrial dating 
VIDEO 2. Endometrial ablation 
VIDEO 3. Complications of operative laparoscopy 
VIDEO 4. Laparoscopic surgery of adhesions 
VIDEO 5. Surgery for endometriosis 
VIDEO 6. Office hysteroscopy 

Images 
IMAGE 1. Clitoromegaly in a patient with 

45,X/46,XY karyotype 

IMAGE 2. Young child with true hermaphroditism 

IMAGE 3. Streak gonad 

IMAGE 4. Complete androgen insensitivity 

IMAGE 5. Endometrial dating: early menstruation 

IMAGE 6. Endometrial dating: early menstruation 

IMAGE 7. Endometrial dating: early–mid


menstruation 
IMAGE 8. Endometrial dating: early–mid


menstruation 

IMAGE 9. Endometrial dating: mid-menstruation 

IMAGE 10. Endometrial dating: late menstruation– 

early proliferation 
IMAGE 11. Endometrial dating: later proliferative 
phase 
IMAGE 12. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days 
IMAGE 13. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days 
IMAGE 14. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase 
IMAGE 15. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
18 days 
IMAGE 16. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
19 days 
IMAGE 17. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
19 days 
IMAGE 18. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
20 days 
IMAGE 19. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
20 days 
IMAGE 20. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 

IMAGE 21. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 
IMAGE 22. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 
IMAGE 23. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
22 days 
IMAGE 24. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
23 days 
IMAGE 25. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
24 days 
IMAGE 26. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
24 days 
IMAGE 27. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
25 days 
IMAGE 28. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26 days 
IMAGE 29. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26–27 days 
IMAGE 30. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26 days 
IMAGE 31. Arias-Stella reaction (ectopic pregnancy) 
IMAGE 32. Acanthosis nigricans 
IMAGE 33. Clinical features of a woman with 
Cushing’s disease 
IMAGE 34. Endometrioma, or “chocolate cyst” 
IMAGE 35. Endometriosis 
IMAGE 36. Diagnosis of endometriosis 
IMAGE 37. Filling defect, fibroid 
IMAGE 38. Filling defect, synechiae 
IMAGE 39. Involuted fibroid 
IMAGE 40. Salpingitis isthmica nodosa 
IMAGE 41. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 42. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 43. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 44. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 45. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 46. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 47. Bicornuate uterus 
IMAGE 48. T-shaped uterus 
IMAGE 49. Asherman’s syndrome, uterine factors 

INDEX 

LINKING INSTRUCTIONS 


EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

Robert W. Rebar, MD, Chair 
Ricardo Azziz, MD 
Edward E. Wallach, MD 
Abbey B. Berenson, MD 
William J. Butler, MD 
Rogerio A. Lobo, MD 
James H. Liu, MD 

ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Donald R. Coustan, MD 
Leo J. Dunn, MD 
Roger P. Smith, MD 

AUTHORS 

Robert L. Barbieri, MD 

Adrenal Gland Disorders 

Sarah L. Berga, MD 

Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 

Richard E. Blackwell, MD 

Hyperprolactinemia and Other Pituitary Disorders 

Contributors 



CONTRIBUTORS 

William J. Butler, MD 

Sexual Differentiation in the Fetus 

Bruce R. Carr, MD 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 

David S. Cooper, MD 

Thyroid Diseases 

Ann J. Davis, MD 

Pubertal Development 

Owen K. Davis, MD 

Future Directions in Infertility Treatment 

William C. Dodson, MD 

Ovulation Induction 

Marc A. Fritz, MD 

Evaluation of Infertility; Overview of Management 

William H. Kutteh, MD 

Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 

Paul W. Ladenson, MD 

Thyroid Diseases 

Lawrence C. Layman, MD 

Genetic Principles 

Richard S. Legro, MD 

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other 
Androgen Excess Disorders 

James H. Liu, MD 

Effects of Hormone Replacement Therapy 

Rogerio A. Lobo, MD 

Approach to Therapy (Menopause) 

Lorna A. Marshall, MD 

Ethical Issues (Infertility) 

David Meldrum, MD 

Assisted Reproductive Technologies 

Lawrence M. Nelson, MD 

Premature Ovarian Failure 

Robert W. Rebar, MD 

Introduction; The Approach to the Patient with 
Abnormal Menstruation 

Richard Reindollar, MD 

Abnormalities of Puberty 

Robert S. Schenken, MD 

Endometriosis; Prostaglandins and Dysmenorrhea 

Samuel Smith, MD 

Premenstrual Syndrome 

Steven J. Sondheimer, MD 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 

Leon Speroff, MD 

Physiology (Menopause) 

Maida Taylor, MD 

Alternative Therapies for Menopause 

Laurence C. Udoff, MD 

Hormone Action 

Bradley J. Van Voorhis, MD 

Endocrine Assays: Their Appropriate Use and 
Interpretation 

STAFF 

Sterling B. Williams, MD 

Vice President of Education 

Rebecca D. Rinehart 

Director of Publications 

Joyce Leinberger Mitchell 

Senior Editor 


Preface 


E
E
ducation is a lifelong process. In no other field than medicine is this 
process more important. As scientific advances unfold, new techniques 
and technologies emerge, knowledge expands, and the art and science of 
medicine undergo dynamic change. Progress in medicine is ongoing, and so 
too must be the continuing medical education of those who practice it. 
Precis: An Update in Obstetrics and Gynecology is intended to meet the 
continuing education needs of obstetricians and gynecologists. It is a broad, 
yet concise, overview of information relevant to the specialty. As in earlier 
editions, the emphasis is on innovations in clinical practice, presented within 
the context of traditional approaches that retain their applicability to 
patient care. 
Precis is an educational resource for preparation of the cognitive assessment 
of clinical knowledge, regardless of the form of the assessment—formal 
or informal, structured or independent. It is one of the recognized 
vehicles useful in preparing for certification and accreditation processes, 
and it is designed to complement those evaluations while serving as a general 
review of the field. 
Each year, one volume of this five-volume set is revised. This process 
provides continual updates that are critical to the practice of obstetrics and 
gynecology and that echo the dynamic nature of the field. The focus is on 
new and emerging techniques, presented from a balanced perspective of 
clinical value and cost-effectiveness in practice. Hence, discussion of traditional 
medical practice is limited. The information has been organized to 
unify coverage of topics into a single volume so that each volume can stand 
on its own merit. 
This second edition of Precis: Reproductive Endocrinology reflects current 
thinking on optimal practice. The information is intended to be a useful 
tool to assist practicing obstetrician–gynecologists in maintaining current 
knowledge in a rapidly changing field and to better prepare them for the role 
of primary care provider for women. 


viii PREFACE 

Some information from the previous edition continues to be of value and 
thus has been retained and woven into the new structure. The efforts of 
authors contributing to previous editions, as well as the work of those 
authors providing new material, must be recognized with gratitude. 
Collectively, they represent the expertise of the specialty. With such a 
breadth of representation, differences of opinion are inevitable and have 
been respected. 

Other Precis volumes are Primary and Preventive Care, Second Edition; 
Obstetrics, Second Edition; Gynecology, Second Edition; and Oncology. 
Each is an educational tool for review, reference, and evaluation. Precis 
establishes a broad scientific basis for the delivery of quality health care for 
women. Rather than being a statement of ACOG policy, Precis serves as an 
intellectual approach to education. An effort has been made, however, to 
achieve consistency both within Precis and with other ACOG recommendations. 
Variations in patient care, based on individual needs and resources, are 
encouraged as an integral part of the practice of medicine. 

—THE EDITORS 


precis 


an update in obstetrics and gynecology 

Reproductive Endocrinology 


second edition 


Introduction 


M
M
olecular biology and molecular genetics are changing our knowledge 
of all physiologic processes and diseases. Perhaps nowhere is 

this more apparent than in the field of reproductive endocrinology. This 

volume of Precis updates important clinically relevant information in this 

field and places the information in its appropriate context. As is true for past 

volumes, there has been no attempt to be comprehensive, but rather to high


light advances in the field that are clinically relevant. 

This edition has been completely reorganized in recognition of the impact 

of advances in practice. The section discussing basic principles is both for


ward looking and historically grounded. To help keep the explosion in med


ical information in perspective, the appropriate use and interpretation of 

endocrine assays is emphasized in a section that might well have appeared 

in a text written two or three decades ago. In contrast, the details of hormone 

action and of molecular genetics, genomics, and proteomics continue to be 

elucidated even as this summary is published. 

In the remainder of the text, the reproductive abnormalities of women are 

considered in the natural progression of life events. The section on infertility 

has been expanded in recognition of the tremendous advances in the ability 

to offer couples the opportunity to bear children. Appearing in this text for 

the first time is a section on hormonal contraception. New approaches to 

contraception have been approved for use in the United States for the first 

time in decades. The expanded section on menopause is timely because of 

the aging of our population and the increasing interest in problems related 

to the postmenopausal period as well as their prevention and treatment. 

This CD-ROM contains the complete text of the printed volume, plus 

enhancements to the text. The CD-ROM permits links to abstracts of refer


enced journal articles through MEDLINE by clicking on the icon at the end 

of the references. Short videos of some diagnostic and surgical techniques 

and images of endocrinologic problems, fibroids, and uterine anomalies 

broaden the educational value of the information. The CD features a multi


media presentation by Edward E. Wallach, MD, depicting histologic images 


of the endometrium and clinical aspects of endometrial dating. Clicking on 
highlighted in-text citations to tables, figures, boxes, slides, and videos will 
take you to the cited material. Use the search function of your computer to 
take you quickly to the text you’re seeking. 

Reproductive endocrinology remains at the heart of obstetrics and gynecology. 
Clinicians with knowledge grounded in the basic principles of 
reproductive physiology can practice the art of obstetrics and gynecology 
at its most rewarding level. It is hoped that this volume will help practitioners 
in our field to remain abreast of the advances that are occurring so 
rapidly. 

—ROBERT W. REBAR,MD 


Basic Principles 


HORMONE ACTION 

Hormones exert their effects through interactions with 
specific cellular receptors. Activation of a hormone 
receptor causes profound changes in cellular function and 
leads to the end hormonal effect. The postreceptor binding 
events that culminate in a cellular response are 
referred to as the signal transduction pathways. These 
pathways vary, depending on whether the ligand is a protein 
or a steroid hormone and is acting in one of the following 
ways: 

• 
Through a classical endocrine pathway, in which 
bloodborne protein or steroid circulates through 
the bloodstream to distant sites, affecting those 
cells that possess the correct hormone-specific 
receptor 
• 
As an autocrine factor, in which a regulatory substance 
is secreted by a cell that acts on receptors 
on or within the same cell 
• 
As a paracrine factor, in which a regulatory substance 
is secreted by a cell that acts on neighboring 
cells 
• 
As an intracrine factor, in which an unsecreted 
regulatory substance acts on intracellular receptors 
within the same cell 
Signal transduction mechanisms for the same hormone 
may vary among different tissues. Additionally, a 
cell can adjust its sensitivity to a hormone by altering the 
number or affinity of the receptors available, a process 
known as up-regulation or down-regulation. 

A better understanding of receptor physiology can 
lead to significant improvements in the treatment of 
many obstetric and gynecologic problems. For example, 
synthetic steroids may be produced that stimulate the 
beneficial effects of estrogen on targets such as bone 
and cardiovascular and genitourinary systems without 
stimulating endometrial or breast tissue. The action of 
these steroids, the selective estrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs), could potentially result in a hormone 
replacement regimen that would offer the benefits of 
estrogen without increasing the risks of endometrial or 
breast cancer. 

Mechanism of Protein Hormone Action 

Protein and peptide hormones that are released by the 
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary include 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Other peptides, such 

as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), are secreted 
primarily by the trophoblast. These substances exert their 
effects by binding to specific cell surface receptors. The 
expression of the receptors is highly regulated and determines 
when and which cells are responsive to a specific 
hormone. Many of the receptors have been isolated and 
sequenced, and their primary structures have been determined. 
Mutations in the genes encoding for these hormone 
receptors also have been described and are 
associated with specific disease states. 

A classic example of the broad clinical impact of 
receptor abnormalities is the androgen insensitivity syndrome. 
Another example is mutations in the FSH receptor 
gene that cause premature ovarian failure. There are 
also reports of inactivating mutations in the LH receptor 
gene that result in amenorrhea and infertility. These 
receptors belong to a large superfamily of hormone 
receptors characterized by hydrophilic sequences on each 
end flanking seven hydrophobic regions, presumed to be 
membrane-spanning areas. The N-terminus is located 
extracellularly and comprises the hormone-binding site. 
The C-terminus is located intracellularly and is coupled 
to a specialized membrane-associated guanine nucleotidebinding 
protein (G protein; see Fig. 1). The G protein is 
believed to act as a mediator of signal transduction. 
Abnormalities in the G protein have been linked to disease 
states. For example, McCune-Albright syndrome 
(isosexual precocious puberty, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia) 
results from activating somatic mutations of the alpha 
subunit’s GS protein and increased cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) concentrations (Fig. 1). 

The putative signal pathway for FSH, LH, and TSH 
involves activation of the cell surface receptor via hormone 
and receptor interactions that result in conformational 
and structural changes in the receptor (1). Note that 
LH and hCG use the same receptor. This provides the 
physiologic basis for the use of exogenous hCG to trigger 
ovulation (mimic an LH surge) in ovulation induction 
protocols. This interaction leads to a change in the subunits 
of the G protein, which results in the activation of 
the enzyme adenylate cyclase (Fig. 1). Activated adenylate 
cyclase converts adenosine triphosphate into a second 
messenger, cAMP, which binds and activates a 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A). 
Protein kinase A acts to phosphorylate a number of yetto-
be-determined enzymes and DNA-binding proteins 
that can cause a wide spectrum of changes in cell physiology 
and gene expression. Amplification of the signal 
occurs at each step along the pathway. For example, each 
cyclase molecule produces many molecules of cAMP, 
and each protein kinase molecule may activate numerous 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Unoccupied 
Hormone 
Receptor activation 
Activation of 
receptor binding 
signal 
generation 
adenylate 
cyclase 


NN 
N 


CinactCinactRCactcAMP-dependentprotein kinasecAMPcAMPRcAMPP-lipaseCDiacyl-
glycerolProteinkinaseCCa++
IP3cAMP-responsiveelementbindingproteins 
a
bg
agb
?
CCCNC+
hG
n FIG. 1. Schematics of hypothetical luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor activation, signal generation, and 
signal pathways. Initial hormone binding leads to changes in the interaction of the hormone and receptors that result in changes 
in the structures of the receptor and the hormone, as well as the dissociation of protein Ga from the protein Gbg complex. The 
dissociated Ga interacts with and activates adenylate cyclase. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) produced by activated 
adenylate cyclase interacts with the regulatory subunits (R) of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which results in the release 
and activation of the catalytic subunit (C). The activated catalytic subunit phosphorylates proteins, some of which lead to activation 
of cAMP-responsive element binding proteins. These proteins are capable of regulating gene expression. In addition to this 
cAMP-dependent signal pathway, activated luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptors are thought to activate phospholipase 
C (P-lipase C), which hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol, a phospholipid, to produce diacylglycerol and inositol triphosphate 
(IP3). Both of these compounds are known to serve as second messengers to activate protein kinase C and to enhance the 
cytoplasmic calcium ion concentrations, respectively. Abbreviations: N indicates N-terminus; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 
Cinact, catalytic subunit inactivated; Cact, catalytic subunit activated. (Ji TH, Ji I, Kim SJ. Gonadotropin receptors. In: Adashi EY, Rock 
JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:735) 
downstream enzymes. This action allows for a minute cir-GnRH analogues for clinical use. In general, excess conculating 
concentration of hormone to produce wide-rang-centrations of tropic hormones like GnRH stimulate 
ing effects. internalization of cell surface receptors, leading to a loss 

Not all protein hormones use G protein or cAMP-cou-of receptors in the cell membrane and decreased biologic 
pled signal transduction pathways. For example, activa-responses. It is now clear that hormones, including 
tion of the LH/hCG receptor has been shown to cause an GnRH, are secreted in a pulsatile manner to avoid downincrease 
in phospholipase C activity, resulting in the for-regulation. Pulse frequency is a key factor in regulating 
mation of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate and diacylglycerol receptor number. 
from phosphatidyl inositol. Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate Native GnRH has an extremely short half-life of 2–4 
increases the cytoplasmic calcium ion concentration, and minutes. By altering amino acids in the decapeptide (ie, 
diacylglycerol activates protein kinase C (Fig. 1). D-amino acid at position 6), thousands of analogues of 

The concept of up-regulation and down-regulation, GnRH with longer half-lives have been produced. 
which is positive or negative modulation of receptors by Available agonists can be administered intramuscularly, 
homologous hormones, has been exploited in developing subcutaneously, or intranasally. Initially the agonists 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

stimulate increased secretion of LH and FSH (the socalled 
flare effect). However, 1–3 weeks of sustained 
action of the agonist leads to down-regulation, decreased 
secretion of LH and FSH, and an effective “medical castration.” 


GnRH antagonists can be synthesized by substituting 
for several amino acids in the decapeptide. These antagonists 
bind to GnRH receptors and competitively inhibit 
binding by GnRH. Thus, the presence of GnRH antagonists 
results in immediate declines in gonadotropin levels 
and has immediate therapeutic effects. Use of early 
GnRH antagonists was limited by adverse effects (particularly 
histamine release) and lack of potency. Newer 
agents that have overcome these drawbacks have been 
marketed only recently. Both GnRH agonists and antagonists 
also prevent premature LH surges when used with 
gonadotropins for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. 

Mechanism of Steroid Hormone Action 

In circulation, steroids are bound to several classes of 
serum proteins, predominantly sex hormone–binding 
protein and albumin. Sex hormone–binding protein is 
believed to act as a regulator of the concentration of free, 
or biologically active, hormone. Specific cell surface 
receptors for sex hormone–binding protein have been 

identified, and the activation of these receptors by sex 
hormone–binding protein or the sex hormone–binding 
protein–ligand complex results in the stimulation of 
cAMP production, implying the activation of a signal 
transduction pathway. The physiologic significance of 
these events remains to be elucidated. 

In the classic model of steroid hormone action, the 
unbound steroid is presumed to be freely transported into 
the cell by simple diffusion (2). Steroid hormone action is 
initiated by the binding of the hormone to a specific 
receptor located within the cell nucleus (except for androgens, 
mineralocorticoids, and corticosteroids, which bind 
to receptors in the cytoplasm and then are transported to 
the nucleus). This binding promotes the dissociation of 
heat shock proteins from the nascent receptor, resulting in 
dimerization and allosteric changes in the receptor, which 
are necessary before binding to DNA can occur (steroid 
response element; see Fig. 2). After several phosphorylation 
steps, the transcriptionally active receptor–DNA 
complex activates recruitment and stabilization of transcriptional 
factors at the target gene promoter, which 
initiates new messenger RNA (mRNA) synthesis. 
Translation of mRNA then occurs, resulting in protein 
synthesis, which is required for the specific hormone 
effect. This process is thought to require 30 minutes or 
more to complete. The biologic response of the target 

SSSSSSSSSRRSSSSRSSAlteredcellularfunctionSerumbindingprotein(s) 
Binding 
BindingNuclearmembraneCellmembraneRNApolymeraseAUGUAATranscriptionProcessingTranslationExportmRNA5¢3¢
SRRETATASSRRNewprotein
n FIG. 2. Schematic model for the mechanism of steroid hormone action. Steroid hormones (S) carried in the bloodstream enter 
the cell by diffusion, a process that may in some circumstances be modulated by interaction between serum steroid “carrier” proteins 
and the cell membrane. Within the cell, the steroids bind to receptors (R) located primarily in the cell nucleus. Binding alters 
the conformational state and protein–protein interactions of the receptor complex. Interaction of the steroid–receptor complex 
with specific response elements on the DNA activates transcription of specific hormone-sensitive genes, resulting in changes in 
RNA and protein synthesis that lead to altered cellular function. Abbreviations: SRE indicates steroid response elements; TATA, 
TATA box complex; mRNA, messenger RNA; AUG and UAA, codon sequences. (O’Malley BW. Molecular pathways of steroid 
receptor action. Biol Reprod 1992;46:163–167) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tissue continues until the hormone–receptor complex dissociates. 
The half-life of different hormone–receptor 
complexes varies, adding to other factors such as receptor 
affinity in determining the potency of a hormone. For 
example, estradiol is a more potent hormone than estriol, 
in part because of the length of time the estradiol–receptor 
complex occupies the DNA binding site. 

This principle of hormone action is also important in 
understanding that regarding biologic effect, the duration 
of exposure to a hormone (eg, by continuous exogenous 
administration or a long half-life of the receptor complex 
or both) is as important as dose. This principle has been 
put into clinical practice in combined estrogen/progestin 
hormone replacement regimens for postmenopausal 
women with a uterus. When the concept of continuous 
(ie, daily) progestin administration was introduced, it was 
reasoned that the dose of progestin could be significantly 
lowered, in comparison to sequential (ie, 10–14 days per 
month) regimens, without diminishing the overall biologic 
effect. In practice, this principle has held true; progestins, 
provided continuously in doses less than half 
those of sequential regimens, have been shown in numerous 
clinical trials to offer adequate endometrial protection 
against estrogen’s proliferative effects. 

Although seemingly detailed and complete, the above 
model of steroid hormone action does not adequately 
explain all observed clinical phenomena. For example, 
this model does not explain how the same hormone can 
produce different biologic responses in different cells. 
This mechanism is of particular importance in understanding 
the potential and observed biologic effects of 
SERMs such as tamoxifen and raloxifene (Fig. 3). For 
example, clinical studies have documented that raloxifene, 
acting through the estrogen receptor, stimulates 
estrogen action in the bone but has an antiestrogen effect 
in the endometrium. Alternatively, tamoxifen stimulates 
estrogen receptors in the endometrium but acts like an 
antiestrogen in the breast. 

A new model of steroid hormone action has emerged. 
This model is based on findings from research produced 
by recent technologic advances in the field of molecular 
biology (3, 4)—mainly information accumulated from 
the study of the estrogen receptor. Data suggest that the 
physiologically diverse effects of estrogens and SERMs 
are due, at least in part, to the existence of two distinct 
estrogen receptors (ER-a 1 and ER-b ) with different 
ligand affinities, tissue distributions, and ligand-stimulated 
effects. Additionally, the essential role of intracellular 
coregulatory proteins (coactivators and corepressors) 
that interact with the receptor–ligand complex via the 
regulatory domain of the receptor (transcription activation 
function areas TAF-1 and TAF-2) is either to stimulate 
or inhibit transcription of DNA. 

This new information is incorporated in the model of 
estrogen hormone action illustrated in Figure 4. This 
model emphasizes the conformational changes that occur 

n FIG. 3. Structure of selective estrogen receptor modula-
tors. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
with hormone binding. Once the hormone is bound to the 
estrogen response element on the target DNA, the conformational 
shape of the hormone–receptor complex is a 
major factor in determining the net effect of coactivator 
and corepressor activity on gene transcription. Hormones 
such as estradiol, tamoxifen, and raloxifene, which all 
produce a biologic effect through the estrogen receptor, 
therefore can have unique biologic actions in different tissues 
by inducing different conformational shapes in the 
estrogen receptor (leading to diverse interactions with 
coactivator and corepressor proteins) and by having varying 
affinities for different estrogen receptor subtypes 
(which in turn are differentially distributed in tissues 
throughout the body). 

Steroid hormones may act by other nongenomic pathways 
(5). This idea is supported by the observation of 
rapid steroid hormone effects (ie, effects occurring in 
seconds to minutes versus 30 minutes or longer) that were 
not blocked by protein synthesis inhibitors or by blocking 
the entrance of the hormone into the cells. Theories on 
the nonclassical mechanisms of steroid hormone action 
include 1) a nonspecific effect on membrane fluidity, 2) 
binding to specific steroid hormone receptors on the cell 
membrane (which may involve activation of a second 
messenger or ionic channel activation), and 3) binding to, 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Cytoplasm 
Nucleus 
strogen Estrogen 
TAF-2 
coactivators 
corepressors 
TAF-2 
coactivators 
corepressors 
TAF-1 
coactivators 
corepressors 
ERE 
Dimerization 
DNA binding 
TAF-1 
coactivators 
corepressors 
n FIG. 4. An updated model of steroid hormone action. In this model, it is the conformational shape of the hormone–receptor 
complex that is the major factor in determining the net effect of coactivator and corepressor activity on gene transcription. 
Abbreviations: ERE indicates estrogen response element; TAF, transcription activation function; hsp, heatshock protein; A/B, reg-
ulatory domain; C, DNA-binding domain; E, hormone-binding domain. (Speroff L, Glass R, Kase N, eds. Clinical gynecologic 
endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1999:60) 
and modulation of, neurotransmitter membrane receptors 
(eg, g -aminobutyric acid type A, or GABAA; see Fig. 5). 
Examples of steroid hormone actions that are thought to 
be mediated by nongenomic pathways include the inhibition 
of uterine smooth muscle contractility by progesterone 
and alterations in the smooth muscle tone of 
coronary vessels by estrogen. Interactions between the 
nongenomic and genomic pathways may occur and have 
been suggested as an explanation for the wide range of 
observed cellular effects initiated by steroid hormones. 

Mutations in the estrogen receptor have now been 
reported in a few phenotypic males with normal male 
sexual development (6). Incomplete epiphyseal closure 
led to tall stature. Endogenous serum gonadotropin and 
estrogen levels were elevated, and neither level decreased 
after exogenous estrogen administration. These mutations 
indicate that estrogen has an important role in 
pubertal maturation in both females and males. 

Growth Factors in Reproductive Cycles 

The classic models of gonadotropin and steroid-controlled 
cellular growth and differentiation are inadequate 
in explaining the intricacies of the ovarian and endometrial 
cycles. To better explain observed phenomena such 
as recruitment and selection of the dominant follicle in 
the ovary, the concept of autocrine and paracrine regula


tors has been proposed. The carefully timed and regionalized 
expression of these putative principles may allow 
for the great diversity in cellular response noted in tissues 
that are apparently afforded equitable gonadotropic or 
steroidal hormone exposure. Currently, a broad family of 
proteins, designated as growth factors, are being investigated. 
Some growth factors currently under investigation 
include basic fibroblast growth factor, vascular endothelial 
growth factor, transforming growth factor b (TGFb ), 
epidermal growth factor, and the insulinlike growth factor 
(IGF) system. The IGF system comprises ligands (IGF-I 
and IGF-II), which are small polypeptides with structural 
homology to proinsulin-binding proteins. These binding 
proteins are thought to suppress IGF function in most cases. 

Recent evidence suggests that growth factors exert 
their effects through multistep, complex signaling pathways, 
with cross-talk between the pathways, allowing for 
many sites of regulation. The final common pathway 
involves a change in gene expression and protein synthesis 
leading to a specific biologic response. Impeding 
progress in understanding these mechanisms is the fact 
that signal transduction pathways may be tissue specific. 
For example, pathways that use cells of renal origin may 
not be physiologically significant in the ovary. 

Although no known unifying model has been developed 
in the reproductive tract, it is believed that the signal 
transduction pathway of some growth factors begins with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Activatesintracellular steroidreceptor 
ActivatessecondmessengersProtein 
synthesisDNALigandinsertion613245Steroidreceptor 
eand/or EGF/IGFSteroidreceptor 
GABAAreceptor 
Ca++
Ca++Cl–
Cl–
n FIG. 5. Classical and nonclassical modes of action of steroid hormones. Abbreviations: EGF indicates epidermal growth factor; 
IGF, insulinlike growth factor; GABAA, g -aminobutyric acid type A. (Reprinted from Journal of Steroid Biochemical and 
Molecular Biology, Vol. 52, Brann DW, Hendry LEB, Mahesh VB. Emerging diversities in the mechanism of action of steroid hormones. 
Pages 113–133, Copyright 1995, with permission from Elsevier Science) 
ligand binding to a cell surface receptor, followed by activation 
of a protein kinase (eg, tyrosine kinase for IGF-I 
receptors). After this step, many intracellular processes 
have been proposed. Recently, the core TGFb pathway 
was described, and the steps in signal transduction from 
ligand to transcription were detailed. An integral part of 
this system are the Smads (coined from the developmental 
roots of the Caenorhabditis elegans sma genes and the 
Drosophila mad genes, homologues to the genes encoding 
the family of proteins mediating TGFb action). The 
Smad family of proteins are classified as 1) receptor-specific 
Smads that interact with, and are directly phosphorylated 
by, a particular type I receptor; 2) Smads that 
act as common mediators of TGFb signaling, interacting 
with all receptor-activated Smads; and 3) inhibitory 
Smads, which competitively inhibit Smad signaling (7, 
8). In this model, TGFb activates the cell surface receptor, 
the activated receptors phosphorylate and assemble 
cytoplasmic Smad proteins, and Smad complexes move to 
the nucleus as transcription regulators (Fig. 6). 
Elucidation of this pathway is expected to have far-reaching 
clinical implications, as mutations in the TGFb signaling 
pathway have been implicated in human 
malignancies. For example, missense mutations in Smad4 
have been associated with ovarian cancer. 

ENDOCRINE ASSAYS: 
THEIR APPROPRIATE USE AND 
INTERPRETATION 

Measurements of steroid hormones and of pituitary peptides 
are commonly obtained by obstetrician–gynecologists 
caring for women with reproductive disorders. The 
clinician always must interpret test results in the context 
of clinical findings, keeping in mind that no assay has 
perfect sensitivity or specificity for a given condition. In 
addition, false results may occur through laboratory error 
or through errors inherent in a given assay system. 
Although most clinically important assays are now very 
accurate, there can be significant differences in measurements 
among laboratories. Therefore, clinicians should 
become familiar with test results of one laboratory and 
send all patient specimens to that laboratory, if possible. 
This protocol is particularly important when a clinician is 
following levels of a given hormone over time. 

Steroid Hormones 

Most laboratories now measure steroid hormone levels by 
immunometric assays. These assays use two antibodies to 
the hormone of interest. The first antibody is coated on 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
n FIG. 6. Smad signaling downstream of transforming growth factor b (TGFb ) superfamily members. TGFb ligands bind two 
cell surface receptors, the type I and type II receptors, each with serine/threonine kinase activity. Upon ligand binding, the 
type I receptor is phosphorylated at the GS domain by the constitutively active type II receptor and thus is activated. A receptorspecific 
Smad (R-Smad) is recruited to the phosphorylated type I receptor and in turn is phosphorylated. In TGFb signaling, SARA 
(for Smad anchor for receptor activation) localizes the R-Smad, Smad2, to the cell membrane to allow rapid association with the 
type I receptor after ligand binding. Once phosphorylated, R-Smad is released from the receptor complex. In the cytoplasm, 
R-Smad binds a common mediator of TGFb signaling (Co-Smad), and this complex translocates to the nucleus. Inside the nucleus, 
the Smad complex, alone or in combination with other molecules, regulates transcription. Inhibitory Smads (I-Smads) inhibit 
TGFb signaling by preventing R-Smad and Co-Smad interaction. Although depicted as a monomer, the Smads are thought to exist 
as homotrimers. (Rooke HM, Crosier KE. The Smad proteins and TGFb signalling: uncovering a pathway critical in cancer. 
Pathology 2001;33:73–84. With permission of Taylor and Francis Ltd. Web site: http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals) 
the surface of the test tube and “captures” the hormone Because immunometric assays use two antibodies, 
being measured. A second antibody, labeled by an most commercially available assays are very accurate, 
enzyme or chemiluminescent agent, is then added to the with a high sensitivity and specificity. However, errors 
test tube. The second antibody (the tracer antibody) can occur, and unexpected values that do not fit the clinattaches 
to a different site on the hormone than the first ical picture should be investigated by repeating the assay 
antibody and marks the previously captured hormone. on the same sample or a by testing a new sample. 
Thus, a “sandwich” of antibody–hormone–antibody is Discrepant results between two assays may require even 
formed, and the amount of hormone present in a sample a third assay for confirmation of the “true” result. 
is proportional to the amount of labeled or tracer antibody Usually, steroid hormones in blood are measured 
present in the test tube after removing the unattached or for clinical purposes. Recently, salivary steroid assays 
free antibody. The amount of tracer antibody present can have been developed for experimental use (9–11). 
be detected by measuring chemiluminescence. Measurement of steroids in saliva has several advantages 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

over measurement in serum. Multiple samples can be 
obtained easily and painlessly. In addition, salivary 
steroids may correlate with the free, or biologically 
active, hormone, because steroids bound to proteins do 
not diffuse into saliva. Steroid hormone concentrations in 
saliva are approximately 0.5–2% of concentrations found 
in serum, but individual variation is high, making the correlation 
between salivary and serum measurements less 
than ideal. Little clinical experience with salivary measurements 
is available to guide the physician in interpreting 
results. At this time, salivary hormone determinations 
have not been proven to be clinically useful. 

ESTRADIOL 

Estradiol is secreted into the circulation by the developing 
ovarian follicle, the corpus luteum, and the placenta 
during pregnancy. The estradiol level is most useful for 
assessing ovarian function and for monitoring ovarian 
follicular development in patients undergoing assisted 
fertility procedures. 

In the female, estradiol levels are very low prior to 
puberty. During the reproductive years, estradiol is produced 
at a rate of 100–300 m g/d, with typical estradiol 
levels fluctuating between approximately 40 pg/mL and 
400 pg/mL. The absolute concentrations of estradiol are 
extremely low when compared with many other steroid hormones 
commonly present at much higher concentrations, 
measured in nanograms per milliliter. After menopause, 
estradiol levels are typically in the range of 10–20 pg/mL. 
During pregnancy, estradiol levels are as much as 100-fold 
higher than they are in a typical menstrual cycle (12). 

Approximately 1–3% of estradiol in blood is not protein 
bound, 40% is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG), and the remainder is bound to albumin. All 
currently available immunoassays use reagents that 
release estradiol from serum-binding proteins and therefore 
measure total estradiol present in the specimen. 
Estradiol levels are measured by immunoassay kits, 
which are highly sensitive and specific for estradiol 
because monoclonal antibodies are used. Nevertheless, 
there is some cross-reactivity with other estrogens. 

The major clinical use of estradiol measurement is in 
monitoring follicular development during ovulation 
induction procedures in infertile women (13). Estradiol 
measurements help the clinician gauge the degree to 
which follicles are developing in response to gonadotropin 
injections. Estradiol levels typically more than 
double every 2 days while women are receiving gonadotropin 
injections. Very low levels of estradiol after 
gonadotropin injection suggest poor ovarian follicular 
development, often resulting in cancellation of the cycle. 
In contrast, extremely high levels of estradiol suggest 
that multiple follicles are developing and the woman is at 
risk for multiple birth, as well as ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. One mature ovarian follicle typically 
results in serum levels of estradiol ranging from 
250 pg/mL to 350 pg/mL. Most often, estradiol levels 

are measured in conjunction with transvaginal ultrasonography 
to determine the responsiveness of the ovary 
to gonadotropins. 

Other rare uses of estradiol assessment include the 
evaluation of patients with precocious puberty, assessment 
of menopausal status, and evaluation of patients 
with suspected granulosa cell tumors. Menopause is 
associated with low estradiol levels, whereas patients 
with precocious puberty and granulosa cell tumors have 
inappropriately high estradiol levels compared with the 
reference range. Measurements of FSH generally are 
more clinically useful for the evaluation of menopausal 
status than are estradiol measurements. Estradiol levels 
are not useful for monitoring hormone replacement therapy 
in menopausal women. A variety of estrogenic compounds 
are administered as replacement therapy, many of 
which are measured only incompletely by specific assays 
for estradiol. 

ESTRIOL 

The major indication for measuring serum estriol is as 
one component of the “triple screen” of maternal serum 
testing for certain birth defects (14). Midtrimester pregnancy 
screening with plasma unconjugated serum estriol 
and hCG augments the screening efficiency and validity 
of gestational age–adjusted alpha-fetoprotein levels as a 
biochemical marker to identify pregnant women who are 
at increased risk for fetal aneuploidy. Estriol assays are 
performed by immunoassays, and several commercial 
kits are available and approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration for clinical use. 

Historically, serial plasma or urinary estriol determinations 
were widely used as biochemical markers for 
fetal placental well-being. Estriol is the principal circulating 
estrogen in late pregnancy. The basis of monitoring 
the fetus with serial estriol determinations is that if either 
the fetus or the placenta becomes compromised, production 
of the hormone will be expected to decrease. 
Unfortunately, however, by the time estriol concentrations 
are reduced, the fetus is often severely compromised. 
The initial test monitored 24-hour urinary estriol 
levels, but this test was supplanted by radioimmunoassays 
of plasma estriol. Several groups of investigators 
have demonstrated the close association of abnormal 
estriol profiles and poor perinatal outcome. Estriol determinations 
have largely been replaced by biophysical testing, 
including nonstress tests, contraction stress tests, and 
biophysical profiles performed via ultrasonography. 
Therefore, estriol assays seldom are used clinically today 
to determine fetal well-being. 

PROGESTERONE 

Progesterone is produced in the corpus luteum and in the 
placenta during pregnancy. Therefore, the two main reasons 
for measuring serum progesterone are to determine 
whether a woman has ovulated and whether an early 
pregnancy is normal (13). 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Of circulating progesterone, 80% is bound to albumin, 
18% is bound to corticosteroid-binding globulin, less 
than 1% is bound to SHBG, and 2% is free. All currently 
available progesterone immunoassays use releasing 
agents to release progesterone from serum-binding proteins 
and measure the total progesterone present in the 
specimen. 

Progesterone levels fluctuate depending on the time of 
the cycle. In the follicular phase, serum progesterone levels 
typically are less than 1 ng/mL. Following ovulation, 
the corpus luteum produces progesterone at a rate of 
20–30 mg/d, and serum progesterone levels range from 3 
ng/mL to 20 ng/mL. Therefore, in most laboratories, progesterone 
levels of less than 3 ng/mL indicate that ovulation 
has not occurred, and progesterone levels higher than 
3 ng/mL indicate ovulation. In pregnancy, about 100 mg 
of progesterone is produced daily during the first 
trimester. Progesterone is synthesized predominantly by 
the corpus luteum until 7 weeks of gestation, when placental 
production becomes predominant. 

Some clinicians have used serum progesterone levels 
to determine whether a woman with infertility or recurrent 
pregnancy loss has a luteal phase defect (12). 
However, the consensus is that a single midluteal-phase 
progesterone measurement is insufficient evidence upon 
which to judge the adequacy of the luteal phase. The reason 
is that progesterone levels are subject to great variation 
during the luteal phase because of pulsatile secretion. 
In addition, there is a poor correlation between serum 
progesterone levels and histologic changes in the 
endometrium determined by biopsy. Most physicians still 
view the endometrial biopsy as being the standard for 
diagnosing luteal phase defect. The definition of luteal 
phase defect is controversial, however, and endometrial 
biopsy is very uncomfortable and expensive. Therefore, 
many clinicians use the serum progesterone level, despite 
its limitations, to evaluate a possible hormone deficiency 
in progesterone that may be contributing to infertility or 
recurrent pregnancy loss. 

Serum progesterone levels can aid in the differentiation 
of normal and abnormal pregnancies. This measurement 
can be used as an adjunct to hCG levels and 
ultrasonography. A serum progesterone level of 25 ng/mL 
nearly always is associated with a normal intrauterine 
pregnancy. Conversely, a serum progesterone level of 25 
ng/mL is rarely associated with an ectopic pregnancy 
(1–2% of cases). Values of less than 5 ng/mL are nearly 
always associated with nonviable pregnancies, including 
ectopic pregnancies and pregnancies destined for miscarriage. 
Viable pregnancies are found in only 0.16% of 
cases when the progesterone level is less than 5 ng/mL 
(15). Serum progesterone levels are usually between 
these extremes and are not useful in determining whether 
or not a pregnancy is viable. Thus, the serum progesterone 
level may be used as one indicator of the viability 
of a pregnancy in the first trimester, although most test 
results fall between the extremes. 

TESTOSTERONE 

The primary reason for measuring the testosterone level 
in women is in the evaluation of hirsutism and virilization 
(see “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other 
Androgen Excess Disorders”) (16). The primary goal in 
determining the testosterone level is to rule out androgensecreting 
tumors, which typically are associated with 
very high levels of testosterone (>200 ng/dL). 

In women, testosterone is produced by the ovaries, to 
a small extent by the adrenal cortex, and by peripheral tissues 
through conversion of androstenedione to testosterone. 
Approximately half of the circulating testosterone 
is derived from peripheral conversion of androstenedione. 
Prepubertal testosterone levels are very low, and there is 
a significant increase in testosterone levels in women 
around the time of puberty. Of course, this increase is 
much smaller than is found in males. There is a recognized 
circadian rhythm of total serum testosterone levels, 
with highest concentrations found in early morning and 
lowest concentrations in late evening. Slightly higher 
testosterone levels also are found at midcycle. However, 
these minor variations are not clinically important in the 
evaluation of a patient with hirsutism. Several years after 
menopause, testosterone levels are reduced by as much as 
15%, primarily as a result of a decrease in the production 
of androstenedione and peripheral conversion to testosterone. 
Ovarian testosterone production is near normal 
during the first 5 years after menopause, but it declines 
thereafter. 

Testosterone circulates in blood bound to three proteins. 
In women, approximately 60% of testosterone is 
bound tightly to SHBG. Most of the remaining testosterone 
is bound to albumin, and a very small amount is 
bound to cortisol-binding globulin. Only approximately 
1% of the total circulating testosterone in women 
remains unbound, or free. There is controversy as to 
whether protein-bound testosterone molecules are biologically 
active. However, most investigators feel that 
unbound, or free, testosterone is likely to be the most 
biologically active. 

Testosterone can be measured as either total testosterone 
or free testosterone (16). Total testosterone measurements 
include all testosterone, both free and protein 
bound, whereas free testosterone measurements attempt 
to better estimate the biologically active, or free, testosterone. 
A variety of methods are used for determining 
free testosterone levels. Traditionally, the level of free 
testosterone is calculated indirectly by first measuring 
total testosterone and then determining the percentage of 
testosterone that is free in blood. The free testosterone 
level is then determined by multiplying the percentage of 
free testosterone by the total testosterone. The methods 
for determining the percentage of free testosterone, however, 
are time-consuming and expensive. 

More recently, researchers have directly measured free 
testosterone through radioimmunoassay techniques using 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

antibody-coated tubes. Other researchers have devised 
mathematical models for estimating free testosterone levels. 
The androgen index is the ratio of total testosterone 
to SHBG in the blood ´ 100; it is an indicator of free 
testosterone. Another measure, derived free testosterone, 
also relies on the measurement of total testosterone and 
SHBG. These measures are then used in a mathematical 
formula derived to calculate free testosterone. In comparisons 
of the different methods of determining free testosterone 
levels, the differences in diagnostic discrimination 
between the assays are usually small. No one method for 
measuring free testosterone has been shown to be superior. 

There is controversy as to whether total or free testosterone 
should be measured when evaluating women with 
hirsutism. The normal range of total plasma testosterone 
levels is typically between 20 ng/dL and 80 ng/dL. Total 
testosterone levels will be elevated in approximately 
50–70% of women with anovulation and hirsutism. Even 
in very hirsute women, testosterone levels are typically 
2-fold to 10-fold lower than they are in normal men. 
Many investigators have shown that a greater proportion 
of hirsute patients have an abnormal androgen status 
when free testosterone, rather than total testosterone, is 
measured. This is true whether the free testosterone is 
measured directly by assay or determined by mathematical 
derivation. However, measuring free testosterone is 
more expensive than measuring total testosterone. Most 
clinicians feel that the purpose of measuring testosterone 
is to exclude an androgen-secreting tumor. This purpose 
is fulfilled by using the total testosterone assay. If the 
total testosterone level exceeds 200 ng/dL, the presence 
of an androgen-producing tumor must be suspected and 
further evaluation done (17). Because this level is well 
above the normal range for testosterone, fine discrimination 
of the free testosterone levels is unnecessary. It 
should be noted that the rare patient who has an acute 
rapid course of virilizing symptoms must also have an 
androgen-producing tumor ruled out even if the testosterone 
level is below the cutoff value of 200 ng/dL. 
Furthermore, the increased sensitivity of the free testosterone 
assay in patients with hirsutism is unlikely to be 
clinically relevant, because patients are typically treated 
with the same medications for their hirsutism regardless 
of the results of the testosterone assay. 

In general, pregnant women should not undergo 
testosterone testing. Testosterone levels are significantly 
elevated during normal pregnancy. Levels are greater than 
100 ng/dL in the first trimester and reach up to 500–800 
ng/dL by term. This is thought to be mainly due to 
increases in SHBG as a result of the stimulatory effect of 
increased estrogen production during pregnancy. 

A recent Committee Opinion from ACOG has concluded 
that measurement of free or total testosterone levels 
for diagnosis in women with sexual dysfunction or for 
monitoring of androgen therapy is not clinically useful 
(18). Sexual dysfunction—and decreased libido in particular—
is a complex disorder with multiple etiologies. A 

relationship between libido and hormonal changes has 
been suspected for many years, particularly with 
decreased libido in menopause in light of declining ovarian 
function. However, in an observational study of 201 
women who had undergone natural menopause, serum 
testosterone concentrations did not correlate with libido 
or any other aspect of sexual function (19). Furthermore, 
despite the steady decline in serum testosterone concentrations 
that occur with age, survey data indicate a greater 
incidence of sexual dysfunction among younger women. 
Therefore, reduced testosterone levels have not been 
clearly associated with reduced libido, and measurements 
are not clinically useful. 

Androgens do consistently increase libido in women 
when prescribed at doses that produce supraphysiologic 
blood levels (20, 21). However, physiologic levels of 
androgen replacement therapy have not been shown to 
affect libido consistently. Formulations currently available 
in the United States generally achieve superphysiologic 
serum levels that are at least two times the 
premenopausal range of values. Androgen therapy has 
been prescribed for sexual dysfunction for many years, 
but data regarding its long-term safety and efficacy are 
lacking. Patients most likely to benefit from androgen 
therapy are young women who have had bilateral 
oophorectomy. Although other women may benefit from 
a trial of androgen therapy, the lack of long-term and 
definitive data should lead to a cautious approach. 

17a -HYDROXYPROGESTERONE 

The primary indication for measuring the 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is to evaluate a patient with hirsutism. 
Approximately 1–5% of women who report hirsutism 
have nonclassic or late-onset adrenal hyperplasia (12). 
This condition is due to a mild deficiency in the 21hydroxylase 
enzyme. Patients present with relatively 
severe hirsutism that begins at a young age, typically at 
the time of puberty. These patients are very difficult to 
distinguish from patients with the more common polycystic 
ovary syndrome (PCOS). Because patients with 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia may be treated differently 
than those with PCOS, determination of the 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
level is recommended for the evaluation 
of patients with severe hirsutism. 

Screening for 21-hydroxylase–deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia is best performed by measuring 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
levels basally (without stimulation). 
If a patient is not ovulating at all, the blood sample 
can be drawn at any time, or after a withdrawal bleed is 
induced with a progestogen. If the basal 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is less than 2 ng/mL, the patient most 
likely does not have adrenal hyperplasia. Alternatively, if 
the 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is greater than 2 
ng/mL and it is certain that the patient was not studied 
during the luteal phase of the cycle, a corticotropin stimulation 
test should be performed. This test consists of the 


administration of 0.25 mg of synthetic corticotropin 
(adrenocorticotropic hormone, or ACTH [cosyntropin]) 
as an intravenous bolus. Blood samples for 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
should be obtained before and 30–60 minutes 
after the administration of corticotropin. The 
stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is normally as 
high as 4 ng/mL. Stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
levels in excess of 10–12 ng/mL are considered diagnostic 
of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. 

Blood levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone are also 
used to diagnose congenital adrenal hyperplasia in infants 
with ambiguous genitalia. These patients would typically 
have much higher levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
than do women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, 
because the 21-hydroxylase deficiency is more severe in 
these patients. Levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone also 
are measured by endocrinologists treating patients with 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is used as an indicator of the adequacy of corticosteroid 
hormone replacement. 

DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE SULFATE 

The primary indication for determining a dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate (DHEAS) level is for evaluating 
women with hirsutism (22). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 
is the most abundant product of the adrenal gland, 
and in a healthy woman it is synthesized exclusively in 
the adrenal cortex. In men, approximately 5% of DHEAS 
is secreted by the testes. The upper limit of normal in 
most laboratories is 350 m g/dL, but because of variation 
among laboratories, attention must be given to the normal 
values of the laboratory. 

The half-life of DHEAS is long, at 10–20 hours, and it 
is strongly bound to albumin in the bloodstream. Because 
of the long half-life, diurnal variation is very limited, and 
DHEAS levels can be obtained at any time of the day and 
at any time during the menstrual cycle. 

Plasma concentrations of DHEAS are age dependent. 
In women, DHEAS levels reach their maximum between 
ages 20 years and 40 years. Concentrations decline after 
age 40 years. By the time women are in their 70s, 
DHEAS levels are only 20–30% of the peak concentrations 
that are achieved in young adulthood. The exact 
physiologic role of DHEAS is unknown. 

Levels of DHEAS typically are determined in the evaluation 
of women with hirsutism. Because this hormone is 
synthesized exclusively in the adrenal gland, it is thought 
to be a good marker for adrenal androgen production. 
Classically, DHEAS levels greater than 700 m g/dL suggest 
an adrenal tumor, and thus imaging of the adrenal 
gland is required. Levels of DHEAS are sometimes modestly 
elevated in patients with PCOS. When DHEAS levels 
are normal, adrenal disease is unlikely. The exception 
to this rule is late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
Patients with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia often have 
normal levels of DHEAS, so the measurement of 17a 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

hydroxyprogesterone is essential in evaluating the patient 
with hirsutism. Recently, some reproductive endocrinologists 
have advised against obtaining DHEAS levels in the 
routine evaluation of hirsutism, given that very high levels 
are extremely uncommon. The rare adrenal tumors 
that would produce high levels of DHEAS often are associated 
with elevations in testosterone levels and so would 
be detected by an assay of testosterone. 

ANDROSTENEDIONE 

The primary reason for the measurement of androstenedione 
is the evaluation of hirsutism. Androstenedione is 
an androgenic hormone produced in both the adrenal 
gland and the gonads. Because it responds to both stimulation 
by corticotropin in the adrenal gland and stimulation 
by LH in the ovary, androstenedione is characterized 
by both diurnal and menstrual cycle variation. It is highest 
in the morning and shows a midcycle or ovulatory 
peak in women of reproductive age. In women, essentially 
equivalent amounts of androstenedione are produced 
by the ovary and the adrenal gland throughout the reproductive 
years, although levels decline with advancing age 
in both sexes. Elevated androstenedione levels often are 
found in women with hirsutism and virilization caused by 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, PCOS, ovarian stromal 
hyperthecosis, and adrenal and ovarian virilizing tumors. 
Androstenedione can serve as a prehormone for the production 
of both testosterone and estrogens. Because 
androstenedione is produced in both the adrenal gland 
and the ovary, determination of androstenedione levels by 
immunoassay does not aid greatly in the differential diagnosis 
of the causes of hirsutism. Therefore, measurements 
of androstenedione are of less clinical utility than 
determination of either 17a -hydroxyprogesterone or 
testosterone levels in the evaluation of hirsutism and virilization. 


5a -ANDROSTANE-3a , 17b -DIOL GLUCURONIDE 
The measurement of 5a -androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide 
has no clinical use, but it has been used in studies 
evaluating the causes of hirsutism. Testosterone is 
converted to the highly potent androgen dihydrotestosterone 
by the enzyme 5a -reductase at the level of the hair 
follicle (12). Dihydrotestosterone binds to androgen 
receptors, stimulating growth in the hair follicle. 
Dihydrotestosterone is then metabolized, and 5a androstane-
3a ,17b -diol glucuronide is a stable metabolite 
of dihydrotestosterone. Therefore, 5a -androstane-3a , 
17b -diol glucuronide may reflect the paracrine activity of 
the hormone dihydrotestosterone and serve as a marker of 
5a -reductase activity. Some investigators have found elevated 
levels of 5a -androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide, 
and normal levels of other serum androgens in women 
with idiopathic hirsutism. This finding suggests that some 
hirsutism is secondary to high 5a -reductase activity in 
the skin. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

This assay should not be used clinically, because values 
in hirsute women overlap the normal range by about 
20%. In addition, the results of this test do not affect the 
ultimate diagnosis of, and therapy for, hirsutism. 

CORTISOL 

Gynecologists most often order cortisol measurements to 
rule out Cushing’s syndrome (23). Cortisol is the primary 
corticosteroid secreted by the adrenal gland. It regulates 
carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism; 
indirectly affects blood pressure; has antiinflammatory 
effects; and has a generalized excitatory effect on the nervous 
system. It is under the control of corticotropin and is 
normally suppressed when exogenous corticosteroids 
such as dexamethasone or prednisone are administered. 
Cortisol secretion has a marked diurnal variation in normal 
people, with peak levels of cortisol at about 8:00 AM 
and the nadir of cortisol secretion at about midnight. 
Patients with endogenous hypercortisolism of any cause 
have a disrupted diurnal rhythm of cortisol secretion. In 
fact, one can consider Cushing’s syndrome as a failure to 
suppress cortisol in the evening, because there is considerable 
overlap of the 8:00 AM cortisol level with that of 
normal subjects. 

The clinical suspicion of endogenous hypercortisolism 
must be confirmed biochemically by measuring 24-hour 
urinary free cortisol (UFC). The reference range of UFC 
depends on the type of assay employed. Traditionally, 
laboratories have used a solvent extraction of cortisol 
from the urine followed by either radioimmunoassay or 
competitive protein binding. The upper range of normal 
in these types of assays is usually 80–100 g every 24 
hours. Recently, the introduction of high-performance 
liquid chromatography has provided a more specific 
means of measuring UFC. Normal subjects have a UFC 
of less than 50 g every 24 hours by this method. 

Determinations of UFC have been shown to have a 
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of 95–100% and 
94–98%, respectively (24). However, elevated 24-hour 
UFC can be observed in patients with depression, so the 
specificity of UFC may not be optimal in all clinical circumstances. 
If UFC is measured by high-performance 
liquid chromatography, a metabolite of carbamazepine 
reacts with cortisol and causes spuriously high readings 
for cortisol. Another potential confounding problem in 
the assessment of UFC is urine volume. If patients have 
extremely high fluid intake and urine output, UFC values 
can be falsely elevated. (Also see “Adrenal Gland 
Disorders.”) 

The overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test 
also is used as a screening test for Cushing’s syndrome. 
In this test, 1 mg of dexamethasone is administered orally 
between 11:00 PM and midnight, and blood is drawn at 

8:00 AM the next morning to determine a plasma cortisol 
level. A value of less than 5 g/dL rules out Cushing’s syndrome. 
Cushing’s syndrome is unlikely with intermediate 
values between 5 g/dL and 10 g/dL; however, a value 
higher than 10 g/dL is virtually diagnostic of adrenal 
hyperfunction. The false-positive rate may be higher than 
10% in obese individuals and patients who are depressed. 
Some researchers have reported that patients with mild 
corticotropin-dependent Cushing’s syndrome demonstrate 
unusual sensitivity to dexamethasone suppression, 
leading to false-negative results. Therefore, the 24-hour 
UFC test appears to be the screening test of choice among 
medical endocrinologists. 

Cortisol concentrations in saliva are highly correlated 
with levels found in blood, and the results are independent 
of the rate of salivary flow. Salivary concentrations 
are much lower than those found in urine or serum. 
Cortisol in the saliva is stable for at least 1 week, making 
home collection possible. Despite the convincing demonstration 
of the correlation between salivary cortisol and 
urine and plasma cortisol, use of salivary cortisol measurement 
is not yet clinically widespread. 

If biochemical hypercortisolism is confirmed by one 
of these screening tests, referral to a medical endocrinologist 
is warranted for the establishment of the etiology of 
Cushing’s syndrome. Cushing’s syndrome may originate 
by a variety of mechanisms. The condition may result 
from pituitary overproduction of corticotropin (Cushing’s 
disease), by ectopic corticotropin production from 
tumors, by autonomous cortisol secretion from the 
adrenal gland and ovarian tumors, or by secretion of corticotropin-
releasing hormone by a tumor. These causes 
are differentiated by use of the high-dose dexamethasone 
suppression test for cortisol (the classic Liddle test), corticotropin 
measurements, and imaging studies. These 
tests are probably best performed by practitioners who 
are familiar with the differential diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome. 

Protein Hormones 

PROLACTIN 

The indications for measuring serum prolactin include 
amenorrhea; oligomenorrhea; galactorrhea; and infertility, 
particularly if caused by a luteal phase defect (25). 
Hyperprolactinemia reduces GnRH pulsatility, resulting 
in anovulation, estrogen deficiency, and inadequate luteal 
phase progesterone production if ovulation does occur. 
The primary objective in measuring the serum prolactin 
level is to rule out a prolactin-secreting tumor of the pituitary 
gland, ie, a prolactinoma. 

From a practical standpoint, blood for determining 
prolactin levels can be drawn at any time of the day and 
at any time in the menstrual cycle to establish whether a 
patient has hyperprolactinemia. However, prolactin is 
secreted episodically, so some prolactin levels may be 
slightly above the upper limit of normal established for a 
given laboratory. Prolactin is commonly increased in 
response to sleep and to the ingestion of food. Thus, the 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

finding of a minimally elevated level of prolactin in the 
blood requires confirmation in a second sample. 

A normal level of serum prolactin (<25 ng/mL in 
most laboratories) essentially rules out a prolactinoma 
as a cause of a patient’s amenorrhea or galactorrhea. 
Elevated levels of prolactin first require the clinician to 
rule out primary hypothyroidism, which is accomplished 
most easily by simultaneously measuring basal 
TSH. A prolactinoma or other hypothalamic or pituitary 
tumor then must be eliminated as a cause of the 
disorder. The frequency with which one finds a prolactinoma 
will increase with increasing basal levels of 
prolactin. 

If hyperprolactinemia not due to hypothyroidism is 
established, radiologic imaging of the hypothalamus and 
pituitary is indicated. The exact imaging modality to be 
used is debated, but most radiologists prefer magnetic 
resonance imaging. This modality, with gadolinium 
enhancement, generally provides the best anatomic detail 
to diagnose both small prolactinomas and non–prolactinsecreting 
tumors that may be the cause of hyperprolactinemia. 


Although one must rule out a prolactinoma as the 
cause of hyperprolactinemia, a wide variety of other conditions 
in addition to hypothyroidism may lead to hyperprolactinemia. 
Medications, including antidepressants 
and antihypertensive agents, can lead to mild increases in 
prolactin levels. Thus, a careful history of medication 
intake is required when evaluating patients with hyperprolactinemia. 


Another cause of hyperprolactinemia is pregnancy. 
Obviously, pregnancy also can be a cause of amenorrhea 
and thus should be ruled out before determining a prolactin 
level. Because of the physiologic increase of prolactin 
during pregnancy, periodic checking of prolactin 
levels during pregnancy to monitor potential growth of a 
prolactinoma is of no benefit; therefore, there is no role for 
the measurement of prolactin levels during pregnancy. 

A variety of stimulation and suppression tests have 
been evaluated to try to differentiate between prolactinomas 
and other causes of hyperprolactinemia. These tests 
have been found to yield nonspecific results and have 
been largely abandoned in attempting to determine the 
cause of hyperprolactinemia. Instead, basal prolactin levels 
are measured, followed by radiologic imaging of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary axis if hyperprolactinemia is 
found. 

There are limitations to the prolactin assay kits commonly 
used because of heterogeneity in this peptide hormone. 
Prolactin circulates in various forms with 
structural modifications. The various forms are associated 
with varying bioactivity and immunoreactivity. 
Therefore, prolactin levels determined by immunoassay 
may not correlate with symptoms (eg, galactorrhea) in all 
cases. When following prolactin levels over time, it is 
important that assays be performed in the same laborato


ry, because there can be significant interlaboratory variability. 


FOLLICLE-STIMULATING HORMONE 

Measurements of FSH are widely used by gynecologists 
for the assessment of ovarian function, as well as the evaluation 
of primary amenorrhea and disorders of pubertal 
development (26). Before physicians can use FSH measurements 
for these clinical purposes, they must understand 
the natural variations in FSH levels that are seen 
throughout a woman’s lifetime. At birth, FSH levels are 
very low in response to the high steroid hormone levels of 
pregnancy. Following delivery, FSH levels rise rapidly 
over the first few weeks of life before declining to very 
low levels at about 4 years of age. At the onset of puberty, 
FSH levels begin to rise in response to pulsatile GnRH 
stimulation. Initially, GnRH stimulation occurs only during 
sleep. As puberty progresses, the pulsatile GnRH 
secretion becomes more regular and a pulsatile pattern of 
FSH secretion becomes established throughout the day. 
Although the mean plasma FSH concentrations rise progressively 
during puberty, the absolute changes are not 
large, and the overall increase is only about twofold in 
comparison with prepubertal values. 

During the reproductive life of a woman, plasma FSH 
levels undergo well-defined changes during the menstrual 
cycle. The FSH levels rise during the late luteal and 
early follicular phases and are followed by a decline that 
is interrupted at midcycle by a small surge that coincides 
with the preovulatory LH peak. Following menopause, 
FSH values increase 10-fold to 20-fold compared with 
premenopausal values, with the maximal levels found 
1–3 years after menopause. The years of the menopause 
transition are characterized by wide fluctuations in FSH 
values, and occasionally FSH values in the menopausal 
range are seen. 

Follicle-stimulating hormone can be measured by a 
variety of means, including bioassays and immunoassays. 
Bioassays are assays designed to measure the biologic 
activity of FSH in the blood. In general, they are cumbersome 
and insensitive, and they are not used clinically. 
Immunoassays are used for the clinical determination of 
FSH for diagnosis and in physiologic studies because 
they are rapid, readily available, inexpensive, and sensitive. 
Newer assays are based on monoclonal antibody 
technology. Most commercially available assays are 
“sandwich” assays using combinations of monoclonal or 
monoclonal–polyclonal antibodies. Because these sandwich 
assays rely on the detection of two different antigens 
on the FSH molecule, they are generally more 
specific and precise than one-site assays. 

Although assays of apparently high specificity are 
available, there is still considerable variability among the 
results of different assays for FSH. The reasons for such 
variations have been ascribed to differences in calibration 
in assay kits, cross-reactivity between gonadotropin sub



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

units, and nonlinearity between kit standards and internationally 
available standards for FSH. 

In an effort to standardize the results from various 
immunoassays, a number of standards for FSH measurement 
have been devised. The first preparation was found 
to be toxic in some bioassays. Subsequently, a second 
preparation was evaluated and became the Second 
International Reference Preparation. International standards 
for FSH were also established by the World Health 
Organization and were calibrated in terms of the Second 
International Reference Preparation. 

There is, at present, no single reference standard for 
the determination of FSH levels. The FSH values measured 
in different laboratories, using different assays and 
perhaps different standards, can vary. Therefore, clinicians 
should know the type of assay used for their 
patients and understand that there may be significant 
interlaboratory variability in FSH measurements. 

The primary use of FSH measurements is for assessment 
of gonadal function. Through classic endocrine 
feedback pathways, an elevated level of FSH indicates 
reduced gonadal function or gonadal failure; a normal 
serum concentration of FSH suggests normal gonadal 
function. A low serum FSH concentration may indicate a 
problem at the level of the hypothalamus or pituitary, or 
it may indicate a prepubertal state when evaluating a 
patient with delayed puberty. 

Persistently elevated FSH values above the 
menopausal range (>20 IU/L in most laboratories) pro-
vide conclusive evidence of ovarian failure. In the 
menopausal transition, it is common to see elevated FSH 
values on one occasion followed by FSH values in the 
normal range on a different day. In other words, there is 
typically great fluctuation in FSH values during this period. 
FSH levels are valuable in diagnosing menopause but 
cannot be used to predict the onset of menopause or to 
monitor the adequacy of hormone replacement therapy. 
In menopausal women, hormone replacement therapy 
lowers FSH values by only 10–20%, because FSH is regulated 
not only by steroids but also by inhibin, which of 
course is not replaced in menopausal women. 

Another use of FSH is to assess ovarian reserve in the 
evaluation of infertile couples (27). In most studies, FSH 
values have been measured on cycle day 3, although one 
investigator has found no statistical difference in FSH 
values if measured on cycle days 2, 3, 4, or 5. Most studies 
have demonstrated that women with relatively high 
day 3 FSH values will have reduced responsiveness to 
simulation of the ovaries for an in vitro fertilization cycle. 
High basal FSH values are much better at predicting ovarian 
response to gonadotropin medications than they are at 
predicting pregnancy. Therefore, women with high FSH 
values are at increased risk for having their in vitro fertilization 
cycles canceled because of poor stimulation and 
are likely to have fewer oocytes retrieved, a lower peak 
estradiol level, and probably a lower overall pregnancy 
rate than women with normal day 3 FSH values. 

Studies have used different cutoff levels for normal FSH 
when assessing ovarian reserve. These differences are logical, 
given laboratory differences in measuring the FSH. 
The upper limit of normal for a day 3 FSH has been reported 
anywhere from 9 IU/L up to 12 IU/L. Basal FSH values 
demonstrate great intercycle variation. However, there 
appears to be no difference in response to stimulation 
between cycles with a high or a low FSH in the same 
patient. Once a patient has one elevated FSH level, ovarian 
response is likely to be poor even in subsequent cycles that 
have a normal day 3 basal FSH value. The upper limit of 
normal for FSH should be determined for every laboratory. 

Newer tests of ovarian reserve also rely on FSH 
assays. The clomiphene citrate challenge test, a test of 
ovarian reserve, is performed by measuring FSH on cycle 
day 3, followed by the administration of 100 mg of 
clomiphene citrate on days 5–9 of the cycle. An FSH 
value is then determined on day 10. If either FSH value is 
high (>12 IU/L), ovarian reserve is considered to be 
diminished. This test is thought to be more sensitive than 
the basal FSH determination alone in detecting women 
with abnormal ovarian reserve. 

LUTEINIZING HORMONE 

Luteinizing hormone is a gonadotropin secreted by the 
anterior pituitary gland. It is a glycoprotein consisting of 
two subunits, the alpha and beta subunits. The assays for 
LH rely on antibodies specific to the beta subunit, which 
is unique to the LH molecule. The predominant reason 
for measuring LH is to detect ovulation. In a woman with 
regular 28-day menstrual cycles, the LH surge typically 
occurs around day 14. The onset of the LH surge is a reliable 
predictor of ovulation. Follicular rupture typically 
occurs 34–36 hours after the onset of the LH surge. 
Ovulation is estimated to occur 10–12 hours after the LH 
surge peak. The entire midcycle LH surge lasts for 48–50 
hours. 

The ovulation-predictor kits used at home by patients 
with infertility detect the LH surge. Many brands of urine 
ovulation-detection kits use semiquantitative two-site 
enzyme-linked immunoassays. Most of these assays have 
an alpha subunit–specific antibody fixed to a plastic dipstick. 
The LH in a urine specimen binds to the antibody. 
Subsequently, a beta subunit–specific antibody that has 
been linked to alkaline phosphatase is exposed to the 
urine dipstick. If LH is present in significant quantities in 
the urine, it will bind to the dipstick; and in turn, the beta 
subunit–specific antibody linked to an enzyme will bind 
to the LH molecule. The enzyme (alkaline phosphatase) 
can now react with the substrate solution, causing the 
stick to turn a different color. Women can reliably detect 
the onset of the LH surge for purposes of timing natural 
intercourse or inseminations to improve the chances for 
pregnancy. Most kits instruct women with regular menstrual 
cycles to begin testing urine once a day starting on 
day 11 or 12. 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Medications that have been shown to interfere with the 
ovulation predictor kit include injections of either hCG or 
LH used for ovulation induction. If a woman is pregnant, 
hCG will cross-react in most ovulation predictor kits used 
at home. If women are using clomiphene citrate, they 
should wait at least 3 days after the medication has been 
stopped before performing urine LH testing. The 
clomiphene citrate induces higher-than-normal levels of 
LH early in the cycle, leading to false-positive readings 
on the test. 

Another possible indication for measuring LH is 
anovulation. Patients with persistent anovulation have a 
higher mean concentration of LH and a low to normal 
concentration of FSH. Thus, an LH-to-FSH ratio of 3 to 
1 has been thought to be indicative of PCOS. However, 
many patients with PCOS do not have this reversal of the 
LH-to-FSH ratio, so the ratio is not a sensitive or specific 
criterion for diagnosing PCOS (12). Therefore, few 
experts recommend measurements of LH in evaluating 
patients with anovulation. There is little need to measure 
LH in anovulatory or amenorrheic women; measurement 
of FSH is much more helpful. 

HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN 

Human chorionic gonadotropin is a glycoprotein hormone 
that is produced almost exclusively during pregnancy and 
has a long half-life of 24 hours. The primary indications 
for obtaining an hCG assay are to diagnose pregnancy 
and to diagnose “problem pregnancies” such as ectopic 
pregnancies, miscarriages, and gestational trophoblastic 
disease, an uncommon sequela of pregnancy. 

Human chorionic gonadotropin consists of alpha and 
beta subunits, which are linked by disulfide bonds. The 
alpha subunit of hCG is identical to that of other 
gonadotropins. The unique biologic activity of hCG is 
attributed to the differences found in the beta subunit of 
hCG compared with other gonadotropins. Human chorionic 
gonadotropin is produced by the syncytiotrophoblast 
of the placenta, and its function is support of the corpus 
luteum in producing progesterone. The maternal circulating 
hCG concentration is approximately 100 IU/L at the 
time of the expected menses. A maximal level of about 
100,000 IU/L is reached at 8–10 weeks of gestational 
age. Thereafter, hCG levels typically decrease to about 
10,000–20,000 IU/L at 18–20 weeks and remain at that 
level until term. Levels are higher in multiple gestations. 

The modern assay for hCG measures serum levels of 
the hCG beta subunit. This unique part of the hCG structure 
allows the production of highly specific antibodies 
used for immunologic assays. In most laboratories, the 
lower limit of the assay is 5 IU/L. 

In normal intrauterine pregnancies, hCG levels rise in a 
curvilinear fashion until they plateau at 100,000 IU/L (28). 
However, because the increase is essentially linear early in 
pregnancy, the rate of increase can be used to assess the via


bility of pregnancy. Early in pregnancy, hCG levels approximately 
double every 2 days in viable, singleton, intrauterine 
pregnancies. With ectopic pregnancies or miscarriages, 
levels typically increase at much slower rates. Studies of 
doubling times show that 85% of viable pregnancies are 
associated with a rise in hCG levels of at least 66% every 
48 hours during the first 40 days of gestation. Note that 
15% of viable pregnancies will have less than a 66% rise. 
With advancing gestational age, the doubling time progressively 
increases, so following hCG levels to determine 
viability is less useful at later gestational ages. Although an 
increase in hCG of 100% is normal for gestations of less 
than 41 days, this value falls to 33% for gestations of 41–56 
days and to 5% for gestations of 57–65 days (29). 
Fortunately, transvaginal ultrasonography should be able to 
detect all viable intrauterine pregnancies by 41 days of 
gestation. Likewise, among women with hCG levels of at 
least 2,000 mIU/mL, transvaginal ultrasonography should 
be able to identify all viable intrauterine pregnancies. 
Therefore, at later gestational ages and at higher hCG 
levels, ultrasonography becomes the test of choice to determine 
the location and viability of the pregnancy. 

A subnormal rise in hCG concentration early in pregnancy 
often is associated with an abnormal pregnancy, 
although the location (ectopic or intrauterine) cannot be 
determined from this test. An increase of 50% or less in 
a 48-hour period usually is associated with a nonviable 
pregnancy. However, appropriately rising levels of hCG 
do not eliminate the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy. 

Concentrations of hCG can be used not only to diagnose 
an ectopic pregnancy but also to determine the best 
treatment approach. With hCG levels higher than 15,000 
IU/L, medical therapy with methotrexate of an ectopic 
pregnancy has a failure rate of nearly 32% (28). With values 
of hCG between 10,000 and 15,000 IU/L, medical 
therapy has a failure rate of 18%. At lower hCG levels, 
increasing success rates with methotrexate are seen. 
Thus, in ectopic pregnancies with hCG levels higher than 
10,000 IU/L, methotrexate is relatively contraindicated, 
and surgical therapy may be preferable. 

Levels of hCG also are monitored following medical 
and surgical treatment of ectopic pregnancies to ensure 
complete resolution. With the commonly used singledose 
methotrexate protocol, serum hCG levels are 
obtained on days 1, 4, and 7 following the injection. If the 
hCG level declines less than 15% between days 4 and 7, 
the protocol is repeated with an additional injection of 
methotrexate. If the level declines by 15% or more 
between days 4 and 7, hCG levels are measured on a 
weekly basis until resolution of the ectopic pregnancy is 
confirmed by a negative test. Approximately 20% of 
women require a second dose of methotrexate (28). After 
salpingostomy for an ectopic pregnancy, hCG levels need 
to be followed for complete resolution to ensure that no 
residual proliferating trophoblastic tissue remains. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Concentrations of hCG are very helpful in evaluating 
trophoblastic disease. In the United States, molar pregnancies 
occur in approximately 1 in 600 induced abortions 
and approximately 1 in 1,000 pregnancies. 
Approximately 20% of patients with molar pregnancies 
develop malignant complications or persistent trophoblastic 
disease. Trophoblastic disease often is characterized 
by very high levels of the beta subunit of hCG 
(b -hCG), which are often between 3 and 100 times higher 
than the levels found in normal pregnancy. Following 
the evacuation of a molar pregnancy, hCG levels should 
fall to the nondetectable range by 16 weeks in patients 
who do not have persistent disease or malignant sequelae. 
A diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease is made 
when serial hCG levels plateau or rise during a 2-week 
period or when a continued elevation is present 16 weeks 
after evacuation of the abnormal pregnancy. Thus, the 
hCG assay is useful in assessing patients after a molar 
pregnancy for the development of malignant trophoblastic 
disease. The assay is also useful in detecting the recurrence 
of trophoblastic disease following treatment. 
Typically, hCG levels are measured monthly for at least a 
year following treatment for trophoblastic disease. 

Heterophilic antibodies (large human antibodies that 
bind to animal antibodies) have recently been identified 
as a cause of false-positive hCG test results (30). The 
mechanism by which heterophilic antibodies cause falsepositive 
results relates to the nature of commercial 
immunometric assays. Most hCG tests use two animal 
antibodies against hCG. The first antibody, commonly 
a mouse monoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG), captures 
and immobilizes the hCG molecule. The second antibody, 
labeled with an enzyme or chemiluminescent 
agent, marks the immobilized hCG by binding to a distant 
site on the hCG molecule (tracer antibody). This 
antibody is commonly a polyclonal IgG of mouse, 
sheep, rabbit, or goat origin. The amount of hCG in the 
antibody–hCG–tracer complex is proportional to the 
amount of tracer. Heterophilic antibodies usually bind to 
the assay IgG. Because they are bivalent, they can link the 
capture and tracer antibodies, thereby mimicking hCG 
immunoreactivity (Fig. 7). The incidence of false-positive 
hCG assay results is unknown, although heterophilic 
antibodies have been detected in 3–4% of healthy individuals. 
There have been several case reports of women 
who were thought to have persistent trophoblastic neoplasms 
and who had unnecessary surgical procedures 
based on false-positive hCG assay results. 

Two criteria have been established for identifying 
false-positive hCG test results. The first is finding hCG 
immunoreactivity in the serum but no detectable hCG in 
the urine of a sample taken concurrently. The reasoning 
behind this criteria is that heterophilic antibodies are 
large glycoproteins that are not excreted in the urine. The 
second criterion is finding more than a fourfold difference 
between the serum hCG concentration determined 
by the commercial immunoassay and the hCG concentra


n FIG. 7. Mechanism of false-positive human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) assays caused by heterophilic antibodies. 
Abbreviation: IgG indicates immunoglobulin G. 
(Rotmensch S, Cole LA. False diagnosis and needless therapy 
of presumed malignant disease in women with false-positive 
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations. Reprinted 
with permission from Elsevier Science [The Lancet 2000; 
355:712–715]) 
tion obtained by a radioimmunoassay. Heterophilic antibodies 
affect hCG tests differently and produce wide variations 
in results (30). 

Detection of hCG has profound diagnostic and therapeutic 
implications. The clinician must be aware of the 
possibility of false-positive results. Any results suspected 
of being false positive should prompt the testing of both 
urine and serum, and samples should be sent to a reference 
laboratory capable of performing a radioimmunoassay. 

GENETIC PRINCIPLES 

Management of genetic disease in the molecular genetics 
era requires the clinician to understand DNA characteristics 
and gene structure. Double-stranded DNA consists of 
a sugar–phosphate backbone with inwardly projecting 
nitrogenous bases held together by hydrogen bonds. The 
nitrogenous bases of DNA include adenine (A), cytosine 
(C), guanine (G), and thymine (T); single-stranded RNA 
has identical nitrogenous bases except that uracil (U) 
replaces thymine. Complementary pairing of the nitrogenous 
bases is specific, with C joining with G by three 
hydrogen bonds and T binding to A with two hydrogen 
bonds. Genes are DNA sequences that encode mRNA, 
which is usually translated into protein (Fig. 8). Genes 
consist of exons, which encode RNA, and introns, which 
separate the exons. Within the nucleus, gene sequences 
are copied into RNA by the enzyme RNA polymerase II, 
the introns are removed, and a series of adenines is added 
to the 3' end (poly-A tail). The mRNA then exits the 
nucleus and moves to the ribosomes, where it is translat



BASIC PRINCIPLES 

1 2 3 


DNA5'3'
Transcription 


(Nucleus)
mRNAAAAA
Splicing 


AAAAA 
mRNA

mRNA
Translation 



Protein 


(Ribosomes) 


n FIG. 8. Structure of a gene containing three exons (dark + hatched regions) and two introns (white) is shown (top). Exons are 
numbered 1–3 above the exons. The average human gene is 14–27 kb with 7–9 exons. When transcription occurs, the entire 
sequence is copied into ribonucleic acid (RNA), and a poly-A tail is added to the 3’ end. Then the introns are spliced out (bottom) 
so that only the exons remain in the messenger RNA (mRNA). Note that the 5’-most end of exon 1 and the 3’ end of exon 
3 are untranslated regions (hatched regions). Even though the entire exons encode mRNA, the mRNA goes out of the nucleus to 
the ribosomes and is translated into protein. Appropriate start and stop codons dictate where the beginning and end of the translation 
will be. 
ed into protein. Genetic diseases occur from mutations in Mechanisms 
the approximately 30,000 human genes on 3 billion base 
pairs of genomic DNA. MITOSIS 

Humans possess 23 pairs of chromosomes in all nucle-

Mitosis is the process in which somatic cells, which conated 
cells, which include one pair of sex chromosomes 

tain the diploid (2n) number of chromosomes, replicate 
(X,Y in males and X,X in females) and 22 pairs of auto


their DNA to the tetraploid (4n) complement, and then 
somes (numbered 1–22). Chromosomes are composed of 

divide into two identical daughter cells, each containing 
a long arm (q) and a short arm (p), which are joined by a 

the diploid number of chromosomes. Prior to enteringcentromere. The standard metaphase karyotype results in 

mitosis, the nuclear genome first replicates its DNA. In 
approximately 400 bands, but at the prometaphase stage, 

mitosis, the cell then passes through five stages: 
550–850 bands may be produced (extended banding 
karyotype). • Prophase, the stage with formation of a centriole, 
Euploidy is defined as the normal haploid number of which then divides into two centrioles that 
chromosomes (23) in germ cells or an exact multiple of migrate to opposite poles of the cell 
the haploid number of chromosomes (46, 69, etc). The • Prometaphase, when the nuclear membrane is disdiploid 
number of chromosomes (46) is observed in nor-rupted so that chromosomes become attached to 
mal individuals. Although triploidy (3n) and tetraploidy the mitotic spindle 
(4n) are classified as euploid numbers, they do cause phe


• Metaphase, when duplicated chromosomes,
notypic abnormalities, usually ending in spontaneous 

appearing as a pair of sister chromatids, line up on 

abortions, and rarely in liveborns. A karyotype will aid in 

the spindle formed by the joining of the centrioles

the diagnosis of aneuploidy (an abnormal number of 

• Anaphase, which includes loss of the spindle and 
chromosomes that is not an exact multiple of the haploid 
migration of chromosomes to opposite poles

number) and structural abnormalities, such as deletions, 
translocations, and inversions. Trisomy (three of a partic-• Telophase, which encompasses cytokinesis and 
ular chromosome) and monosomy (one chromosome) separation into two daughter cells. Each daughter 
constitute the most common forms of aneuploidy. cell is an exact copy of the parent cell. 



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

MEIOSIS 

Germ cells contain the haploid (1n) number of chromosomes, 
and to proliferate they must retain their haploid 
number. Meiosis is comprised of two different divisions; 
in meiosis I (the reduction division), the diploid number 
of chromosomes is reduced to the haploid number, and 
then meiosis II follows without intervening DNA replication. 
Similar to mitosis, DNA replication occurs prior to 
the initiation of meiosis, and stages include prophase, 
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. However, prophase 
in meiosis is much more complicated than in mitosis, and 
it has a number of stages (leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, 
diplotene, and diakinesis). It is in prophase I that crossing 
over (recombination) of genetic material between homologous 
chromosomes occurs, permitting genetic diversity. 
Meiosis II is similar to mitosis, except that the haploid 
number of chromosomes is present upon entry into meiosis 
II, and each daughter cell has the haploid number of 
chromosomes. In addition, daughter cells are not identical, 
because recombination has taken place. 

There are some very sex specific differences in meiosis 
in male versus female gametes. Primary oocytes in the 
fetus are arrested in a suspended dictyotene stage of 
prophase I of meiosis I at midgestation, and they do not 
resume meiosis I until the dominant follicle is stimulated 
by gonadotropins. With the LH surge, meiosis I is completed, 
and the oocyte begins meiosis II, which is not 
completed until fertilization occurs. In meiosis I in the 
female, one primary oocyte results in a secondary oocyte 
and the first polar body. Then in meiosis II, the secondary 
oocyte produces an ovum and the second polar body. In 
contrast, in the male, spermatozoa do not form until after 
puberty, and each primary spermatocyte in meiosis I 
results in two secondary spermatocytes, which, in meiosis 
II, each form two spermatids. The spermatids later differentiate 
into spermatozoa. 

MEIOTIC/MITOTIC ERRORS AND MATERNAL AGING 

Meiotic errors result in aneuploidy. If nondisjunction 
(failure of homologous chromosomes to separate) occurs, 
one daughter cell will have 24 chromosomes, which if 
fertilized will cause trisomy; the other daughter cell will 
have 22 chromosomes, causing monosomy in the zygote. 
If one chromosome is not released from the spindle 
(anaphase lag) and is lost, monosomy may occur with fertilization. 
Nondisjunction increases with advancing 
maternal age, thereby increasing the probability of trisomies 
(see a later discussion). In general, meiosis I 
errors in the female account for most of the trisomies that 
are seen clinically. If nondisjunction occurs in mitosis, 
two different cell lines (mosaicism) will be present. This 
may occur in individuals with gonadal dysgenesis, in 
which nondisjunction in the 46,XY zygote will produce a 
45,X/47,XY cell line (all three cell lines could persist, 
depending on how early in mitosis nondisjunction 
occurred). If anaphase lag occurred in a 46,XY individual, 
a 45,X/46,XY cell line could result. 

As has been said, the probability of having a fetus with 
a chromosome disorder increases with increasing maternal 
age. The most common abnormalities with advanced 
maternal age are trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18, 
and trisomy 13, in decreasing frequency. Trisomy of the 
sex chromosomes also may occur, with 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter’s syndrome) and 47,XXX being the most common. 
In general, autosomal trisomies result in more severe 
phenotypic abnormalities than trisomies of sex chromosomes. 
An increased risk in trisomy does not appear to 
occur with increased paternal age, although autosomaldominant 
and X-linked recessive disorders increase with 
paternal age because of new mutations. In general, if a couple 
has a child with a trisomy, the risk of trisomy recurrence 
in a subsequent pregnancy is approximately 1%. 

OTHER FACTORS 

Radiation, chemotherapy, and chemicals may induce 
mutations in DNA, either by causing infertility (interrupting 
gamete function) or by affecting zygotes (resulting in 
miscarriage of abnormal offspring). Doses of radiation to 
the ovaries greater than 20 Gy (1 Gy = 100 rad) generally 
cause irreversible ovarian failure in females of any age, 
but lower doses may spare ovarian function in children 
and adolescents. Radiation doses less than 7 Gy do not 
affect ovarian function in children, but doses of 10–20 Gy 
may result in ovarian failure in some children and young 
women, and doses of 8 Gy will result in ovarian failure in 
most adult women. Similarly, chemotherapy, such as the 
alkylating agents (chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, 
busulfan, and nitrogen mustard), affects gonadal function 
to a greater degree in adults than in children. If 
chemotherapy is administered before puberty, ovarian 
function and fertility usually are not impaired, but approximately 
50% of adult women will have ovarian failure. In 
general, men appear to be affected more by chemotherapy 
and radiation than women, as radiation and chemotherapy 
affect gamete and steroid function. 

In early pregnancy, if radiation exposure occurs prior 
to organogenesis (5–10 weeks of gestation), the effect on 
the fetus is generally believed to be an all-or-none situation. 
If no pregnancy loss occurs, it is unlikely that the 
fetus will be affected. However, if irradiation involves a 
dose of 10 rad (0.1 Gy) during organogenesis, multiple 
anomalies may occur. After organogenesis, irradiation 
could affect growth and development; because the brain 
and gonads are developing continually during gestation, 
these could be affected. Drugs taken during pregnancy 
are classified according to their presumed safety. Class A 
drugs are proven to be safe in pregnancy in humans; class 
B medicines (eg, dicyclomine) are safe in humans or 
have been shown to be safe in animals without human 
studies; class C medications (eg, promethazine) are 
unsafe in animals, but human studies are lacking, so the 
benefits and risks must be weighed; class D drugs are 
known teratogens in humans, but benefits may outweigh 
risks in certain situations (eg, phenytoin); and class X 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

drugs are contraindicated because risks outweigh benefits 
(eg, thalidomide). It is important to remember that a 
patient should never be told that she will not have a child 
with a birth defect when taking a certain medication, but 
rather that taking the medication does not increase her 
risk above the 2–4% risk all pregnant women have. 

Reproductive Consequences of 
Chromosomal Disorders 

In addition to aneuploidy, structural abnormalities such as 
chromosomal deletions, insertions, and inversions also 
may be diagnosed using a karyotype. Deletions must be 
sufficiently large (three megabases) to be detectable by a 
karyotype, so single gene deletions are not usually 
detectable by cytogenetics. Often when a deletion is identified 
on a karyotype, more than one gene is deleted, producing 
a contiguous gene deletion sequence. 

PREGNANCY LOSS 

More than half of all first-trimester spontaneous abortions 
demonstrate a chromosomal abnormality, and 
although the incidence decreases with advancing gestation, 
risk is still significant in the second and third 
trimesters. Trisomies are the most common group of 
abnormalities, and 45,X is the most common single 
abnormality. Karyotype studies should be considered 
from both members of couples with two or more spontaneous 
abortions or one spontaneous abortion and one 
malformed fetus, because there is a 10-fold increase in 
the detection of parental chromosomal rearrangements 
(an absolute risk of 3–4%). Most chromosomal rearrangements 
are translocations, either robertsonian or 
reciprocal translocations. Translocations may be balanced, 
producing a normal phenotype and thus indicating 
that little or no chromosomal material was lost. An unbalanced 
translocation results in phenotypic abnormalities, 
which usually include mental deficiency and multiple 
somatic anomalies. 

Robertsonian translocations involve chromosomes 
13–15, 21, or 22 and result when p arms from both chromosomes 
are lost, and the q arms unite. With a balanced 
robertsonian translocation, the total chromosomal number 
is 45. If there are 46 chromosomes, a partial trisomy 
is present, which results in an unbalanced translocation. 
If the robertsonian translocation is present in the mother, 
a 10–15% recurrence risk for a child born alive with 
Down syndrome exists; if the robertsonian translocation 
is in the father, the risk is less (0–2%). Reciprocal 
translocations occur when two different chromosomes 
break and exchange material. With a balanced reciprocal 
translocation, the total number of chromosomes is 46, 
whereas in an unbalanced translocation, deletions and 
duplications can occur. With a reciprocal translocation, 
the recurrence risks of having an affected live birth are 
similar whether it is carried by the mother or the father; 
the risks approximate 10–15%. 

CHROMOSOMAL CAUSES OF HYPOGONADISM 

Cytogenetic analysis should be considered in patients with 
multiple somatic anomalies and mental deficiency, hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism, and extremely short stature. 
In females with primary amenorrhea and elevated 
gonadotropins, a 46,XY cell line must be excluded 
because of the increased risk of gonadoblastomas with a 
46,XY karyotype (Swyer syndrome) and a 45,X/46,XY 
karyotype (mixed gonadal dysgenesis, a form of Turner’s 
syndrome). Although sexual ambiguity may be present in 
patients with a 45,X/46,XY karyotype, this feature is not 
constant. A 45,X cell line also must be excluded in women 
with primary or secondary amenorrhea because cardiac 
anomalies (40–50%) and renal anomalies (30%) commonly 
occur in these patients. (Note that the karyotype for 
Turner’s syndrome is written 45,X; 45,XO is incorrect.) 

The most consistent feature of 45,X individuals is 
short stature (usually approximately 4 ft 9 in.); other 
somatic anomalies (eg, shieldlike chest, widely spaced 
nipples, and webbed neck) are highly variable. 
Approximately half of women with primary amenorrhea 
with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism have X chromosome 
abnormalities. Although this abnormality is less 
likely in women with secondary amenorrhea (1–2%), it is 
still wise to consider karyotype studies in women of short 
stature. Other potential abnormal karyotypes in women 
with ovarian failure include Xp or Xq deletions, which 
often are associated with short stature (under 5 ft 3 in.) 
and primary or secondary amenorrhea, depending on the 
location of the deletion. 

Males with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism should 
be counseled about chromosomal abnormalities, because 
approximately 5–15% will have either 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter’s syndrome, which is more common) or 
46,XX (sex-reversed males). The most consistent finding 
in men with Klinefelter’s syndrome is testicular fibrosis 
and infertility; mental deficiency and behavioral disorders 
are less common. Because men with Klinefelter’s 
syndrome have an increased risk of testicular tumors, 
lymphoma, and diabetes, careful surveillance is important. 
It also has been suggested that men with severe 
oligospermia should be offered a karyotype analysis, 
because 1–2% may have balanced translocations. 

Mendelian Inheritance of Disease 

Inherited diseases are classified as being autosomal or X 
linked (Y-linked inheritance is less important, except for 
sex-determining genes and spermatogenesis genes). If 
two copies of a mutant gene (one copy inherited from 
each parent) are required to produce the phenotype, the 
disorder is recessive; if only one copy results in a disorder, 
the inheritance is dominant (31, 32). 

AUTOSOMAL DISORDERS 

In autosomal recessive disorders, affected individuals are 
homozygous, and parents are heterozygous. Characteristics 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

include horizontal transmission (siblings are affected), a 

50:50 male-to-female ratio, and a 25% recurrence risk for 
heterozygotes with each subsequent pregnancy. 
Examples of autosomal recessive disorders include most 
enzyme defects (such as 21-hydroxylase deficiency), cystic 
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, thalassemias, and Tay-
Sachs disease. In consanguineous families, there is an 
increased probability for rare autosomal recessive diseases 
because of more frequent allele sharing. 
In autosomal dominant disorders, only a single copy of 
the mutant gene (the patient is heterozygous) is required to 
produce the phenotype. Features include vertical transmission 
(parents to offspring), a 50:50 male-to-female 
ratio, and a 50% recurrence risk with each subsequent 
pregnancy. Examples are neurofibromatosis, myotonic 
dystrophy, some forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, achondroplasia, 
and Huntington’s disease. 

Autosomal dominant disease may be complicated by 
penetrance, variable expressivity, and anticipation. 
Penetrance is an all-or-none phenomenon that refers to 
whether the affected person has any manifestation of the 
disease. If incomplete penetrance occurs for a particular 
disease (eg, retinoblastoma or split-hand deformity), then 
not all of those who possess the mutation actually manifest 
the disease. Variable expressivity describes the variability 
in the severity of the disease, even within the same 
family (examples are neurofibromatosis type and Marfan 
syndrome). Some autosomal dominant diseases increase 
in severity in successive generations, a phenomenon 
called anticipation, as in myotonic dystrophy. Most diseases 
with anticipation have expansion of triplet repeats 
within the causative gene (discussed later). 

X-LINKED DISEASES 

X-linked recessive diseases occur in hemizygous males 
with mutations arising on the single X chromosome. 
Characteristics include disease almost exclusively in 
males that is transmitted through carrier females to half 
of her sons and that gives carrier status to half of her 
daughters. Disease is never passed from an affected male 
to his son, but carrier status is passed to all of his daughters. 
Examples include Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
androgen insensitivity syndrome, Kallmann’s syndrome, 
and hemophilia A and B. 

X-linked dominant diseases are rare and may be difficult 
to characterize because they possess characteristics 
of both autosomal dominant and X-linked recessive diseases. 
In X-linked dominant disease, both males and 
females are affected (on one allele); but for some rare diseases, 
affected females are approximately twice as common 
as affected males. Affected males with normal 
partners produce no affected sons (they give a Y) and 
100% affected daughters. Females or males born to a carrier 
female have a 50:50 chance of being affected with 
each pregnancy. Examples include vitamin D–resistant 
(hypophosphatemic) rickets, Rett syndrome, and fragile 

X syndrome. Fragile X syndrome displays incomplete 
penetrance; males with the mutation usually are affected, 
but approximately one third do not manifest the disease. 
Important for reproductive endocrinologists is the realization 
that female carriers have an increased risk of 
developing premature ovarian failure (2–3% for patients 
with sporadic premature ovarian failure and 12–15% for 
patients with familial premature ovarian failure). 

COMPLEX (POLYGENIC/MULTIFACTORIAL) DISORDERS 

Most common diseases probably result from the effects 
of a number of genes and environmental factors. The 
pedigree may contain only one or two affected individuals, 
or even none. Examples include hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus (both types 1 and 2), heart disease, cleft 
palate, neural tube defects, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
and congenital heart anomalies. The recurrence risk 
is usually in the range of 1–4%, depending on the type of 
disease, its prevalence, male-to-female sex ratios, and the 
number of affected family members. 

NONCLASSIC PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE 

In addition to the classic modes of inheritance, other 
modes of transmission have been recognized. In mitochondrial 
inheritance, affected females pass the trait to all 
offspring, whereas males transmit the disease to none of 
their offspring. This pattern probably occurs because 
oocytes have several hundred thousand units of mitochondrial 
DNA, but sperm contain only several hundred. 
Therefore, essentially all mitochondrial DNA is maternal, 
explaining the inheritance. Mitochondrial DNA mutations 
affect organs that expend high rates of energy 
(heart, kidney, muscle, brain, and endocrine organs such 
as the pancreas). Some examples of mitochondrial inheritance 
include Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy 
(LHON), a form of adult-onset central blindness; 
MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and strokelike symptoms); and MERRF 
(myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red fibers). 

Uniparental disomy (UPD) refers to a situation in 
which both chromosomes of a chromosome pair (for 
example, chromosome 7) are inherited from the same 
parent, rather than one chromosome from each parent. 
Examples of UPD include Prader-Willi syndrome (two of 
maternal chromosome 15), Angelman syndrome (two of 
paternal chromosome 15), and some cases of intrauterine 
growth retardation (chromosome 16). 

Genomic imprinting is another term for an unequal 
expression of paternal and maternal alleles. Notable 
examples are Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome, 
both of which are due to deletions of chromosome 
15 q11q13. Prader-Willi syndrome (hypotonia, poor 
sucking, developmental delay, characteristic facies with 
almond-shaped eyes, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 
and hyperphagia) occurs with a paternal chromosome 
15 deletion, whereas Angelman syndrome (severe mental 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

deficiency, seizures, and inappropriate paroxysms of 
laughter and movement) occurs with a maternal chromosome 
15 deletion. Imprinting and UPD underscore the 
importance of inheriting a maternal and a paternal chromosome 
for each chromosome pair. These diseases are 
usually sporadic, so the recurrence risk is very small. 

Germline mosaicism is defined as the presence of two 
different cell lines within the gametes of a phenotypically 
normal individual. In this condition, someone unaffected 
may pass a mutant allele from the germ cells, resulting in 
offspring with a genetic disease such as achondroplasia. 
Recurrence risks for these disorders with normal parents 
is usually 1–7%. Somatic cell mosaicism also may occur 
when mutations arise in some cells, but not all cells, of an 
organ. Examples are benign neoplasms, such as fibroids 
and endometrial polyps, as well as cancers. 

GENETIC BASIS OF CANCER 

Cancer results from gene mutations, which usually occur 
in somatic cells and are only occasionally (5%) germline 
(and therefore familial). Currently, at least three types of 
cancer-causing genes are known: proto-oncogenes, tumor 
suppresser genes, and DNA repair genes. Protein products 
of proto-oncogenes control normal cellular growth, 
but when they acquire mutations in one allele, the protooncogene 
is converted to an oncogene, which results in 
uninhibited cell growth. Proto-oncogenes that account for 
cancer in somatic cells include ras, fos, and jun, whereas 
germline tumors are uncommon (RET proto-oncogene is 
unique in that it causes an autosomal dominant cancer in 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2). Tumor suppresser 
genes inhibit cell growth when both copies of each gene 
are functional on a pair of chromosomes (eg, BRCA1, 
BRCA2, retinoblastoma, adenoma polyposis coli, and Li-
Fraumeni syndrome) (35). However, if both copies 
acquire mutations, uncontrolled tumor growth results. 
This occurs when an individual inherits a germline mutation 
so that one copy is nonfunctional from birth. If a second 
mutation occurs in somatic cells, such as the breast 
or ovary, both copies are nonfunctional and cancer develops. 
In these situations, cancer occurs earlier in life (often 
in the 30s), is often bilateral, and is transmitted in an 
autosomal-dominant fashion. Because it is germline, 
there is a 50:50 chance of passing the mutant gene to an 
offspring, but it also requires that a second allele acquire 
a mutation in somatic cells. In the absence of a germline 
mutation in a tumor suppresser gene, the probability of 
“two hits” is much less likely, so the cancer is sporadic, 
has a later age of onset, and is usually unilateral. 

Mutations in DNA repair genes produce cancer in a 
manner similar to that of tumor suppresser genes. Both 
copies need to be inactivated, and the probability is 
increased when a germline mutation exists. Normally, 
mutations continually occur in genomic DNA, but certain 
enzymes correct (or proofread) the mutant bases to their 
original sequences. Mutations in these genes (such as 
MSH2, MLH1, and others) interfere with this proofread


ing activity, so mutations remain. An important example 
is hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, which may also 
include endometrial and breast cancer in affected pedigrees. 


Gene Mutations in Human Genetic 
Disease 

TYPES OF GENE MUTATIONS 

The types of mutations present for genetic diseases 
depend on the specific disease and the ethnic background. 
Deletions and insertions may be large, easily detectable 
by Southern blot analysis, or as small as a single base. 
These point mutations make up the largest proportion of 
mutations identified in human disease. If the point mutation 
changes an amino acid, it is termed a missense mutation, 
although it may or may not affect the protein (in 
vitro analysis can be used to determine whether or not it 
does). Nonsense mutations are point mutations that cause 
a termination (stop) codon for translation (TAA, TAG, 
TGA) so that encoded protein is truncated and usually 
nonfunctional. Frameshift mutations are deletions or 
insertions that are not exact multiples of three, so the 
genetic code is altered. Amino acids downstream may be 
changed completely, and commonly a premature stop 
codon is produced. Commonly, ethnic background affects 
the incidence of certain mutations. For example, in Tay-
Sachs disease, three mutations make up more than 90% 
of all identified hexosaminidase A gene mutations in the 
Ashkenazi Jews, but these three mutations represent only 
approximately 20% in non-Jewish populations. 

Another, more recently recognized type of mutation is 
triplet repeat expansion. Some genes normally have a certain 
number of copies of 3 bp, which are repeated. 
However, when these repeats increase in number, presumably 
by expansion in germ cells or early postmitotic 
events, a disease phenotype results. The classic example 
is fragile X syndrome, an X-linked dominant disease with 
reduced penetrance, which consists of mental deficiency, 
macroorchidism, and often subtle facial features 
(enlarged jaw and ears). The wild-type FMR1 gene located 
at a fragile site on Xq27 contains 5–50 repeats of a 
CGG triplet repeat sequence. The disease is transmitted 
by carrier females, who possess an increased number of 
triplet repeats, called a premutation (50–200 repeats). 
These carrier females are more likely to have an expansion 
of the triplet repeat (>200, and often >1,000, repeats) 
in meiosis; when this occurs, fragile X syndrome may 
occur in offspring. A number of other diseases are caused 
by the expansion of triplet repeat sequences, including 
Huntington’s disease, Friedreich’s ataxia, myotonic dystrophy, 
and spinobulbar muscular atrophy. It is of interest 
that all these disorders are neurologic diseases, and 
most—except fragile X syndrome (X-linked dominant) 
and Friedreich’s ataxia (autosomal recessive)—are autosomal-
dominant diseases. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Another notable feature of diseases caused by triplet 
repeat expansion explains the phenomenon of anticipation. 
The classic example is myotonic dystrophy, in 
which a mildly affected female may have an infant with 
myotonia congenita (severe cardiac disease and myotonia). 
In general, the greater the number of triplet repeats, 
the more severe the phenotype. 

CYSTIC FIBROSIS 

Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disease that has 
particular significance because of the current recommendations 
by the American College of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and the American College of Medical 
Genetics for universal preconceptional and prenatal counseling 
(34). Tests using DNA diagnostic methods are recommended 
to detect carriers of the disease. Testing for a 
panel of specific mutations has been suggested to identify 
most carriers. Current techniques include polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and allele-specific hybridization 
probes. The important concept is that if patients are 
screened for the carrier state for 25 mutations and have 
negative results, they have a reduced likelihood of being 
carriers. It does not make the chances of being a carrier 
zero, because a patient could have 1 of nearly 900 additional 
mutations that are not detected by this test. 

Molecular Genetic Tools 

Several concepts are important in understanding molecular 
genetics techniques. Denaturation is the separation of 
double-stranded DNA into single strands, accomplished 
by alkali (in Southern blots) or by heat (in PCR). When 
single strands of DNA join together, it is termed 
hybridization in Southern blot analysis or annealing in 
PCR. Finally, DNA will anneal or hybridize according to 
specific pairing of the nitrogenous bases. All molecular 
biology techniques rely on these features of nucleic acids. 

Because the human genome is large (3 billion base 
pairs) and individual genes are small, it becomes necessary 
to cut DNA into smaller pieces by restriction 
enzymes (restriction endonucleases) that are normally 
present in bacteria. Restriction enzymes recognize certain 
specific bases and cut every time these sequences are 
identified in the genome. These enzymes enable cloning 
of DNA fragments and also constitute an important step 
in the generation of Southern blots. 

Innumerable DNA techniques have now been described, 
but only the techniques used more commonly in 
clinical diagnostics will be detailed. Most diagnoses today 
are performed using PCR, but DNA chip technology is 
likely to augment and replace this technique. 

SOUTHERN BLOT ANALYSIS 

Southern blot analysis was the first molecular tool used 
for DNA diagnosis, but it has been replaced largely by 
PCR methods, except in a few instances. A Southern blot 
test involves a nylon membrane containing immobilized 

single-stranded genomic DNA from a patient. Patient 
DNA is extracted from leukocytes (usually), digested 
with a restriction enzyme, electrophoresed on an agarose 
gel, and then rendered single stranded by alkali. The 
DNA sequences from the gel are then transferred onto the 
nylon membrane. A DNA probe for the gene of interest is 
then labeled, denatured, and hybridized with the membrane 
(Fig. 9). After nonspecific binding has been washed 
off, the blot undergoes autoradiography (if a radioactive 
probe was used) and is then photographed. The presence 
or absence of bands and their sizes (indicating deletions 
or insertions) can be determined and compared with normal 
controls. 

Major uses of the Southern blot test in obstetrics and 
gynecology are for the detection of a -globin gene deletions 
in a-thalassemia, dystrophin gene deletions in Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy, and fragile X syndrome. Polymorphisms 
were first detected by Southern blot analysis, but 
they are now detected by more rapid methods, such as 
DNA sequencing. Southern blot analysis is more time-consuming, 
requires more DNA, and cannot usually detect single 
base changes or small deletions and insertions. 

POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTIONS 

In Southern blot analysis, it is necessary to use a DNA 
probe to find a gene among the billions of bases of the 
genome; however, with PCR, the fragment of DNA to be 
analyzed is copied many times, so DNA probes are not 
necessary. 

The PCR technique consists of three steps per cycle, 
which are repeated for approximately 30–35 cycles. A 
cycle of PCR includes a denaturation step to render DNA 
single stranded; an annealing step so that primers can 
anneal to the template; and finally an extension step, in 
which a Taq polymerase enzyme initiates the synthesis of 
a new strand (Fig. 10). Through 30–35 cycles, the DNA 
target is copied so many times that an aliquot can be analyzed 
on an agarose gel. Many different PCR fragments 
may be analyzed simultaneously (multiplex PCR), which 
increases the efficiency of diagnosis (eg, Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy). 

As noted earlier, most mutations in genetic disease are 
not deletions but rather are single base changes, or point 
mutations, that are usually detected by DNA sequencing. 
To decrease the necessity for DNA sequencing (which 
remains expensive), screening techniques such as denaturing 
gradient gel electrophoresis or single-strand conformation 
polymorphism may be performed. 

DOT BLOTS AND ALLELE-SPECIFIC OLIGONUCLEOTIDE 
HYBRIDIZATION 

Because most diseases are caused by a variety of mutations, 
it is practical to test for the most common ones. An 
important method to detect specific point mutations, 
without the requirement for sequencing, is the technique 
of dot blots, hybridized to allele-specific oligonucleotide 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 


n FIG. 9. Southern blot analysis. 
probes for each different mutation (Fig. 11). It must be 
emphasized that dot blot/allele-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization tests only for the presence or absence of a 
specific mutation. 

The specific fragment of DNA is amplified by PCR, 
denatured, and spotted onto a nylon membrane. The 
hybridization signal resembles a dot, whereas no dot is 
present when hybridization does not occur. Probes are 
specifically designed to detect a normal allele and the 
particular mutant allele. If hybridization occurs only to 
the normal allele, then the patient is homozygous for the 
normal allele. Similarly, if the hybridization is detected 
only for the mutant allele, the patient is homozygous 

mutant. The DNA from a heterozygote hybridizes to both 
the mutant and wild-type oligonucleotides. This analysis 
can be repeated for each different mutation, so a panel of 
known mutations can be tested for expeditiously. 

FLUORESCENT IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION 

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) bridges molecular 
genetics and cytogenetics. Currently, it may be a useful 
adjunct to cytogenetics in some cases, but it does not 
replace cytogenetics. The FISH technique is performed 
by the immobilization of nucleic acids (DNA, RNA, 
chromosomes, or tissue sections) on a slide, followed by 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


A 


B 
C 
n FIG. 10. Polymerase chain reaction. (A) Denaturation. (B) Annealing. (C) Extension. Abbreviations: dATP indicates 
deoxyadenosine triphosphate; dCTP, deoxycytidine triphosphate; dGTP, 2-deoxyguanosine-5’-triphosphate; dTTP, deoxythymidine 
triphosphate. 

BASIC PRINCIPLES 

denaturation and then hybridization with a fluorescently 
labeled single-stranded DNA or RNA probe (Fig. 12). 
After washing off nonspecific hybridization, the slide is 
viewed under a fluorescence microscope. The FISH technique 
may be used to diagnose trisomy or monosomy, 
translocations, and gene deletions too small to be detected 
with cytogenetics (approximately 3 Mb). Because of 
the great sensitivity of FISH, chromosome aneuploidy 
can be detected in single interphase cells. If probes to 
chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X, and Y are used, simultaneous 
screening for the most common chromosomal aneuploidies 
can be accomplished. Single-cell FISH has been 
used in preimplantation genetic diagnosis for sexing 
embryos and for diagnosing trisomies, monosomies, and 
deletions. Multifluor FISH also has been described; using 
six different colors (fluors), it can label each chromosome 
with a different color. The clinical utility has yet to be 
determined, however. 

n FIG. 11. Allele-specific oligonucleotide probing of dot 
blots. 
Wild-type 
allele 
Mutant 
allele 
TTT 
Normal 
oligonucleotide 
Normal 
oligonucleotide 
Mutant 
oligonucleotide 
Mutant 
oligonucleotide 
AAA 
AG A 
TC T 
Dot blot 
N/N N/M M/M 
DNA or RNA 
Flourescin 
Visualize by flourescence microscopy 
Probe 
Slide 
TGCATGCATGCA 
ACGTACGTACGT 
DNA MICROARRAYS 

Through the interface of physics and biology, chip technology 
has made it possible to synthesize or attach thousands 
of different nucleotides onto a small piece of glass 
(chip). These chips then can be hybridized to patient samples 
to analyze gene expression (complementary DNA, 
or cDNA) or to test patient DNA for gene mutations 
(Fig. 13). 

Expression chips permit the simultaneous analysis of 
thousands of cDNAs, which was not possible prior to the 
advent of chip technology. Thousands of sequences for 
genes can be placed on a chip and then hybridized with 
tumor cDNA from a patient. For example, breast cancer 
tissue can be obtained from a patient, RNA extracted, and 
cDNA generated (using the enzyme reverse transcriptase) 
and then simultaneously tested for the patterns of expression 
for thousands of genes. 

Genomic DNA sequences also can be placed on the 
chips to analyze human gene mutations. Sequences of the 
oligonucleotides on the chip can be designed so that 
every variation of every possible base of genes on the 
chip can be detected. Because the genome is nearly completely 
sequenced, almost any gene sequences can be 
used. For example, sequences for diseases that typically 
occur in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals (Tay-Sachs disease, 
Canavan disease, Gaucher’s disease, and cystic 

Computer analysis 
Excitation 
Emission 
Hybridize to chip 
Ovarian tumorNormal tumor 
RNA 
cDNA 
RNA 
cDNA 
Relative Expression 
Tumor increased 
Equal 
Normal increased 
n FIG. 12. Fluorescent in situ hybridization. n FIG. 13. Expression chip (microarray). 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

fibrosis) could be placed on a single chip. In the near 
future, chips could be used in testing for a variety of conditions, 
such as lung disease, heart disease, and gynecologic 
disease. 

Currently, karyotypes are useful for the diagnosis of 
aneuploidies and structural abnormalities such as translocations 
and large (>3-Mb) deletions. Current work 
involves placing 100-kb bacterial artificial chromosome 
clones, spaced about 1 Mb apart, on a slide or slides and 
analyzing the result using FISH. If successful, these 
“cytogenetic chips” would permit the detection of deletions 
and duplications of less than 3 Mb, which is the current 
resolution of a standard karyotype, and this might 
replace the standard karyotype. 

SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE POLYMORPHISMS 

It has been known for many years that diversity of gene 
sequences occurs in all individuals. The DNA sequence 
differences that do not affect the phenotype of the organism 
are termed polymorphisms. Initial polymorphisms 
were detected by Southern blot analysis when they 
altered a restriction site (restriction fragment length polymorphisms). 
However, an extensive sequencing effort has 
yielded a large number (approximately 1.5 million to 2 
million) single base changes, called single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced “snips”). These SNPs 
are located throughout the entire genome on all chromosomes. 
The ability to determine these SNPs in humans 
will allow a more comprehensive study of human evolution 
and will also be important in identifying human gene 
mutations and responses to medications. 

The Human Genome Mapping Project 

The nearly complete draft of the human genome was published 
in February 2001 (35, 36). As has been noted, the 
haploid human genome consists of 3.2 billion base pairs, 
and the number of genes is approximately 30,000 (estimates 
vary between 25,000 and 40,000). This number is 
only about twice the number of genes for the fruit fly 
Drosophila (14,500) and the worm C elegans (17,500– 
20,000). However, these approximately 30,000 genes can 
produce about 100,000 proteins in humans because of 
alternative splicing of the exons. Despite the large size of 
the genome, only a very small percentage of the sequences 
actually encode for genes. More than half of the sequences 
represent repeat elements, whereas the remainder includes 
introns, regulatory elements, and unknown sequences. 
The function of most of the genome is unknown and will 
fuel research efforts in the postmapping era. 

Research will reap the benefits of knowledge of the 
human genome sequence. Comparative studies with 
model organisms (fruit flies and worms, among others) 
will permit a more complete study of gene and cellular 
functions, as well as better understanding of evolution. 
Because most genes encode proteins, it will be important 

to understand protein–protein interactions (proteomics). 
The clinical applications of the genome project will be 
tremendous and are enumerated here. 

GENETIC DIAGNOSIS OF INHERITED DISEASES 

There are currently more than 10,000 genetic diseases 
listed in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
database, but known diseases attributed to a particular 
gene have been ascribed to only a small proportion of the 
genes. Because there are at least 30,000 genes, there will 
be at least 30,000 diseases (although it could range from 
double to triple this number because of alternative splicing 
leading to 100,000 proteins). The causative gene will 
be identified for all mendelian diseases (X linked and 
autosomal). It is highly possible during the near future 
that the entire human genome may be placed on a chip (or 
chips), and that we will be able to test for all sequence 
differences simultaneously. 

Known genetic causes of infertility are shown in Table 1. 
At the present time, gene mutations causing infertility in 
humans are relatively rare and have been identified in 
patients with absent puberty and infertility. The challenge 
will be to identify the mutations that cause more common 
types of infertility—those with normal puberty and infertility. 


GENETIC DIAGNOSIS OF COMPLEX DISEASES 

More common complex diseases, such as hypertension, 
asthma, seizure disorders, and psychiatric disorders, 
probably involve multiple genes and environmental factors. 
Therefore, it is likely that the elucidation of 
causative genes will take longer than for diseases that 
have clear patterns of inheritance. 

UNDERSTANDING THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DISEASES 

Identifying human mutations will be the first step toward 
understanding the genetic basis of human disease; however, 
functional studies of the protein often are limited in 
humans. Because many model organisms possess orthologues 
(genes with similar sequences) to human genes, 
functional studies can be performed to elucidate the functional 
effects of mutations. For example, a particular gene 
could be deleted in mice, and the full spectrum of phenotypic 
characteristics could be examined. In addition, the 
study of model organisms for gene mutations could identify 
genes that could then be searched for in the human 
genome database. Humans with the appropriate phenotype 
could then be screened for mutations. 

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS AND PREIMPLANTATION 
GENETIC DIAGNOSIS 

Prenatal diagnosis will be markedly expanded to include 
a large number of diseases. In the near future, all inherited 
diseases are likely to be characterized, but prenatal 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

n TABLE 1. Genetic Causes of Infertility 
Cause Gene Inheritance 
Hypothalamic 
Kallmann’s syndrome KAL1 X-LR 
AHC/IHH DAX1 X-LR 
Leptin deficiency LEP AR 
Leptin resistance LEPR AR 
Pituitary 
IHH (GnRH resistance) GNRHR AR 
AHC/IHH DAX1 X-LR 
Isolated FSH deficiency FSHb AR 
Isolated LH deficiency LHb AR 
Combined pituitary deficiency PROP1 AR 
Septooptic dysplasia HESX1 AR 
Gonadal infertility 
FSH resistance FSHR AR 
LH resistance LH/hCGR AR 
APECED AIRE AR 
17-OH deficiency CYP17 AR 
Aromatase deficiency CYP19 AR 
17-HSD deficiency 17-HSD 3 AR 
Estrogen resistance ESR1 AR 
Adrenal failure/sex revers SF1 AR 
Denys-Drash syndrome and Frasier syndrome WT1 AD 
Campomelic dysplasia SOX9 AD 
Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus 
syndrome FOXL2 AD 
Gonadal 
Turner’s syndrome 45,X Sporadic 
Fragile X syndrome FMR1 X-LD 
Partial deletion of X ? X-LD 
Ovarian failure Diaph2 X-LD? 
Oligospermia/azoospermia DAZ (AZFc) Sporadic, Y 
Oligospermia/azoospermia YRBM (AZFb) Sporadic, Y 
Oligospermia/azoospermia USP9Y (AZFa) Sporadic, Y 
Outflow 
Androgen insensitivity AR X-LR 
Bilateral congenital absence of the vas deferens 
(cystic fibrosis) CFTR AR 

Abbreviations: ACH/IHH indicates adrenal cortical hromone/idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidosis–ectodermal dystrophy; 
17-OH, 17-hydroxylase; 17-HSD, 17-hydroxysteroid; X-LR, X-linked recessive; AR, autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; X-LD, 
X-linked dominant. 

diagnosis probably will be used only for the most severe GENE THERAPY 
diseases. In addition, it should be possible to diagnose In the next decade, it is likely that some gene therapy will 
most of the deletion syndromes causing multiple congen-be successful (in some cancers, severe combined immunoital 
malformations (such as DiGeorge syndrome and deficiency, cystic fibrosis, and hemophilia). Because the 
Prader-Willi syndrome) and some complex diseases. understanding of gene regulation is in its infancy, it is not 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

surprising that gene therapy is not commonplace now, 
and it could take the first half of the 21st century to gain 
widespread use. Intrauterine therapy also may be possible 
to treat some metabolic diseases in the near future. 

DYSMORPHIC CHILDREN 

Only about 25% of children with dysmorphic features 
currently are diagnosed. As more genes are identified, 
computer algorithms will be able to list the most likely 
candidate genes, which could then be tested for correct 
diagnosis in most cases. 

CANCER 

Knowing the complete human sequence also will enable 
the discovery of more germline mutations that cause 
inherited cancers (currently there are more than 20 known 
genes), which make up approximately 5% of all cancers. 
This knowledge will permit better identification of individuals 
at risk so that appropriate counseling and surveillance 
can be administered. However, most cancers are not 
inherited but instead are of somatic cell origin. Through 
the use of expression chip analysis, those genes that are 
overexpressed can be determined, and therapy can be 
directed more logically against specific targets. 

INFECTIONS 

Many bacterial genomes have been sequenced, and probably 
most of the known bacteria and viruses will have 
their genomes sequenced. This sequencing will permit 
the diagnosis of these organisms (eg, by chip analysis); 
furthermore, the characterization of their genomes will 
lead to a better understanding about virulence, which 
should assist in the development of improved antimicrobial 
and antiviral agents. 

DRUG RESPONSE 

Knowledge of all the DNA sequence differences (polymorphisms) 
in the genome will permit the identification 
of genotypes associated with response or no response to 
certain drugs. This information will reduce the common 
trial-and-error method currently in use. The identification 
of paralogues (genes that arose from duplication of 
another gene) could result in the discovery of a related 
gene that might be a better pharmacologic target. For 
example, the paralogue of the weaker serotonin receptor 
5-HT3A, 5-HT3B, is a better target for serotonin, which is 
important in mood disorders and schizophrenia. 

DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY AND DISEASE PREVENTION 

The identification of all genes and all SNPs, along with 
their analysis in human diseases, will promote disease 
prevention. Everyone will be at risk for certain diseases, 
so with this information, lifestyle changes or screening 
could be instituted. 

LIMITATIONS OF GENOMIC MEDICINE 

Limitations of genomic medicine include concern about 
decision-making issues; individuals may or may not want 
to know they could get a disease. Privacy is another 
important concern, particularly the issue of insurance 
companies using genetic information to prevent enrollment. 
Patenting certain human sequences and withholding 
information from public investigators could hinder 
progress. Perhaps one of the greatest concerns is that too 
few people, including physicians, will be educated in 
genomic medicine. However, it is clear that the human 
genome sequence will produce a lasting change in the 
way medicine is practiced. 

References 

1. Ji TH, Ji I, Kim SJ. Gonadotropin receptors. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:726–746 
2. Porto CS, Lazari MF, Abreu LC, Bardin CW, Gunsalus GL. 
Receptors for androgen-binding proteins: internalization 
and intra-cellular signalling. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 
1995;53:561–565 
( ) 
3. Brann DW, Hendry LB, Mahesh VB. Emerging diversities 
in the mechanism of action of steroid hormones. J Steroid 
Biochem Mol Biol 1995;52:113–133 
( ) 
4. MacLusky NJ. Sex steroid receptors. In: Adashi EY, Rock 
JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:627–663 
5. Wehling M. Looking beyond the dogma of genomic steroid 
action: insights and facts of the 1990s. J Mol Med 
1995;73:439–447 
( ) 
6. Korach KS, Course JF, Curtis SW, Washburn TF, Lindzey J, 
Kimbro KS, et al. Estrogen receptor gene disruption: 
molecular characterization and experimental and clinical 
phenotypes. Recent Prog Horm Res 1996;51:159–186; discussion 
186–188 
( ) 
7. Attisano L, Selvestri C, Izzi L, Labbe E. The transcriptional 
role of Smads and FAST (FoxH1) in TGF beta and 
activin signalling. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2001;180:3–11 
( ) 
8. Attisano L, Tuen Lee-Hoeflich S. The Smads. Genome Biol 
2001;2: reviews 3010 
( ) 
9. Delfs TM, Klein S, Fottrell P, Naether OG, Leidenberger 
FA, Zimmermann RC. 24-hour profiles of salivary progesterone. 
Fertil Steril 1994;62:960–906 
( ) 
10. Lu Y, Bentley GR, Gann PH, Hodges KR, Chatterton RT. 
Salivary estradiol and progesterone levels in conception and 
nonconception cycles in women: evaluation of a new assay 
for salivary estradiol. Fertil Steril 1999;71:863–868 
( ) 
11. Gann PH, 
Giovanazzi S, Van Horn L, Branning A, 
Chatterton RT Jr. Saliva as a medium for investigating intraand 
interindividual differences in sex hormone levels in 
premenopausal women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
2001;10:59–64 
( ) 

12. Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic 
endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams &Wilkins, 1999 
13. Oosterhuis GJ, Michgelsen HW, 
Vermes I. Laboratory 
markers of ovarian function. Adv Clin Chem 2000;35: 
295–331 
( ) 
14. Martin JN Jr, Cowan BD. Biochemical assessment and prediction 
of gestational well-being. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am 1990;17:81–93 
( ) 
15. McCord ML, Muram D, Buster JE, Arheart KL, Stovall TG, 
Carson SA. Single serum progesterone as a screen for 
ectopic pregnancy: exchanging specificity and sensitivity to 
obtain optimal test performance. Fertil Steril 1996;66: 
513–516 
( ) 
16. Wheeler MJ. The determination of bio-available testosterone. 
Ann Clin Biochem 1995;32:345–357 
( ) 
17. Friedman CI, Schmidt GE, Kim MH, Powell J. Serum 
testosterone concentrations in the evaluation of androgenproducing 
tumors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:44–53 
(button) 
18. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Androgen treatment of decreased libido. ACOG Committee 
Opinion 244. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2000:21–22 
19. Dennerstein L, Dudley EC, Hopper JL, Burger H. Sexuality, 
hormones and the menopausal transition. Maturitas 1997; 
26:83–93 
( ) 
20. Shifren JL, Braunstein GD, Simon JA, Casson PR, Buster 
JE, Redmond G, et al. Transdermal testosterone treatment 
in women with impaired sexual function after oophorectomy. 
N Engl J Med 2000;343:682–688 
( ) 
21. Casson PR, Carson SA, Buster JE. Testosterone delivery 
systems for women: present status and future promise. 
Semin Reprod Endocrinol 1998;16:153–159 
( ) 
22. Kroboth PD, Salek FS, Pittenger AL, Fabian TJ, Frye RF. 
DHEA and DHEA-S: a review. J Clin Pharmacol 1999;39: 
327–348 
( ) 
23. Findling JW, 
Raff H. Newer diagnostic techniques and 
problems in Cushing’s disease. Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am 1999;28:191–210 
( ) 
31

BASIC PRINCIPLES 

24. Boscaro M, Barzon L, Fallo F, Sinono N. Cushing’s syndrome. 
Lancet 2001;357:783–791 
( ) 
25. Molitch, ME. Diagnosis and treatment of prolactinomas. 
Adv Intern Med 1999;44:117–153 
( ) 
26. Rose MP, Gaines Das ER, Balen AH. Definition and measurement 
of follicle stimulating hormone. Endocr Rev 
2000;21:5–22 
( ) 
27. Broekmans FJ, 
Scheffer GJ, Bancsi LF, Dorland M, 
Blankenstein MA, te Velde ER. Ovarian reserve tests in 
infertility practice and normal fertile women. Maturitas 
1998;30:205–214 
( ) 
28. Lipscomb GH, Stovall TG, Ling FW. Nonsurgical treatment 
of ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1325–1329 
( ) 
29. Daya S. Human chorionic gonadotropin increase in normal 
early pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:286–290 
( ) 
30. Rotmensch S, Cole LA. False diagnosis and needless therapy 
of presumed malignant disease in women with falsepositive 
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations. 
Lancet 2000;355:712–715 
( ) 
31. Layman LC. Reproductive genetics. In: Seifer DB, Samuels 
P, Kniss DA, eds. Physiologic basis of gynecology and 
obstetrics. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2001:20–37 
32. Layman LC. The genetic basis of of female infertility. In: 
Rimoin DL, Connor JM, Pyeritz RE, Korf BR. Emery & 
Rimoin’s principles and practice of medical genetics. 4th 
ed. London: Churchill Livingstone, 2002:947–960 
33. Hedenfalk I, Duggan D, Chen Y, Radmacher M, Bittner M, 
Simon R, et al. Gene-expression profiles in hereditary 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2001;344:539–548 
( ) 
34. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 
American College of Medical Genetics. Preconception and 
prenatal carrier screening for cystic fibrosis: clinical and 
laboratory guidelines. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
35. The human genome. Nature 2001;409:813–958 
36. The human genome. Science 2001;291:1148–1432 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Sexual Development and Puberty 


Genetic sex is determined at fertilization, but the embryonic 
gonad is bipotential, capable of differentiating into 
either an ovary or testis. Differentiation occurs in an 
orderly sequence of events during gestation (Fig. 14). 
With puberty, secondary sexual characteristics develop, 

again following an orderly sequence of events and culminating 
in the ability to reproduce. Abnormalities occur as 
a result of a number of factors at any stage, and they 
should be evaluated. Treatment is available to ameliorate 
the effects of many abnormalities. 


n FIG. 14. Gonadal sexual differentiation. The indifferent gonad begins to show differentiation into the ovary or testis during 
the sixth week. The testis develops primitive sex cords that differentiate into seminiferous tubules (outer portion) and rete testis 
(inner portion). The mesonephric (wolffian) ducts join the rete testis through efferent ductules. At 8 weeks, Leydig’s cells develop 
and secrete testosterone. In the ovary, the primordial germ cells remain in the cortical areas. Oogonia increase in number by 
mitosis until the 16th week, when meiosis begins. Meiosis continues in the ovary until after birth. During this time, a layer of follicular 
cells surrounds each oocyte to become primordial follicles. (Fossum G. Embryology of the reproductive mechanism. In: 
Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. I. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia, PA: Current Medicine, 
1999:1.15 with permission) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION 
IN THE FETUS 

Mammalian sexual differentiation is controlled by both 
genetic and hormonal influences. The gonadal ridge, a 
bulge on the medial aspect of the urogenital ridge in early 
gestation (weeks 5–7), is differentiated only when germ cells 
migrate into the region. These germ cells arise in the embryo, 
move to an extraembryonic site in the yolk sac, and then 
migrate through the dorsal mesentery to the gonadal ridge. 

Although the human gonad is bipotential, in the 
absence of the necessary testicular determinants, it will 
develop as an ovary. Testicular determination is directed 
by the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome 
(SRY). In the absence of a testis, both internal and external 
genitalia will be female. Male internal and external 
genitalia are dependent on the action of SRY to induce 
testicular differentiation, production of müllerian-inhibiting 
substance (MIS) from Sertoli’s cells to induce müllerian 
regression, production of testosterone from Leydig’s 
cells to preserve male internal ductal development, conversion 
of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone to induce 
male external genital development, and the presence of 
androgen receptors in the target tissues to induce end 
organ responsiveness. Differentiation of the testes occurs 
between days 43 and 50 of gestation. First-trimester testicular 
testosterone secretion is controlled by hCG from 
the placenta. Fetal pituitary gonadotropins contribute to 
testosterone secretion after 12 weeks of gestation. 
Testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone in the 
genital skin by the enzyme 5a -reductase. Fusion of labioscrotal 
folds to form a scrotum will occur only with androgen 
exposure in the first trimester. Androgen exposure later 
in gestation will result in clitoromegaly (Image 1) (1). 

The presence of germ cells is mandatory for ovarian 
differentiation, but not for testicular formation. In ovarian 
development, the germ cells enter meiosis (Fig. 15), 
and these oocytes are then enclosed by granulosa cells to 
form a primitive follicle. This process requires the presence 
of two intact and active X chromosomes. In female 
somatic cells, all but one X chromosome are inactivated; 
this process is termed lyonization. Reactivation of the 
inactivated X chromosome allows expression of genes 
from both chromosomes to control both oogenesis and 
folliculogenesis. Absence of a portion of, or a complete, 
X chromosome can lead to oocyte/follicular degeneration 
and gonadal dysgenesis. Non–X-linked genes also may 
be involved in oocyte maturation. 

Testicular differentiation of the gonadal ridge is primarily 
under the genetic control of the Y chromosome. 
The role of the Y chromosome is facultative; ie, it ensures 
testicular formation by encoding a diffusable factor that 
induces testicular differentiation. In 46,XX males and 
46,X (deleted Y) females, the critical region of the Y 
chromosome is the distal short arm near what is termed 
the pseudoautosomal region (Fig. 16). The pseudoautoso-

A B 
n FIG. 15. Meiosis. (Fossum G. Embryology of the reproductive 
mechanism. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. 
I. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia, PA: 
Current Medicine, 1999:1.5 with permission) 
mal region of Y pairs with X during meiosis and can 
engage in recombination. Asymmetrical pairing of X and 
Y might result in translocation of the testicular-determining 
region within the pseudoautosomal region, leading to 
alterations in sexual development. 

Initial studies using deletion mapping identified a 
highly conserved DNA segment that contained a gene 
coding for a zinc finger protein, which was termed ZFY. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Pseudoautosomal region 

11.3 


11.2 


11.1 


11.1 


11.211 


11.212 


11.22 


11.23 


12 



CSF2RA—Haemopoiesis 
IL3RA 
ANT3 
HOIMT XE7 
MHC2 
XG 
SRY—Sex determination? 
RPS4Y 
ZFY—Transcription factor 

TSPY—Germ cell 


AMELY—Tooth enamel 


KAL—Neuronal migration 
STSp 
T221—Homologue in Xg21.1–q21.3 


AZF—Spermatogenesis 
Family of transcripts with Poly 
A binding most 

n FIG. 16. Physical map of the Y chromosome indicating some known genes and gene regions. (Bradman N, Thomas M. Why 
Y? The Y chromosome in the study of human evolution, migration and prehistory. Science Spectra 1998, no. 14) 
Subsequent studies determined that ZFY was not the testicular-
determining factor. In one study, investigators 
searching the region between the break point in the ZFYnegative 
XX males and the pseudoautosomal boundary 
identified the SRY gene (2). Expression of this gene has 
been demonstrated in the testis of the embryonic male 
mouse, and lack of expression has been shown in the 
female gonadal ridge. Expression resumes in adult testes 
and appears to be germ cell dependent. A mouse model 
carrying a mutation that inactivates this region produced 
XY female mice. A transgene including SRY was inserted 
into XX mouse embryos and was found to induce testicular 
development in those embryos. One transgenic 
embryo that developed to maturity had a normal male phenotype 
with small testes, but without spermatogenesis consistent 
with the findings in nontransgenic XX males (3). 

The direct evidence of germline sex reversal in mice is 
strong evidence in support of SRY as the sex-determining 
gene. However, some questions still remain in humans. 
For example, SRY has been identified in most 46,XX 
males but is also present in most 46,XY females with 
Swyer syndrome. Approximately 10% of these individuals 
have point mutations in a highly conserved central 
region of the SRY gene, termed the HMG-related box, 
which encodes a motif common to other DNA-binding 
transcription factors. Alternative mechanisms for sex 

reversal must be postulated to explain these exceptions. 
Multiple autosomal genes also play a role in testicular 
differentiation. Abnormalities can result in some forms of 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. 

The SRY gene directs male gonadal differentiation by 
inducing a cascade of gene activation and protein production. 
Differentiation of the Sertoli’s cell is an early 
male-specific change that is important in inhibition of 
meiosis and direction of primordial germ cell differentiation 
toward spermatogonia. Sertoli’s cells also produce 
MIS. The gene for MIS has been cloned and mapped to 
the short arm of chromosome 19. Müllerian-inhibiting 
substance causes regression of the müllerian ducts during 
early male embryogenesis and also has been noted to be 
expressed in granulosa cells in females, where it may act 
to inhibit oocyte meiosis. The SRY gene may play a role 
in transcriptional regulation of MIS. The mechanism of 
action is not believed to be direct, because there appear to 
be intervening regulatory factors between SRY and the 
MIS promoter. The SRY gene also has been shown to 
induce sexually dimorphic expression of steroidogenic 
factor 1 (SF-1), with early transcripts present in both 
sexes but subsequent levels declining in females during 
differentiation. The SF-1 binds to an upstream regulatory 
element of MIS and may be one of the intervening regulatory 
factors between SRY and MIS expression. 


SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA 

The finding of ambiguous genitalia in an infant is a rare 
and emotionally charged condition that requires immediate 
attention. The etiology is virilization of genetic 
females (female pseudohermaphroditism), undermasculinization 
of genetic males (male pseudohermaphroditism), 
or rarely, true hermaphroditism with presence of 
both ovarian and testicular tissue (Fig. 17 and Image 2). 

Etiology 

The most common cause of female pseudohermaphroditism, 
and of genital ambiguity overall, is congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia. Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase 
accounts for the vast majority of cases, but 11-hydroxylase 
deficiency and 3-hydroxysteriod dehydrogenase 
deficiency also may occur. The salt-wasting form of 21hydroxylase 
deficiency is life threatening and therefore is 
the most critical condition to be excluded in the differential 
diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia. The presence of 
hypertension suggests possible 11-hydroxylase deficiency. 
In all of these adrenal enzyme–deficiency states, masculinization 
of the female fetus occurs secondary to 
exposure to high levels of androgenic precursors produced 
by the adrenal gland. The enzymatic block causes 
decreased biosynthesis of cortisol, with subsequent 
impaired negative feedback on corticotropin production 
resulting in adrenal hyperplasia and overproduction of 
androgens. Inhibition of aldosterone biosynthesis leads to 
impaired renal conservation of sodium and the potential 
for circulatory collapse. Hypertension is caused by the 
accumulation of steroid intermediates such as 11-deoxycorticosterone, 
which promotes salt and water retention. 

Rarely, female pseudohermaphroditism is the result of 
exposure of the female fetus to androgens from nonadrenal 
sources. Exogenous maternal androgen ingestion 
has been implicated in several cases, although placental 
metabolism of androgens will in general protect the fetus 
from anything other than very high doses. Rare adrenal 
and ovarian tumors may produce high levels of androgens, 
as may theca-lutein cysts. (For a description of 
deficiency of the aromatase enzyme, see “Abnormalities 
of Puberty.”) Inability of the placenta to convert androgens 
to estrogens during pregnancy results in high maternal 
and fetal androgen levels, with subsequent virilization 
of the female fetus. 

In male pseudohermaphroditism, genetic males are 
undermasculinized secondary either to inadequate production 
of testosterone or dihydrotestosterone or to lack 
of androgen responsiveness in the target tissues. Mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis (45,X/46,XY) is a form of gonadal 
dysgenesis, with the degree of genital ambiguity dependent 
on the degree of differentiation of the dysgenetic testicular 
elements. Leydig’s cell hypoplasia results from 
defects in the LH receptor, causing failure of fetal testicular 
Leydig’s cell differentiation and, thus, impaired testosterone 
production with varying degrees of genital ambiguity. 

A number of defects in testosterone biosynthesis also 
have been described. Deficiency of 17a -hydroxylase 
causes hypertension and hypokalemia, in addition to genital 
ambiguity. Patients with 17-ketoreductase deficiency 
may have only isolated clitoromegaly and present at 
puberty with both breast development and symptoms of 
virilization. Deficiency of 5a -reductase is an autosomalrecessive 
condition with normal testes producing normal 
amounts of testosterone but conversion to dihydrotestosterone 
impaired in genital skin. This condition leads to 
severe ambiguity of the external genitalia with labioscrotal 
fusion and a urogenital sinus. Incomplete or partial 
androgen insensitivity syndrome is caused by a mutation 
in the androgen receptor gene that leads to only partial 
function. The external genital abnormalities can be highly 
variable, ranging from phenotypic female to phenotypic 
male. 

Patients with true hermaphroditism most commonly 
have a 46,XX karyotype. In some patients, SRY DNA can 
be detected by using molecular techniques, although it is 
not always present. Approximately 10% of patients with 
true hermaphroditism have 46,XY karyotypes. Rarely, 
the karyotype is 46,XY/46,XX, which is believed to arise 
from the fusion of 46,XY and 46,XX embryos, forming a 
chimera. Gonadal development is variable; any combination 
of ovary, testis, and ovotestis—either unilateral or 
bilateral—is possible. The degree of genital ambiguity 
also varies. In general, the ovarian tissue is more normally 
functional than the testicular tissue, and pregnancy has 
been reported in some true hermaphrodites. 

Diagnosis 

Evaluation of an infant with ambiguous genitalia should 
be initiated in the delivery room. Definitive assignment of 
sex should be withheld, but parents should be reassured 
that appropriate evaluation will result in accurate determination 
of the appropriate sex of rearing. Physical 
examination should include careful inspection of the genital 
area (Box A). A palpable gonad strongly suggests that 
the infant is a genetic male (Y chromosome) or, rarely, a 
true hermaphrodite. In the absence of a palpable gonad, 
the most likely diagnosis is congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
Because the salt-wasting form of this condition can 
lead to life-threatening electrolyte disturbances and 
adrenal failure, early diagnosis is critical. Signs of 
adrenal crisis include vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, 
and eventually shock and coma. Physical examination 
also should look for any other somatic anomalies that 
might be consistent with mixed gonadal dysgenesis. 

The first laboratory studies that should be performed 
are analysis of serum electrolytes, 17a -hydroxyprogesterone, 
and karyotype. During the first 24 hours of life, 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels may be elevated secondary 
to placental production; therefore, if the level is 
elevated, the test should be repeated. A persistently elevated 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is caused by 21hydroxylase 
deficiency in more than 90% of cases and by 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 17. Differential diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia. 

BOX A 
Physical Examination 
for Ambiguous Genitalia 

Are gonads palpable? Palpation of the genital and inguinal 
regions is the most important part of the physical examination. 
Gonads in the inguinal regions or in scrotal folds are 
almost certainly testes. Ovaries are not found in scrotal 
folds or in the inguinal regions. The testes, however, may 
be intraabdominal. If testes are not palpable, the infant 
should be considered to have congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
until demonstrated otherwise. 

What is the phallus length? Measured from the pubic 
ramus to the tip of the glans, a stretched penile length of 
less than 2.5 cm is 2.5 standard deviations below the 
mean for infants at 40 weeks of gestational age (2.0 cm for 
36 weeks and 1.5 cm for 32 weeks). The normal newborn 
clitoris measures less than 1 cm long; a normal newborn 
penis measures 2.8–4.2 cm in length. 

What is the position of the urethral meatus? The urethral 
meatus can range from a mild hypospadias to an opening 
in the perineal area into a urogenital sinus. Hypospadias is 
almost always accompanied by chordee, which is a ventral 
curvature of the phallus resulting from a shortened urethra. 

To what degree are the labioscrotal folds fused? The findings 
can range from unfused labia majora of a normal 
female through labia with variable degrees of posterior 
fusion; to a bifid scrotum; to a fully fused, normal-appearing 
male scrotum. The distance from the anus to the edge 
of the vagina divided by the distance from the anus to the 
base of the clitoris is a ratio that is less than 0.5 in normal 
females. A ratio greater than 0.5 indicates some degree of 
labioscrotal fusion. 

Is there a vagina, vaginal pouch, or urogenital sinus? Does 
the rectal examination suggest a midline structure that 
might be a uterus? A uterus can be palpable, especially 
shortly after birth, when the uterus is a little enlarged in 
response to maternal estrogen. 

Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic endocrinology 
and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
1999:370–371 

11-hydroxylase deficiency in approximately 7% of cases. 
The dehydroepiandrosterone level can also be determined 
to assist in differentiation of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency. Levels of 11-deoxycortisol will be elevated 
in 11-hydroxylase deficiency. A serum sample 
should be frozen to be available for future analysis of 
other steroid intermediates, should it be indicated. 
Electrolytes and glucose should be monitored daily 
because adrenal crisis may not be manifested for 5–7 
days. 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

If a labioscrotal gonad is palpated or a Y chromosome 
is detected on karyotype analysis, serum testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone levels should be assessed. It is difficult 
to detect a blind-ending vaginal pouch in a newborn, 
and even ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) may not be adequate in identifying the presence 
of a uterus. The level of dihydrotestosterone will help differentiate 
5a -reductase deficiency from incomplete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome, because there are low 
levels in the former and normal levels in the latter. If 
testosterone levels are low, an hCG stimulation test can be 
performed to assess gonadal biosynthetic capacity. For the 
test, a dose of 1,000 units of hCG is given intramuscularly 
daily for 3 days, and serum testosterone and dihydrotestosterone 
levels are measured 24 hours after the 
final dose. Levels of testosterone greater than 100 ng/dL 
indicate adequate biosynthetic capacity. Adequate serum 
samples should be frozen for possible subsequent assay of 
steroid precursors. This step will allow differential diagnosis 
of the various rarer enzymatic defects in steroid 
biosynthesis if the standard testing does not result in a specific 
diagnosis. 

Therapy 

Appropriate therapy is determined by the diagnosis. 
Determination of the sex of rearing depends on the genital 
findings. Sex assignment in male pseudohermaphrodites 
should be determined by the potential for the child’s genitalia 
to function sexually in adulthood. Genetic females 
with ambiguity should undergo corrective surgery. There is 
no absolute consensus regarding timing, but in general, clitoroplasty 
can be accomplished successfully shortly after 
birth, whereas correction of significant labioscrotal fusion 
may be better accomplished in an older child, except in cases 
that require treatment of urethral obstruction for voiding purposes. 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia requires corticosteroid 
replacement, as well as mineralocorticoid 
replacement in salt-wasting forms. The presence of a Y chromosome 
necessitates gonadal extirpation, either shortly after 
diagnosis or, in the case of androgen insensitivity syndrome, 
after pubertal breast development is completed. 

Ambiguous genitalia in a 46,XY infant may be undiagnosed 
after evaluation of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone 
levels and the response to hCG. Further imaging 
studies or even surgical exploration may be required to rule 
out true hermaphroditism and mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 
as well as to facilitate gonadectomy. Patients with defects 
in testosterone biosynthesis may respond well to testosterone 
replacement. Intramuscular administration of 25–50 
mg of testosterone every 3 weeks for a total of three doses 
should result in growth of at least 1.5 cm in the stretched 
phallus. Failure to respond indicates severe androgen resistance. 
These patients, in general, should be raised as 
females with appropriate reconstructive surgery because of 
difficulties in surgical construction of a functional penis. 
These decisions should be made in careful consultation 
with the family after all diagnostic test results are available. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT 

Puberty is the result of complex neuroendocrine events 
that cumulate optimally with the most critical aspect of 
survival of the human species: the ability to reproduce. 
This transition interval between childhood and adulthood 
includes somatic growth, the development of secondary 
sexual characteristics, and marked psychologic changes. 
Understanding the normal pubertal process is critical in 
the evaluation of children for possible abnormalities of 
puberty and the evaluation of young patients with menstrual 
complaints. 

The onset of puberty depends on a wide variety of 
genetic and environmental factors. Genetics may play the 
most profound influence on development if environmental 
factors such as nutrition are controlled. The average 
interval between menarche in monozygotic twins is 2.2 
months, compared with an interval of 8.2 months in dizygotic 
twins. In the general population, the age of menarche 
appears to have declined markedly since the 
beginning of the 1900s. This change may reflect better 
nutrition intake and public health. The decline leveled off 
by 1960. However, newer studies have challenged the 
validity of these data, and the seeming decline in age of 
pubertal onset may be only a reflection of inaccurate data 
collected in limited populations (4). 

Hormonal Events 

The hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian (HPO) axis is intact 
in the fetus by early midgestation and is well developed 
at birth. It is responsible for the episodic release of GnRH 
in the fetus, which stimulates germ cell division. In 
midgestation the average fetus has approximately 6 million 
oocytes. The normal process of atresia reduces this 
number to approximately 1 million to 2 million at birth 
and to half a million at puberty. The level of FSH rises 
even further at birth, probably because of withdrawal of 
maternal estrogens. The resulting ovarian stimulation 
produces follicle stimulation. Small ovarian follicles and 
functional ovarian cysts in the fetus, often noted on both 
prenatal and postnatal ultrasonograms, are the result of 
this normal physiologic process. 

The HPO axis is quiescent during childhood, becoming 
active again at the onset of puberty. It controls the 
hormonal cascade that regulates reproductive function, 
which results in the synthesis of GnRH. Secretion of 
GnRH, in turn, stimulates both the release of FSH and LH 
from the pituitary gland and ovarian sex steroid production 
from the ovary. Activation of the HPO axis ultimately 
results in the production of sex steroids from the 
gonads; this is termed gonadarche. 

During the axis’s quiescent period, there is a decline in 
GnRH, independent of ovarian steroids (it occurs in girls 
without ovaries). During these years, FSH levels are higher 
than LH levels, a pattern often referred to as a prepu


bertal gonadotropin ratio. This ratio reverses later, during 
pubertal development. 

The HPO axis is responsible for many of the primary 
changes of puberty. In very early puberty, some illdefined 
changes of the central nervous system (CNS) 
result in the first physiologic change of puberty: an 
increase in GnRH pulses during sleep. These pulses 
gradually occur during daylight hours as well, resulting in 
the advancement of puberty. 

Activation of another axis, the hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal (HPA) axis, generally has already begun. 
This axis produces secretion of adrenal androgens and 
ultimately results in the development of pubic hair, a process 
termed adrenarche. There appears to be a dissociation 
between the HPA and the HPO axes. Advancement 
of adrenarche without gonadarche and of gonadarche 
without adrenarche occurs in some pathologic conditions 
(see the discussion of the adrenal gland). 

Sequence of Puberty 

The classic sequence of puberty in girls is growth acceleration, 
thelarche, pubarche, maximal growth acceleration, 
menarche, and ovulation. Adrenarche can precede 
thelarche in some children. This sequence variant seems 
to be especially prevalent in girls of African descent. 
Maximal growth acceleration is reached prior to menarche. 
Growth after menarche generally is limited to an 
average of 1–3 in. Girls with earlier menarche will have 
more growth potential left at menarche than will girls 
with later menarche. 

Timing of Puberty 

The sequence of thelarche to menarche generally occurs 
within approximately 2–3 years but ranges considerably 
from child to child (Fig. 18). The duration of time from 
pubertal onset to menarche depends on the age of pubertal 
onset. Girls experiencing earlier puberty have a longer 
interval from onset of puberty to menarche. In one study, 
the time lapse from pubertal onset to menarche was 2.8 
years in girls with pubertal onset at 9 years, compared 
with an interval of approximately 1.4 years in girls with 
pubertal onset at 12 years (5). 

The time from menarche to ovulation in half the cycles 
averages approximately 3 years but occurs significantly 
quicker in girls with younger menarche. In girls with 
menarche at less than 12 years, approximately half of the 
cycles are ovulatory in 1 year. In contrast, in girls with 
menarche between 12 and 13 years, it takes approximately 
3 years to achieve ovulation in 50% of cycles (6). 

Racial differences also were reported. In the United 
States, black girls entered puberty 1.0–1.5 years earlier 
than white girls and began menstruating 8.5 months earlier 
(4) (Table 2). Data on other races were not analyzed, 
because other racial groups made up less than 3% of the 
study population. 


SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

8 
9 
10 
1112 
1314151617 


Height spurtMenarche 
Breast(Tanner stage) 
Pubichair 
(Tanner stage) 
2345223344554325
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
Age (years) 
n FIG. 18. Timing of events of puberty. , 1969 data from a study of British schoolchildren. , 1997 data from a study of 

American schoolchildren. (From Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child 
44:291–303, 1969; and Pediatrics in Review, vol 8, no 2. Columbus, Ohio: Ross Laboratories, 1986) 

n TABLE 2. Sequence of Puberty 
Mean Age (Years) 
Event 
African 
Americans 
White 
Americans 
Thelarche 
Adrenarche 
Breast bud 
Pubic hair 
Maximal growth 
Menarche 
8.87 
8.78 
12.16 
9.96 
10.51 
10.5 
11.0 
11.4 
12.88 

Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, Bourdony CJ, Bhapkar MV, Kock GG, et al. Secondary sexual characteristics 
and menses in young girls seen in office practice: a study from the Pediatric Research in Office Settings network. 

Pediatrics 1997;99:505–512 

Tanner Staging 

Tanner staging was developed in 1969 to provide structure 
for clinicians to document breast and pubic hair 
development in a standardized fashion (7). The pubertal 
normatives identified in this study were based on the 
observation of 192 British children with a lower socioeconomic 
background, not a contemporary U.S. population 
of girls. In 1997, an office-based study of more than 
17,000 U.S. girls showed an earlier age of pubertal onset 
than the older standards (4) (see Fig. 18 and Table 2). 

Whether this difference reflects a declining age of puberty 
or flawed previous standards is unknown. 

The majority of girls, approximately 62%, are at breast 
stage Tanner IV at menarche (Fig. 19). Approximately 
10% are at Tanner V (adult contour) at menarche, and 25% 
are at Tanner II (breast buds) (8). On average, an adolescent 
progresses to Tanner V staging approximately 2 years 
after menarche. Girls participating in strenuous exercise 
may have aberrant progression in development and differing 
ages of achieving specific landmarks. For example, in 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 19. Tanner staging of breast development. Tanner I, elevation of papilla (no development; a prepubertal breast); Tanner 
II, a small breast bud elevating the papilla; Tanner III, continued enlargement of the breast mound without separation of the papilla 
and mound; Tanner IV, separation of the papilla above the breast mound; and Tanner V, recession of the papilla to the breast 
mound (adult breasts). Tanner V breasts are differentiated from Tanner III breasts by size and can be defined only by sequential 
examination. (Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 1999:398) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

one study, 75% of young dancers were at Tanner III (ele-nomenon. For pubic hair development, most girls are 
vated) at menarche, and 25% were Tanner II (8). Athletes Tanner IV (midescutcheon) stage at menarche and achieve 
may progress much quicker through Tanner breast stages Tanner V (female escutcheon) stage, on average, approxithan 
other girls when they go through a “catch-up” phe-mately 1 year after menarche (Fig. 20). 


n FIG. 20. Tanner staging of pubic hair development. Tanner I, no pubic hair (prepubertal pattern); Tanner II, isolated long 
hairs, mainly along the labia majora; Tanner III, course, curled hairs increasing in number; Tanner IV, adult-type pattern, but only 
on the mons pubis; and Tanner V, pubic hair spread beyond the mons (adult pattern). (Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical 
gynecologic endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:399) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ABNORMALITIES OF PUBERTY 
Precocious Puberty 

The 1997 data (5) have prompted discussion regarding 
the definition of precocious puberty. Based on the old 
standards, textbooks generally state that breast development 
before age 8 years is considered precocious (see 
Fig. 18). Recommendations based on more current data 
are that girls who have pubic hair or breast development 
when they are younger than 7 years (white girls) or 
younger than 6 years (African-American girls) receive an 
evaluation for precocious development (9). These recommendations 
caution that for white girls with development 
beginning after age 7 or African-American girls after age 
6, evaluation also is appropriate in any of the following 
additional conditions: 

• 
Rapid progression of puberty (bone age >2 years 
ahead of chronologic age and a predicted height 
of <150 cm or 2 standard deviations or more 
below the genetic target height) 
• 
Findings that relate to the central nervous system 
(CNS), such as headaches, neurologic symptoms, 
and seizures 
• 
Pubertal progression that affects the emotional 
health of the family or the girl 
Not all experts agree that the definition of precocious 
puberty should be changed based on the recent U.S. 
study, because it did not analyze racial groups other than 
white and African-American girls, and it was not from a 
random general population (10). Some experts recommend 
a bone age and height prediction in all children 
with breast or pubic hair before ages 8 and 9 years, 
respectively, because it may predict abnormal development 
more accurately. 

Puberty is initiated by the reactivation of the HPO 
axis, which is relatively quiescent between infancy and 
the onset of puberty. The mechanism for this reactivation 
has not been characterized completely, but it does require 
pulsatile GnRH stimulation. Central precocious puberty 
is a disease process characterized by premature hypothalamic 
GnRH activity. The most common etiology in 
females is idiopathic. Other conditions that must be ruled 
out include CNS tumors, such as craniopharyngiomas; 
trauma; infection; and juvenile primary hypothyroidism. 
Another possibility is Silver’s syndrome, a dwarfing syndrome 
with small stature, craniofacial disproportion. and 
elevated gonadotropin levels. 

GnRH-independent (peripheral) precocious puberty 
results from an independent source of sex steroids, rather 
than from maturation of the HPO axis. Steroids may be 
produced by ovarian cysts, functional ovarian tumors 
such as granulosus cell neoplasms, adrenal tumors, or 
ingestion of exogenous steroids. A rare cause is 
McCune–Albright syndrome. Patients exhibit precocious 
puberty and other signs of endocrine hyperfunction, as 

well as polyostotic fibrous dysplasia and café au lait 
spots. An activating somatic mutation of the gene coding 
for the stimulatory G protein component of glycoprotein 
hormone receptors leads to independent activation of the 
receptor without hormone. In granulosa cells, this process 
leads to the synthesis of estradiol through activation of 
FSH receptors without FSH being present. Heterosexual 
precocious puberty in females results from prepubertal 
production of androgens with growth of pubic and axillary 
hair and skeletal maturation. This condition may be 
secondary to exogenous androgen ingestion, androgensecreting 
tumors, or congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 

The diagnosis of idiopathic central precocious puberty 
in females is a diagnosis of exclusion. Pseudoprecocious 
puberty can be subdivided into premature thelarche and 
premature adrenarche. Premature thelarche is early breast 
development without other signs of sexual maturation; no 
other signs of precocious development are present (Fig. 
21). Bone age should be normal. Close follow-up is necessary 
to rule out progression to true precocious puberty. 
Premature adrenarche is the isolated appearance of pubic 
or axillary hair. It may be associated with excess adrenal 
androgen secretion secondary to partial deficiencies of 
steroidogenic hormones, but it also is commonly seen in 
African-American girls. 

Evaluation and treatment are not considered necessary 
for most African-American girls who develop pubertal 
signs when they are older than 6 years or for white girls 
older than 7 years unless there is rapid progression, an 
unacceptable predicted adult height based on bone age, 
and CNS-related findings or significant behavioral problems 
thought to be related to the progression of puberty. 
For most girls in this age group, pubertal development 
will be slow and ultimate adult height unaffected. 


n FIG. 21. Girl with precocious puberty. Breast development 
(Tanner stage III, approaching stage IV) in a 5-year-old 
girl with central precocious puberty. Note nipple and areolar 
maturation. (Lee PA. Normal and precocious puberty. In: 
Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol 1: Pediatric 
and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 
1998:4.11 with permission) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

The aim of treatment in central precocious puberty is 
suppression of gonadotropin production. Chronic administration 
of GnRH agonists has proven to be a remarkably 
safe and effective therapy for children of both sexes. 
Within 6–18 months after beginning daily therapy, pubertal 
levels and patterns of secretion of gonadotropins and 
sex steroids revert to prepubertal levels and patterns. 

A striking aspect of this therapy is the regression of 
secondary sexual characteristics, the cessation of menstrual 
bleeding, and the slowing of bone growth. In addition, 
any behavioral problems previously present and 
related to the precocity usually are reduced. 

Delayed Puberty and Primary 
Amenorrhea 

Etiologies for delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea 
may be divided into hypogonadal (ie, hypoestrogenic) and 
eugonadal (ie, well-estrogenized) categories (11). Patients 
with hypogonadism may have hypergonadotropism secondary 
to ovarian failure or central abnormalities affecting 
the normal maturation of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, 
leading to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The eugonadal 
category is comprised of patients with clinical evidence 
of normal steroidogenesis but delayed menarche. 
This group frequently has developmental failure or 
obstruction of the female müllerian system. Less common 
eugonadal etiologies include failure to develop a mature 
positive feedback mechanism despite adequate endogenous 
estrogen production (eg, polycystic ovary disorder), 
pituitary prolactinoma, and intersex disorders such as 
androgen insensitivity syndrome. 

Adolescents should be examined each year during the 
pubertal process with a genital inspection and evaluated 
with a growth chart and appropriate testing rather than 
wait until they meet the absolute ages previously held for 
pubertal delay (age 13 years, 2.5 standard deviations 
from the mean for thelarche; age 15 years, 2.5 standard 
deviations from the mean for menarche; and age 16 
years, 3 standard deviations from the mean for menarche). 
Inspection of the introitus, placement on a growth 
chart, and determination of FSH levels will identify the 
three most common causes of delayed puberty (ovarian 
failure, congenital absence of the uterus and vagina, and 
constitutional delay) and its etiology for two thirds of 
patients. 

Total absence of breast development at age 13 years 
requires some preliminary investigation. In addition to a 
thorough general physical examination and counseling, 
assessments of serum FSH and LH, TSH, and prolactin 
should be obtained. An elevation in serum FSH should 
signal cytogenetic evaluation. Undetectable or low serum 
gonadotropin levels necessitate finer scrutiny for pituitary 
tumors using computed tomography or MRI. Bone age 
determination may be helpful in selected cases, because it 
correlates better with sexual development than does 
chronologic age. 

Menarcheal delay accompanied by normal sexual and 
somatic growth requires a careful pelvic examination to 
exclude anatomic etiologies. This examination should be 
accompanied by abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography if 
the vagina is absent or represented by a shallow pouch. 
The presence of ovaries with follicles and absence of a 
uterus essentially establishes the diagnosis of müllerian 
agenesis. An abdominal ultrasonographic examination 
performed at the same visit will allow identification of 
unilateral renal agenesis or pelvic kidney associated with 
this condition. Determination of serum testosterone level 
is necessary only if the diagnosis is not straightforward; a 
value that approximates the range for males would suggest 
androgen insensitivity. Cytogenetic studies are indicated 
only when complete androgen insensitivity 
syndrome is a diagnostic consideration after the examination 
and studies just discussed have been performed. 

Gonadal Dysgenesis and 
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism 

Gonadal dysgenesis consists of a spectrum of disorders 
with gonadal failure resulting in hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Individuals with gonadal dysgenesis present 
with delayed puberty consisting of lack of secondary sexual 
development and primary or secondary amenorrhea. 
The most common etiology is privation of X chromosomal 
material. Karyotypes range from 45,X or 46,X (delX) 
single cell lines to mosaic and structural abnormalities of 
the X chromosome. Less commonly, apparently normal 
karyotypes (46,XX or 46,XY) are detected (11, 12). 

In 1938, Turner reported seven females who were 
short and had sexual infantilism, a congenital webbed 
neck, and cubitus valgus. Subsequent chromosome studies 
determined that phenotypically identical individuals 
had 45,X chromosome complements. These patients had 
characteristic somatic anomalies, referred to as Turner’s 
stigmata (Figs. 22 and 23). The most common visceral 
anomalies are coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic 
valves, and horseshoe kidney. More and more reports are 
accumulating of patients with Turner syndrome developing 
dilation of the ascending aorta and, rarely, dissections 
and rupture. At birth they may demonstrate a cystic 
hygroma or lymphedema of the hands and feet. Internal 
gonadal development consists of only white streaks of 
fibrous stroma with a paucity or complete lack of follicles. 
Studies have demonstrated the presence of primordial 
oocytes in the gonads of 45,X fetuses, demonstrating 
that the pathologic cause of gonadal dysgenesis is oocyte 
depletion due to premature loss, rather than failure of 
germ cell differentiation or migration. 

The 45,X chromosomal complement seen in these 
patients may arise from meiotic nondysjunction or 
anaphase lag during spermatogenesis or oogenesis. 
Parental studies have shown the X chromosome to be 
maternal in origin in 80–85% of cases, indicating loss of 
the paternal X as the most common etiology for this syn



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


A
AAB 
BB


n FIG. 22. Turner’s syndrome in a girl aged 12 years 5 
months with a 45,X karyotype. Her height was 126.7 cm 
(–4.6 SD); her weight was 31.2 kg (–1.9 SD); and her bone 
age was 11 years. Note the down-turned mouth, cubitus valgus, 
and widely spaced nipples; she also had a low posterior 
hairline, edema of the dorsum of the hands, and 
dystrophic nails. She had stage II pubic hair from adrenal 
androgens, but estradiol was undetectable, and levels of 
both luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone 
were high. (Styne DM, Kaplan SL. Normal and abnormal 
puberty in the female. Pediatr Clin North Am 1979; 
26:123–148) 
drome. Molecular studies have demonstrated undetected 
mosaicism in some patients with apparent single cell line 
45,X Turner’s syndrome. Because monosomy for nonsex 
chromosomes is uniformly lethal, it may be that most 
45,X patients actually have undetected mosaicism or partial 
translocations. The 45,X karyotype is the most frequent 
abnormal karyotype seen in first-trimester abortus 
material, demonstrating that most 45,X conceptions 
result in spontaneous fetal loss, and fewer than 3% result 
in delivery of a viable infant. In live newborn females, the 
approximate incidence of 45,X is 1 in 3,500. 

Approximately one third of patients with X chromosome 
privation have a single 45,X cell line (11). The 
majority exhibit chromosomal mosaicism (45,X with 
another cell line) or structural abnormalities of the X chromosome, 
such as deletions or an isochromosome for the 
long arm of X. In general, all patients with privation of X 
chromosomal material exhibit short stature, because statural 
determinants are present on both arms of the X chromosome; 
however, the other somatic anomalies seen in 

n FIG. 23. (
((A
AA) 
)) Appearance of one of the original seven 
cases of Turner’s syndrome reported in 1938. (
((B
BB) 
)) The same 
patient, photographed in 1972, almost 35 years after publication 
of the original case report. The karyotype was documented 
to be 45,X. The patient had received little estrogen in 
intervening years and experienced severe osteoporosis. 
(Becker KL. Principles and practice of endocrinology and 
metabolism. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2001;863) 
Turner’s syndrome are more variably expressed. Patients 
with mosaicism are more likely to retain some follicles in 
their gonadal streaks, and 10–20% may present with some 
secondary sexual development and even menstruation, 
compared with fewer than 5% of 45,X patients. Fertility is 
rare in any patient with Turner’s syndrome. Pregnancy out-
comes are relatively poor, with approximately 40% resulting 
in healthy, normal newborn infants. One third result in 
fetal loss and one third of liveborn infants have abnormalities, 
usually chromosomal. Patients with gonadal dysgenesis, 
especially those with an isochromosome for the long 
arm of X, are at increased risk for developing autoimmune 
diseases such as diabetes and hypothyroidism. 

Patients with mixed gonadal dysgenesis have a mosaic 
karyotype of 45,X/46,XY. They present with short stature, 
primary amenorrhea, and somatic anomalies similar to 
other patients with Turner’s syndrome. However, their 
external genitalia may exhibit varying degrees of genital 
ambiguity, depending on the degree of gonadal function 
present. Patients with bilateral streak gonads (Image 3) 
have normal infantile female external genitalia. Those 
with an intraabdominal dysgenetic testis may have isolated 
clitoromegaly (Image 1). If the dysgenetic testis is 
functional enough to descend into the labioscrotal pouch, 


the patients may have more profound genital ambiguity 
with labioscrotal fusion. The presence of a cell line containing 
a Y chromosome places these patients at a 20–30% 
risk of developing a gonadoblastoma or germ cell tumor. 

Lack of ovarian function in patients with gonadal dysgenesis 
results in deficient secretion or no secretion of 
sex steroids. Lack of estrogen negative feedback results 
in elevated FSH and LH levels. Adrenal androgens usually 
are adequate to induce normal adrenarche; however, 
breast tissue and other estrogen-dependent tissues remain 
infantile. Estrogen replacement therapy is necessary for 
normal secondary sexual development, as well as to prevent 
the development of osteoporosis. Most of these 
patents have normal müllerian development, so cyclic 
progesterone replacement is necessary to prevent endometrial 
hyperplasia. 

Low-dose estrogen replacement therapy has been 
advocated for patients with gonadal dysgenesis to allow 
maximal growth of the long bones without premature 
epiphyseal closure, as well as maximized adult height. 
This therapy may also reduce the risk of abnormal (tubular) 
breast development, which occurs in association with 
high-dose estrogen replacement therapy. Anabolic 
steroids such as oxandrolone also have been used to maximize 
height. This relatively weak androgen has minimal 
virilization risks. More recently, recombinant growth hormone 
has become available. It often is used in combination 
with steroids with some increase in adult height. The 
efficacy of these therapies is somewhat limited, because 
patients with X chromosome privation lack normal genetic 
statural determinants and therefore never achieve a normal 
adult height. Although patients with Turner’s 
syndrome have become pregnant with donor oocytes, 
four recent reports of death during or immediately after 
pregnancy make this option most concerning. 

Patients with Gonadal Dysgenesis and 
Normal Stature 

Some individuals with gonadal dysgenesis have a normal 
female karyotype (46,XX). They also have hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism secondary to lack of ovarian 
function. They have absence of secondary sexual development 
and primary amenorrhea. In general, they lack the 
somatic anomalies associated with X chromosome privation. 
They also have normal stature, because genetic statural 
determinants are present. This condition is inherited 
in some families in an autosomal recessive fashion. In 
most cases, no specific genetic mutation has been 
identified. 

Molecular mutations involving sex steroid production 
or action have been found that present in a phenotypic 
fashion similar to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, but 
do not directly affect germ cell survival. Several mutations 
of the FSH receptor gene have been described (13). 
Individuals with these mutations have high gonadotropin 
levels, low to normal sex steroid production, impaired 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

folliculogenesis, and primary or secondary amenorrhea. 
The 46,XX individuals with mutations of the LH receptor 
gene also present with elevated LH levels but normal follicular-
phase estrogen production and normal secondary 
sexual development. They do develop primary or secondary 
amenorrhea and cystic ovaries. Mutations in the 
gene for steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) 
and the gene for 17a -hydroxylase (CYP17) both result in 
phenotypic females regardless of karyotype because of 
lack of synthesis of androgens or estrogens. These 
patients present with elevated gonadotropin levels and 
sexual infantilism. Both conditions require replacement 
of adrenal steroids, as well as estrogen replacement therapy 
for secondary sexual development. Mutations in 
CYP19 (causing aromatase deficiency) blocks estrogen 
biosynthesis. Affected 46,XX individuals present with 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and failure of secondary 
sexual development (14). Mothers with aromatase-
deficient progeny develop virilization during 
pregnancy because of failure of placental aromatase to 
convert precursor androgens to estrogens. Affected 
female progeny have ambiguous genitalia at birth secondary 
to the high androgen levels. In addition to corrective 
genital surgery, these patients require estrogen 
replacement starting as early as 3 years of age to prevent 
ovarian cyst formation; the dosage should be low enough 
so as not to induce secondary sexual development. 

Gonadal dysgenesis also occurs in individuals with 
normal male karyotypes (46,XY; Swyer syndrome). 
These patients present with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism 
with lack of secondary sexual development, normal 
infantile female external genitalia, and normal 
internal female ductal development. They are of normal 
or above-average height because of the presence of normal 
genetic statural determinants, and they have delayed 
closure of the epiphyses due to lack of sex steroid production. 
Approximately 10% of these patients have point 
mutations in the SRY gene or a deletion in the short arm 
of the Y chromosome that includes SRY. In the remainder 
of patients, SRY is normal, suggesting that other genes 
must be important in the control of testicular differentiation 
(15). The Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene (WT1) is a 
transcription factor expressed in the primordial gonad and 
kidney. Mutations in this gene lead to XY gonadal dysgenesis, 
as well as nephropathy and Wilms’ tumor. These 
mutations appear to affect gonadal development prior to 
the action of SRY. The SOX9 gene, a class of genes related 
to SRY, is involved in both skeletal development and 
gonadal differentiation. It is expressed in Sertoli’s cells in 
the developing testis. Patients with camptomelic dyplasia 
due to a mutation of SOX9 have a dwarfing syndrome and 
XY gonadal dysgenesis (16). Another transcription factor, 
SF-1, is expressed in both Leydig’s and Sertoli’s cells 
in the developing testis. Mutations have been associated 
with both adrenal insufficiency and XY gonadal dysgenesis. 
A gene on the X chromosome, DAX1, also has been 
found to play a role in gonadal development. When it is 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

duplicated, it is not subject to X chromosome inactivation. 
Expression appears to oppose the action of WT1 in 
modifying SF-1 transactivation and results in sex reversal of 
46,XY embryos, causing XY gonadal dysgenesis. This condition 
has been termed dosage-sensitive sex reversal (17). 

Leydig’s cell hypoplasia is a condition caused by an 
inactivating mutation in the gene coding for the LH receptor 
(18). The phenotype of patients with this condition is 
similar to XY gonadal dysgenesis. Patients with severe 
defects have female external genitalia or mild ambiguity 
secondary to lack of testosterone synthesis. They lack 
müllerian structures because the testes do produce MIS. 
Mild defects result in abnormal male external genitalia 
with micropenis or hypospadias. One 46,XX individual 
with primary ovarian failure was also described. 

The presence of a Y chromosome in patients with dysgenetic 
gonads places them at a 20–30% risk of developing 
a gonadal tumor, most commonly a gonadoblastoma 
or dysgerminoma (19). Because these tumors can arise as 
early as the first decade of life, patients with diagnosed 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis should have their gonads 
extirpated. In the majority of these individuals, the uterus 
will be present and should be maintained, allowing the 
option of donor oocyte in vitro fertilization in the future. 
Bilateral gonadectomy often can be accomplished laparoscopically 
with current techniques. 

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism 

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism results from a temporary 
or permanent inability to secrete GnRH or 
gonadotropins. Such defects also may be caused by an 
inability of GnRH to be transported from the hypothalamus 
to the pituitary or by lack of target organ response 
secondary to GnRH receptor mutations. These patients 
have undetectable to low normal levels of pituitary 
gonadotropins. Multiple diverse etiologies are present 
within this group and may be responsible for delaying or 
interrupting the normal pattern of pubertal maturation 
within the hypothalamus and pituitary (11) (Box B). 
Among these etiologies, anorexia nervosa and milder 
variants are becoming more frequent. The psychiatric 
aspects of these disorders remain a special challenge. 

A standard assay for TSH allows discrimination 
between low and normal values, which is useful in the 
differential diagnosis of pituitary and hypothalamic 
hypothyroidism. Computed axial tomographic scanning 
or MRI with and without contrast media, coupled with 
serum prolactin determinations, can help diagnose early 
pituitary tumors in this age group. 

The differential diagnosis of irreversible gonadotropin 
failure and physiologic delay can be difficult. Pubertal 
delay beyond the 15th birthday is unlikely to be physiologic 
or constitutional. Identifying a normal pubertal pattern 
of gonadotropin release in response to exogenous 
GnRH stimulation (predominant rise of LH to more than 
10 mIU/mL and a lesser response of FSH) has been the 

BOX B 
Etiologies of Delayed Puberty 

Multiple diverse etiologies may be responsible for delaying 
or interrupting the normal pattern of pubertal maturation 
within the hypothalamus and pituitary: 

Physiologic or constitutional delay (reversible) 

Systemic disease processes (sustained malnutrition) 
Gastrointestinal malabsorption 
Anorexia nervosa 
Exercise 


Endocrine disease processes 
Primary hypothyroidism 
Cushing’s disease or syndrome 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (untreated) 
Hyperprolactinemia (with or without prolactinoma) 


Hypothalamic–pituitary etiologies (irreversible) 
Isolated gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency 


with or without anosmia (Kallmann’s syndrome) 
Pituitary insufficiency 
Pituitary tumors (eg, craniopharyngioma) 

Reindollar RH, Byrd JR, McDonough PG. Delayed sexual development: 
a study of 252 patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;140: 
371–380 

mainstay for diagnosis of physiologic delay after other 
disorders have been excluded. More recently, the identification 
of a pubertal ovarian appearance on pelvic ultrasonography 
(ie, multifollicular ovaries) has become more 
practical for corroborating the diagnosis of physiologic 
delay than the GnRH challenge test. Mutations in the 
GnRH receptor gene have been identified as rare causes 
of irreversible hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (20, 21). 
Although GnRH gene mutations have been present in 
mice, they have not been identified in humans. Patients 
should be treated with cyclic estrogen and progestin therapy 
(22). Mutations of the Kallmann gene (KALIG-I, also 
referred to as the Kal gene) on Xp have been identified in 
some subjects with Kallmann’s syndrome (23, 24). This 
gene appears to encode a cell adhesion protein that facilitates 
the migration of the GnRH neurons from the medial 
olfactory placode to the hypothalamus. Patients should 
be treated with estrogen replacement therapy (22). 

Eugonadism 

Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina (Rokitansky 
syndrome) is the most common anatomic genital abnormality 
associated with delayed menarche and the second 


most common cause of pubertal aberrancy or primary 
amenorrhea (11). Less frequently, a patient may have a 
functional but obstructed genital tract, including a transverse 
vaginal septum or an imperforate hymen. 

The patient with eugonadism who has complete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome has evidence of steroid 
production. A lack of pubic hair with normal breast development 
identifies individuals who have 46,XY karyotypes, 
testes, and receptor defects for androgens (see the 
earlier discussion of Tanner staging). These individuals’ 
relative lack of hair and male levels of testosterone differentiate 
them from people with Rokitansky syndrome. 
Associated urinary tract abnormalities in the latter group 
should be excluded by ultrasonography or intravenous 
pyelography. 

Other patients with eugonadism exhibit pubertal maturation 
but present with delayed menarche associated with 
chronic anovulation (11). Heterogeneous etiologies may 
be identified, including hyperprolactinemia, hypothyroidism, 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, and even forms 
of hypothalamic suppression. The large majority of these 
patients, however, have hyperandrogenic chronic anovulation 
or polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). The workup 
always should include measurement of serum prolactin 
and TSH levels to rule out other causes of estrogenic 
anovulation. Other hormone assays, including those for 
androgens, may be appropriate based on the presentation. 
Recently, it has become apparent that insulin resistance 
often mediates the reproductive and medical problems 
associated with hyperandrogenic anovulation or polycystic 
ovarian disease. Diagnosis and treatment of insulin 
resistance in the very young patient is still evolving. 

Dyssynchronous Puberty 

Müllerian anomalies usually present during the adolescent 
years as primary amenorrhea (müllerian aplasia, 
vaginal atresia) or cryptomenorrhea (transverse septum, 
incomplete longitudinal septum). Because of the proximity 
and timing of the development of the genital and urinary 
systems, abnormalities in one system often are 
associated with abnormalities in the other (25). 

Müllerian aplasia (Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser 
syndrome) classically refers to patients with congenital 
absence of the uterus and vagina (also called CAUV or 
müllerian aplasia). This syndrome is considered a fusion 
failure of the müllerian anlagen during development. As a 
result, canalization of the vagina and uterine remnants 
does not occur. The patients typically have small bilateral 
uterine remnants attached to normal fallopian tubes 
that are associated with normal ovaries. Variations of this 
aberrant müllerian system also have been described. After 
gonadal dysgenesis, this is the second most common 
cause of primary amenorrhea. Its proposed incidence 
rates range from 1 per 10,000 to 1 per 4,000. Occurrence 
is usually sporadic, although it has been reported to occur 
in several sibships of a few families. In addition, identical 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

twins who were concordant and discordant for müllerian 
aplasia have been described. 

Because ovarian and adrenal function are normal in 
patients with müllerian aplasia, these individuals usually 
progress through puberty normally. On examination they 
are found to have an absent vagina; occasionally they 
have a vaginal pouch created by prior attempts at coitus. 
Physical examination also may reveal skeletal abnormalities 
in 11–50% of patients. The most common skeletal 
abnormality is scoliosis; rarely, more dramatic limb defects, 
such as phocomelia or lobster claw deformity, may be 
found. 

DIAGNOSIS 

The diagnosis of müllerian aplasia is usually clinical. The 
differential diagnosis includes complete androgen insensitivity. 
Because virtually all patients with complete 
androgen insensitivity have absent or significantly 
reduced pubic hair, it is usually easy to differentiate the 
two conditions at the time of examination in postpubertal 
patients. A pelvic–abdominal ultrasonographic examination 
is the most useful study to obtain, because it usually 
confirms the absence of a midline uterine structure and 
identifies ovaries with follicles. At the same time, the 
ultrasonographic study should be used to evaluate the 
kidneys, because up to 30% of patients with müllerian 
aplasia may have unilateral renal agenesis or a single 
pelvic kidney. Should any further confusion exist about 
the diagnosis, a serum testosterone level will further differentiate 
between müllerian aplasia (normal female levels) 
and androgen insensitivity syndrome (near-normal 
male levels). A karyotype should be determined only for 
the patient with diagnosed androgen insensitivity in order 
to confirm the 46,XY karyotype or for the prepubertal 
patient with an absent vagina or a vaginal pouch. 
Magnetic resonance imaging has been suggested to assess 
the internal genitalia, but it is rarely needed. Because the 
diagnosis is usually apparent after performing the physical 
and ultrasonographic examinations, laparoscopy is not 
indicated for diagnostic purposes. 

After the diagnosis of müllerian aplasia, the adolescent 
should be offered psychologic support to help her 
adjust. Routine referral to a psychiatrist is usually not 
necessary. Counseling should be available within the 
gynecologist’s office. The most helpful intervention is to 
pair the patient as a “buddy” with an older patient who 
has been diagnosed and treated, and preferably who has 
dealt with many of the psychosocial and sexual issues 
associated with this condition. These patients should be 
told that a normal sex life will be possible after a neo-
vagina has been created and that pregnancy is possible 
through assisted reproductive technologies and the use of 
a gestational carrier. Many babies have been born through 
this technology without evidence of müllerian aplasia to 
date (27). 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

TREATMENT 

A vagina can be created through use of dilators. This 
method has a reported success rate of more than 90%. 
Some adolescent women who have dealt with the psychologic 
issues surrounding the diagnosis of müllerian aplasia 
may want to start this treatment even before becoming 
sexually active. Others delay such treatment indefinitely, 
often because of denial. Surgical creation of a neovagina 
by the McIndoe procedure also has a high success rate but 
may result in more complications. Furthermore, if the 
patient does not have sexual intercourse or does not use 
dilators, postoperative stricturing of the vagina may occur 
over time, necessitating additional surgery. Recently, the 
use of an absorbable adhesion barrier instead of a skin 
graft has been proposed for this procedure, but it has been 
tested on only a few patients. Other procedures that have 
been described include Williams vaginoplasty, colovaginoplasty, 
amnion vaginoplasty, tissue expansion techniques, 
and rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap 
(28–30). Because at least eight cases of vaginal carcinoma 
have been reported after the creation of a neovagina, Pap 
tests should be performed periodically. 

POSTOPERATIVE CONCERNS 

Transverse vaginal septa occur less commonly than does 
müllerian aplasia. Embryologists generally agree that 
they are probably caused by a mesodermal proliferation 
error and not a lateral fusion defect. Transverse septa are 
often perforate and are less frequently imperforate. They 
occur most commonly (46%) at the junction of the middle 
and upper thirds of the vagina. When located in the 
lower vagina, a transverse septum may be misdiagnosed 
as an imperforate hymen. 

The level of the defect should be determined preoperatively, 
if at all possible, to assist in counseling the patient 
and planning the surgical procedure. This determination 
may be possible with pelvic ultrasonography. If the level 
still cannot be determined, MRI may be performed. 
Views of the kidneys probably will be obtained with the 
pelvic ultrasonography or MRI; they are not specifically 
needed, however, because the incidence of renal malformation 
in patients with true transverse vaginal septa is no 
higher than that in the general population. In contrast, the 
incidence is increased in patients with müllerian aplasia 
and longitudinal defects, especially those with hemiobstruction 
(obstruction of one side of an unfused müllerian 
system—uterus didelphys). 

Drainage of the hematocolpos and anastomosis of the 
vagina usually can be accomplished by a vaginal 
approach when a low septum is present. When a high septum 
is present, a simultaneous vaginal and abdominal 
approach by two experienced surgeons may be necessary. 
If the septum is thick, removal usually results in a defect 
that is too great for vaginal advancement, and a graft is 
required. The surgeon must be careful to avoid creating 
an hourglass shape in the vaginal canal at the site of the 
septum after removal. 

Longitudinal vaginal septum defects may occur as 
errors of lateral fusion, canalization, or septum reabsorption. 
These anomalies may result in difficulty with sexual 
intercourse or tampon insertion, as well as an arrest of the 
second stage of labor. They may be associated with uterine 
fusion defects and renal abnormalities as well. 
Obstruction of one side may occur and, when associated 
with a didelphic uterus, result in the formation of a hematocolpos. 
Patients with a hemiobstructed vagina have regular 
menses associated with their patent side; they may 
present with cyclic pain, irregular prune-colored bleeding 
or leukorrhea (if a fistula develops to the hematocolpos), 
or a mass—all caused by the hemiobstruction. Virtually 
all patients with hemiobstruction have renal agenesis ipsilateral 
to the side of the obstruction. Less than 10% of 
nonobstructed patients with a longitudinal vaginal septum 
have renal agenesis. All obstructed and symptomatic 
septa should be excised. 

Vaginal atresia is failure of the urogenital sinus to 
form the lower vagina, with normal müllerian structures 
above. Patients usually present during the teenage years 
with primary amenorrhea and a midline pelvic mass 
(hematocolpos and hematometra). Ovarian function is 
normal. Because of the small amount of vaginal tissue 
missing, it is usually possible to perform a vaginal 
advancement. Skin grafts are rarely needed. 

If the vagina and cervix are absent and a normal uterus 
is present, the treatment is more controversial. Most 
experts recommend a total abdominal hysterectomy, 
because the chance of pregnancy is remote (two reported 
cases to date) after reconstructive surgery (31, 32). 
Furthermore, death may occur from sepsis. Some experts, 
however, recommend that a fistulous tract be created with 
a stent from the uterine cavity to the neovagina. 
According to one report, the procedure was performed in 
11 patients, 9 of whom achieved menstruation (33). 

Most isolated uterine abnormalities are not diagnosed 
during the childhood or adolescent years. Patients with a 
rudimentary horn, however, may present with pelvic pain 
during early adolescence. This condition results from 
failure of fusion of the müllerian ducts, along with maldevelopment 
of one side. If the horn is noncommunicating, 
severe dysmenorrhea, hematometra, or pyometra 
may result. Diagnosis is usually apparent on ultrasonography, 
which should be followed by laparoscopy. 
Pregnancy in a rudimentary horn results in rupture in 
90% of cases and can result in maternal death. Resection 
of the rudimentary horn is indicated on diagnosis. 

Androgen Insensitivity Syndromes 

The androgen receptor is a member of the superfamily of 
nuclear transcription factors that mediate the action of 
steroid hormones. Ligand binding forms an activated 
complex that binds to specific DNA sequences on target 
genes. The androgen receptor gene has been mapped to 
the X chromosome at Xq11–12. The gene consists of eight 
exons coding for a large aminoterminal end, a DNA-bind



ing region and an androgen-binding domain. The androgen 
receptor mediates the action of both testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone, and it is therefore essential for primary 
development of male internal and external genitalia, 
as well as for normal secondary sexual development at 
puberty. Mutations of the androgen receptor gene lead to 
diminished or absent androgen action, resulting in complete 
or partial androgen insensitivity. All 46,XY individuals 
with complete androgen insensitivity present as 
phenotypic females with a blind-ending vaginal pouch 
and diminished or absent pubic hair. Patients with incomplete 
androgen insensitivity present with varying degrees 
of abnormal external genital development ranging from a 
predominantly female phenotype with some ambiguity of 
the external genitalia to predominantly male phenotypes 
with hypospadias, micropenis, or only impaired spermatogenesis. 


COMPLETE ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY 

Patients with complete androgen insensitivity have normal 
testicular development with normal Sertoli’s cell and 
Leydig’s cell function (34). The Sertoli’s cells produce 
müllerian-inhibiting substance, causing regression of the 
müllerian system that results in absence of the cervix and 
uterus and the formation of a blind-ending vaginal pouch. 
Although testosterone is produced and converted to dihydrotestosterone, 
the lack of a functional receptor leads to 
regression of the wolffian derivatives and lack of external 
male genital development. The external genitalia remain 
infantile female, although in some cases the descent of a 
testis may occur as a mass bulging in the labial pouch. At 
puberty there is impaired pubic and axillary hair development 
because of lack of androgen action, but breast 
development does occur, probably secondary to peripheral 
conversion of androgens to estrogens (Image 4). 

More than 200 mutations of the androgen receptor 
gene have been described. Most are point mutations 
occurring in exons 2–8, the DNA- and androgen-binding 
domains. Some deletions also have been described as 
causing complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. There 
is no specific genotype-to-phenotype correlation, and 
some individual mutations have been shown to have variable 
expressivity within families. Several of these cases 
have been shown to be new somatic cell mutations with 
somatic mosaicism. 

Laboratory evaluation of these patients reveals testosterone 
in the low to normal male range and a relatively 
elevated LH level. The karyotype is 46,XY. Either the elevated 
testosterone level or the karyotype can be used to 
differentiate this syndrome from müllerian agenesis. The 
testes may be located intraabdominally or at some point 
along the inguinal canal into the labial pouch. The risk of 
malignancy is increased, as in any other cryptorchid 
testis, but it is probably no greater than 1–2%. Therefore, 
it is recommended that the testes be allowed to remain in 
situ until completion of breast development, at which 
time the patient can undergo laparoscopic gonadectomy. 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

INCOMPLETE ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY 

Patients with incomplete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
have variable phenotypes, from normal female to 
normal male with impaired spermatogenesis and a spectrum 
of genital ambiguities between those extremes (35). 
Both Reifenstein’s and Lubs syndromes have been 
demonstrated to be forms of incomplete androgen insensitivity. 
These patients are characterized by bilateral 
testes, no müllerian derivatives, and pubertal breast 
development or gynecomastia. 

Kennedy’s disease is a form of spinobulbar motor neuronopathy 
with partial androgen insensitivity. It results 
from the expansion of a polyglutamine tract in the 
aminoterminal of the androgen receptor gene to greater 
than 38 repeats (normal is 10–31). These patients are phenotypic 
males with a mild form of androgen insensitivity 
that presents later in life with testicular atrophy and 
decreased spermatogenesis. Other mild forms of androgen 
insensitivity may present as infertility in an otherwise 
normal male with oligospermia or azoospermia. 

Treatment of incomplete androgen insensitivity must 
be individualized. Some patients with normal female 
external genitalia or marked ambiguity should be raised 
as females and undergo any necessary genital reconstructive 
surgery. Others with more extensive virilization can 
be raised as males, but they also may require reconstructive 
surgery for hypospadias or subsequent treatment for 
infertility. 

References 

1. Zaontz MR, Packer MG. Abnormalities of the external genitalia. 
Pediatr Clin North Am 1997; 44:1267–1297 
( ) 
2. Sinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer MS, Hawkins JR, Griffiths 
BL, Smith MJ, et al. A gene from the human sex-determining 
region encodes a protein with homology to a conserved 
DNA-binding motif. Nature 1990;346:240–244 
( ) 
3. Sinclair AH. New genes for boys. Am J Hum Genet 1995; 
57:998–1001 
( ) 
4. Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, Bourdony 
CJ, Bhapkar MV, Kock GG, et al. Secondary sexual characteristics 
and menses in young girls seen in office practice: 
a study from the Pediatric Research in Office Settings network. 
Pediatrics 1997;99:505–512 
( ) 
5. Marti-Henneberg C, Vizmanos B. The duration of puberty 
in girls is related to the timing of its onset. J Pediatr 
1997;131(4):618–621 
( ) 
6. Apter D, Vihko R. Early menarche, a risk factor for breast 
cancer, indicates early onset of ovulatory cycles. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1983;57:82–86 
( ) 
7. Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in pattern of pubertal 
changes in girls. Arch Dis Child 1969;44:291–303 
( ) 
8. Warren MP. The effects of exercise on pubertal progression 
and reproductive function in girls. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1980;51:1150–1157 
( ) 
9. Kaplowitz PB, Oberfield SE. Reexamination of the age 
limit for defining when puberty is precocious in girls in the 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

United States: implications for evaluation and treatment. 
Drug and Therapeutics and Executive Committees of the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society. Pediatrics 
1999;104:936–941 


( ) 
10. Rosenfield RL, Bachrach LK, Chernausek SD, Gertner JM, 
Gottschalk M, Hardin DS, et al. Current age of onset of 
puberty. Pediatrics 2000;106:622–623 
( ) 
11. Reindollar RH, Byrd JR, McDonough PG. Delayed sexual 
development: a study of 252 patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1981;140:371–380 
( ) 
12. Layman LC, Reindollar RH. The genetics of hypogonadism. 
Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 1994;5:53–68 
13. Layman LC. Mutations in the follicle-stimulating hormonebeta 
(FSH b ) and FSH receptor genes in mice and humans. 
Semin Reprod Med 2000;18:5–10 
( ) 
14. Bulun SE. Aromatase deficiency and estrogen resistance: 
from molecular genetics to clinic. Semin Reprod Med 
2000;18:31–39 
( ) 
15. Kent-First M. The Y chromosome and its role in testis differentiation 
and spermatogenesis. Semin Reprod Med 
2000;18:67–80 
( ) 
16. Warne GL, Zajac JD. Disorders of sexual differentiation. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1998;27:945–967 
(button) 
17. Ostrer H. Sexual differentiation. Semin Reprod Med 2000; 
18:41–49 
( ) 
18. Latronico 
AC. Naturally occurring mutations of the 
luteinizing hormone receptor gene affecting reproduction. 
Semin Reprod Med 2000;18:17–20 
( ) 
19. Levin HS. Tumors of the testis in intersex syndromes. Urol 
Clin North Am 2000;27:543–551 
( ) 
20. Layman LC, Peak DB, Xie J, Sohn SH, Reindollar RH, 
Gray MR. Mutation analysis of the gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone receptor gene structure in idiopathic hypogo24. 
Hardelin JP, Levilliers J, del Castillo I, Cohen-Salmon M, 
Legouis R, Blanchard S, et al. X chromosome-linked 
Kallmann syndrome: stop mutations validate the candidate 
gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:8190–8194 
( ) 
25. Boyd ME, Daniels E. Development of the female genital 
tract and external genitalia. In: Gidwani G, Falcone T, eds. 
Congenital malformations of the female genital tract: diagnosis 
and management. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins, 1999:1–20 
26. Emans SJ, Laufer MR, Goldstein DP. Pediatric and adolescent 
gynecology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 
1998 
27. Petrozza JC, 
Gray MR, David AJ, Reindollar RH. 
Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina is not commonly 
transmitted as a dominant genetic trait: outcomes of 
surrogate pregnancies. Fertil Steril 1997;67:387–389 
( ) 
28. Broadbent TR, Woolf RM, Hebertson R. Nonoperative construction 
of the vagina: two unusual cases. Plast Reconstr 
Surg 1984;73:117–123 
( ) 
29. Baldwin DD, Landa HM. Common problems in pediatric 
gynecology. Urol Clin North Am 1995;22:161–176 
( ) 
30. Edmonds DK, Muram D. Sexual developmental anomalies 
and their reconstruction: upper and lower tracts. In: 
Sanfilippo JS, Muram D, Dewhurst J, Lee PA, eds. Pediatric 
and adolescent gynecology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders, 200:553–583 
31. Geary WL, Weed JC. Congenital atresia of the uterine 
cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1973;42:213–217 
( ) 
32. Zarou GS, Esposito JM, Zarou DM. Pregnancy following 
the surgical correction of congenital atresia of the cervix. 
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1973;11:143–156 
33. Rock JA, Zacur HA, Dlugi AM, Jones HW Jr, TeLinde RW. 
Pregnancy success following surgical correction of imperforate 
hymen and complete transverse vaginal septum. 
nadotropic hypogonadism. Fertil Steril 1997;68:1079–1085 

Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:448–451 


( ) 
(button) 
21. Layman LC, Cohen DP, Jin M, Xie J, Li Z, Reindollar RH, 
34. Gottlieb B, Pinsky L, Beitel LK, Trifiro M. Androgen 
et al. Mutations in gonadotropin-releasing hormone recep-insensitivity. Am J Med Genet 1999;89:210–217 
tor gene cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Nat Genet 
( ) 
35. Hiort O, Sinnecker GH, Holterhus PM, Nitsche EM, Kruse 
1998;18:14–15 

K. The clinical and molecular spectrum of androgen insen( 
) 
22. Rebar R. Puberty. In: Berek JS, ed. Novak’s gynecology. 
sitivity syndromes. Am J Med Genet 1996;63:218–222 
12th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996;771–807 
( ) 
23. Bick D, Franco B, Sherins RJ, Heye B, Pike L, Crawford J, 
et al. Brief report: intragenic deletion of the KALIG-1 gene 
in Kallmann’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 1992;326: 
1752–1755 
( ) 

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 


The development of predictable, regular, cyclic, and 
spontaneous ovulatory menstrual cycles is regulated by 
complex interactions of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, 
the ovaries, and the genital tract. The average length of the 
cycle in women of reproductive age is approximately 28 
days, with a range of 25–32 days. The greatest variability 
of the menstrual cycle occurs at the onset of menarche and 
just before menopause. During these transitions, inadequate 
follicular development, inadequate luteal progesterone 
production, and anovulatory cycles often occur. 

The sequence of hormonal events leading to ovulation 
dictates the menstrual cycle. During each cycle, a single 
ovarian follicle emerges as dominant over all others in its 
cohort and subsequently directs the sequence and timing 
of events leading to ovulation. Thereafter, the corpus 
luteum governs events in the luteal phase of the cycle. 

Estrogen produced by the ovary (or more specifically, 
by the selected follicle) is the essential hormonal signal 
on which most events in the normal menstrual cycle 
depend. More recent studies in both nonhuman primates 
and in women, many using new and powerful molecular 
techniques, suggest that autocrine and paracrine actions 
of various locally produced intraovarian peptide hormones 
and growth factors play a major modifying role. 
The normal menstrual cycle ultimately may depend as 
much on local regulatory mechanisms as on the feedback 
actions of ovarian steroid hormones. 

THE MATURE OVARY 

The ovary has three distinct regions: 1) an outer cortex 
containing the germinal epithelium and follicles, 2) a central 
medulla consisting of stroma, and 3) hilum around 
the area of attachment of the ovary to the mesovarium. 
The germinal epithelium consists of coelom-derived 
cells, but its function is not understood. Follicles are 
embedded in loose connective tissue of the ovarian cortex 
and can be subdivided as nongrowing (primordial) and 
growing. Most follicles are nongrowing throughout the 
reproductive years. In humans, the number of ova reaches 
a peak of approximately 8 million halfway through 
fetal life development. Evidence suggests that there is no 
further germ cell development following birth. The primordial 
follicle is composed of a single layer of granulosa 
cells and a single immature oocyte arrested in the 
diplotene stage of the first meiotic division, and it does 
not resume meiosis until ovulation. The primordial follicle 
is separated from the surrounding stroma by a thin 
basal lamina or basement membrane. 

The oocyte is enclosed in a single layer of spindleshaped 
cells with processes that reach the basal lamina. 

The oocyte and granulosa cells do not have a direct blood 
supply; thus, they exist in their microenvironment separated 
from contact with other cells by the basal lamina. 

The growing follicles are divided into five stages: primordial, 
primary, secondary, tertiary, and graafian (Fig. 
24) (1). The first three stages of growth can occur in the 
absence of pituitary function and are believed to be controlled 
by intraovarian mechanisms. One hypothesis suggests 
that these early stages of follicular development 
occur over several menstrual cycles and that the total time 
to attain a preovulatory cycle averages 85 days. However, 
this theory remains controversial, and most researchers 
believe that a group of primary follicles are recruited in 
the luteal phase of the prior menstrual cycle. 

The next phase of follicular development includes a 
cuboidal differentiation in the spindle-shaped cells, 
which undergo successful meiotic divisions to form a 
multilayered stratum granulosa or zona granulosa. The 
oocyte enlarges and secretes a glycoprotein-containing 
substance called the zona pellucida. The oocyte is then 
considered a primary follicle. 

The secondary follicle is formed by further proliferation 
of granulosa cells, as well as differentiation of the 
stroma and theca. The theca adjacent to the basal lamina 
is termed the theca interna, and thecal cells merging with 
the surrounding stroma are designated the theca externa. 
The secondary follicle acquires an independent blood 
supply consisting of one or more arterioles that terminate 
in the capillary bed of the basal lamina. These capillaries 
do not penetrate the basement membrane. 

Further hypertrophy of the theca and the appearance of 
the antrum, a fluid-filled space among the granulosa cells, 
accompany the tertiary follicle. The fluid in the antrum 
consists of plasma transudate and secretory products of 
granulosa cells, some of which are estrogens that are 
found at higher concentrations than in peripheral blood. 
At this stage, the follicle rapidly increases in size under 
the influence of gonadotropins to form the mature, or 
graafian, follicle. During this stage, the granulosa and 
oocyte remain enclosed by the basal lamina and are still 
devoid of vascularization. The antral fluid increases in 
volume. The recruited primordial follicles either develop 
into a dominant mature graafian follicle designated to 
ovulate or degenerate as a result of atresia. Because of 
atresia, the oocyte and granulosa cells with the basal laminae 
die and are replaced by fibrous tissue. In contrast, the 
thecal cells outside the basal lamina do not differentiate; 
they return to the pool of cells consisting of ovarian interstitial 
or stromal cells. The process of atresia generally is 
believed to be secondary to an effect of hormones or 
growth factors formed by the mature dominant follicle 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Primordial 
follicle 


Primary 
follicle 

Secondary 
follicle 


Tertiary 
follicle 

Graafian 
follicle 

Cumulus oophorous 
granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 
Granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 

Granulosa cells 
Oocyte 

Zona pellucida 

Basement laminae 

Granulosa cells 
Oocyte 
Zona pellucida 
Theca 


Theca externa 

Theca interna 

Basement laminae 
Zona pellucida 
Fully grown oocyte 

Antrum 
Multiple layers of 
granulosa cells 

Antrum (follicular fluid) 

Theca interna 

Zona pellucida 

Membrana 
granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 

Fully grown oocyte 

Theca externa 

n FIG. 24. The structure and classification of the ovarian follicle during growth and development (Modified from Erickson GF, 
Magoffin DA, Dyer CA, Hofeditz C. The ovarian androgen producing cells: a review of structure/function relationships. Endocr 
Rev 1985;6(3):371–399. Copyright © by The Endocrine Society) 
through intrinsic ovarian mechanisms. There is general 
agreement that atresia of follicles is an apoptotic process, 
or programmed cell death (1). 

The ovarian stroma consist of three major cell types: 
connective tissues similar to the other tissues, contractile 
cells, and several types of interstitial cells. The primary 
interstitial cells are the first to develop, and they are identified 
in the fetal ovary. Secondary interstitial cells are 
derived from the thecal cells of the atretic follicles. These 
enlarged epithelial cells undergo hypertrophy and maintain 
active steroidogenic features of the thecal cells from 
which they are derived. Secondary interstitial cells retain 
responsiveness to luteinizing hormone LH. Thecal interstitial 
cells of the tertiary follicles are the active site of 
androgen secretion. They develop from mesenchymal 

cells that differentiate when the secondary follicles form. 
Thecal interstitial cells contain LH receptors and the 
enzymes 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and 4,5-isomerase. 
These cells increase markedly in size and develop 
the ultrastructural characteristics of steroid-secreting 
cells. The hilum of the ovary, where the blood vessels and 
lymphatics enter the ovary, is the locus of specific interstitial 
cells, termed hilar cells. The physiologic function 
of the hilar cells is obscure, but because of their intimate 
association with nerve fibers and blood vessels, they may 
influence ovarian function (2). 

In the mature dominant follicle, oocyte growth occurs 
and meiosis resumes following ovulation and is complete 
following fertilization. During growth, the oocyte 
increases in diameter from 20 mm to 120 mm. The 


growth period is associated with an accumulation of 
nutrition stores. The presence of granulosa cells is an 
absolute requirement for growth of the oocyte. The 
oocyte is surrounded by a collection of granulosa cells, 
termed the corona radiata, that interacts with the oocyte 
by gap junctions (3). The zona pellucida that forms 
between the corona radiata and the oocyte during the formation 
of the primary follicle contains specific receptors 
for sperm. It prevents polyspermia and promotes movement 
of the fertilized ovum from the fallopian tube to the 
uterus. Meiosis is complete with the release of the second 
polar body at the time of fertilization. 

Ovarian Hormones and Hormonal 
Regulation 

All steroids of the ovary, as well as those produced by the 
testes, adrenal gland, and placenta, are derived from 
cholesterol. Cholesterol can be obtained from three 
sources: 1) preformed cholesterol, which circulates in 
blood in the form of lipoproteins, 2) cholesterol synthesized 
de novo within the ovary from two-carbon units 
(acetylcoenzyme A), and 3) cholesterol liberated from 
cholesterol esters stored within lipid droplets. The cholesterol 
used by the ovary is derived primarily from the 
uptake of plasma lipoprotein cholesterol (4). Low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is the principal source of 
cholesterol used for steroidogenesis. In the ovary, LH 
stimulates the activity of adenylate cyclase, which releases 
cAMP. This in turn serves as a second mRNA for the 
LDL receptor for the purpose of binding and uptake of 
LDL cholesterol, as well as the formation of cholesterol 
esters. Cholesterol is then transported to the inner mitochondrial 
membrane by cAMP-activated steroidogenic 
acute regulatory protein. A 30-kd mitochondrial protein, 
it is believed to be the key mediator of acute induction of 
steroidogenesis. The conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone 
is the rate-limiting step in ovarian steroidogenesis 
and is catalyzed by a cholesterol side chain cleavage 
enzyme complex. 

The principal steroid-producing cells of the ovary— 
the granulosa, the thecal, and the corpus luteum cells— 
possess the complete enzymatic complement required for 
steroid hormone formation. The main pathway of steroid 
synthesis in the corpus luteum is the D 4-pathway, which 
involves the conversion of 17a -hydroxypregnenolone to 
progesterone. In the human ovarian follicle, the D 5-pathway 
is the preferred pathway for the formation of androgens 
and estrogens, because thecal cells of the human 
ovary metabolize 17a -hydroxypregnenolone more efficiently 
than 17a -hydroxyprogesterone. However, the predominant 
steroid differs among each of these cell types, 
so the corpus luteum primarily forms progesterone and 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone, the thecal and stromal cells 
secrete androgen, and the granulosa cells predominantly 
secrete estrogen. The factors that determine which steroid 
is secreted by each cell type include the levels of 

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

gonadotropin and gonadotropin receptors, the expression 
of steroidogenic enzymes, and the availability of LDL 
cholesterol. 

The rate of steroid production during the menstrual 
cycle is a function of the content of four key enzymes: 

• 
P450scc, which converts cholesterol to pregnenolone 
•3b -Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, which converts 
pregnenolone to progesterone 
• 
Cytochrome P450 17a -hydroxylase (P45017a ), 
which converts pregnenolone to androgens 
• 
Cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom), which 
converts androgens to estrogens. 
Luteinizing hormone regulates the first step in steroid 
hormone biosynthesis by controlling the conversion of 
cholesterol to pregnenolone, whereas FSH controls the 
conversion of androgens to estrogens. The current view of 
the steroidogenic pathway in the human ovary encompasses 
the formation of androstenedione in the thecal 
cells, which crosses the basement membrane and is con-
verted to estrone by P450arom in the granulosa cells, as 
well as the conversion of estrone to estradiol by 17b hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 (Figs. 25 and 26). 

Intraovarian Signaling Systems 

A number of putative intraovarian regulators have been 
described, and the vital roles they play are beginning to 
be appreciated (1). In addition to its negative-feedback 
effects on pituitary FSH secretion, inhibin has important 
actions within the ovary, where it regulates androgen production 
in the theca by enhancing the actions of LH and 
other growth factors. Inhibin consists of two distinct peptides 
(designated as alpha and beta subunits) linked by 
disulfide bonds. Two forms exist: inhibin A and inhibin 

B. Each contains the same alpha subunit and one of two 
distinct, but related, beta subunits (b A, b B). These same 
subunits, when combined (b A–b A, b A–b B, b B–b B), form 
other peptides known as activins (activin A, activin AB, 
and activin B, respectively), which have actions that 
oppose those of inhibin. In the follicle, activin increases 
FSH binding by regulating receptor concentrations. It 
enhances FSH-stimulated estrogen and inhibin secretion 
but interferes with inhibin’s ability to potentiate LH-stimulated 
thecal androgen production. Activin also suppresses 
granulosa cell progesterone synthesis, an action 
that may prevent premature luteinization. Follistatin is yet 
another of the peptides in this family; it also modulates 
FSH actions in the ovary by binding to, and thus inhibiting, 
the actions of activin. 
Considerable evidence now suggests that events within 
the ovary are also regulated by various growth factors. 
These ubiquitous polypeptide molecules operate through 
local autocrine and paracrine mechanisms to modulate 
cell proliferation and functions. There are many different 
growth factors; among the more important are IGF-I and 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Thecal cell Granulosa cell 

LH 

R 
Blood 
cAMP 
Protein 
kinase A 
P450scc 
P450c17 
P450c17 
3b -HSD 
Cholesterol 
Pregnenolone 
17-OH Pregnenolone 
DHEA 
Androstenedione 
REstradiol-17b 
ESTRONE 
Androstenedione 
P450arom 
17b -HSD1 
cAMP 
Protein 
kinase A 
Basement 
FS 


n FIG. 25. The two cell–two gonadotropin hypothesis and key enzymes involved in steroidogenesis in the human ovary. 
Abbreviations: LH indicates luteinizing hormone; R, receptor; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; 
3-HSD, 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; 17-HSD1, 17-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1. (Modified from Hseuh AJ, Adashi EY, Jones PBC, et al. Hormonal regulation of the differentiation of cultured 
granulosa cells. Endocrin Rev 1984;5:76–127. Copyright © 1984 by The Endocrine Society. From Carr BR. Disorders of 
the ovary and female reproductive tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams textbook of 
endocrinology. 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:765) 
IGF-II, also known as somatomedins. Their physiologic 
effects are mediated by specific transmembrane receptors. 
In the ovary, receptors for IGF-I can be found on 
both granulosa and theca cells; IGF-II receptors are plentiful 
in luteinized granulosa cells and in the corpus 
luteum. As their name implies, these peptides are structurally 
similar to insulin. In fact, insulin cross-reacts with 
the IGF-I receptor; conversely, IGF-I binds to the insulin 
receptor, albeit with limited affinity. 

By themselves, IGF-I and IGF-II have only modest 
effects, but in synergy with gonadotropins, their effects 
are dramatic. When IGF-I teams with FSH, it stimulates 
granulosa proliferation, aromatase activity, LH receptor 
synthesis, and inhibin secretion; because IGF-I is produced 
in the theca, these effects appear to be paracrine in 
nature. In contrast, autocrine mechanisms operate in the 
theca, where IGF-I combines with LH to stimulate androgen 
production. Another family of peptides, known as 
IGF-binding proteins, regulates the tissue effects of these 
growth factors by binding them and preventing their 
access to membrane surface receptors. The main binding 
protein in serum is IGF-binding protein 3; its synthesis in 
the liver primarily depends on growth hormone, and circulating 
levels reflect the total IGF concentration (IGF-I 
plus IGF-II). These binding proteins also are synthesized 
in the ovary, where they inhibit IGF actions. Their synthesis, 
in turn, is inhibited by FSH and both IGF-I and 
IGF-II—actions that maximize growth factor availability. 
Evidence suggests that IGF-binding proteins 1 and 3 play 
an important role in growing follicles, whereas IGF-binding 
proteins 2, 4, and 5 are expressed primarily in atretic 
and regressing follicles. 

Other growth factors and peptides also may be important 
intraovarian regulators. Epidermal growth factor is a 
potent granulosa cell mitogen. Transforming growth factors 
a and b (derived from the same gene family as 
activin and inhibin), fibroblast growth factor, and 
platelet-derived growth factor are others that exhibit regulatory 
actions in vitro. Cytokines such as interleukin-1, 
derived from resident ovarian macrophages, also may be 
operating. There is also an intraovarian renin–angiotensin 
system that may be involved in angiogenesis. Another 
peptide, endothelin-1, has been implicated as the putative 
luteinization inhibitor. Whether GnRH-like peptides and 
oxytocin, also found in preovulatory follicles, have any 
specific functions is unknown. 

HYPOTHALAMIC SECRETION OF 
GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING 
HORMONE 

The neurohormone that controls gonadotropin secretion 
is GnRH. It is secreted from the median eminence of the 
hypothalamus by a cluster of neurons called the arcuate 
nucleus. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a 10-amino 
acid peptide that stimulates secretion of both LH and 
FSH from the anterior pituitary gland; it is synthesized in 
these neurons (5). 

The gene that encodes the 92-amino acid precursor 
protein containing GnRH has been localized to the short 
arm of chromosome 8. This precursor protein contains, in 
order, a 23-amino acid signal sequence, the GnRH 
decapeptide, a 3-amino acid proteolytic processing site, 


THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

22

21 

23 26 
19 
11 
12 
13 16 
18 20 
2417 
25 
27 
12 
9 
10 8 
14 15 
HO 3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Cholesterol 
Luteinizing 
hormone P450 scc (Cholesterol side CH3 
chain cleavage 
enzyme) C O 

3b HSD 

P45017a 

(hydroxysteroid(17a -hydroxylase) dehydrogenase/isomerase) 

CH3 CH3 
HO 

CO CO

Pregnenolone 

Theca 

OH 

HO O 
Progesterone

17-Hydroxypregnenolone 

CH3 

P45017a 

P45017a 
(17, 20-lyase) O (17a -hydroxylase) C O 

OH 

HO O 

Dehydroepiandrosterone 17a -Hydroxyprogesterone 

P45017a 
(17, 20-lyase)

3b HSDO OH 
(hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase/ 
isomerase) 


17b -HSOR 
(17b -hydroxysteroid 
oxidoreductase)


OO 
Androstenedione Testosterone 

P450 Arom P450 Arom

Follicle-stimulating 

(aromatase) (aromatase)

P45017a

hormone 

(17, 20-lyase)

O OH 

17b -HSOR 
(17b -hydroxysteroid 
oxidoreductase)


HO HO 
Estrone Estradiol 

Granulosa Corpus luteum 

n FIG. 26. Principal pathways of steroid hormone biosynthesis in the human ovary. Although each cell type of the ovary contains 
the complete enzyme complement required for the formation of estradiol from cholesterol, the amounts of the various 
enzymes, and consequently the predominant hormones formed, differ among the cell types. The major enzyme complement for 
the corpus luteum, theca, and granulosa cells are shown by the brackets; as a consequence, these cells produce predominantly 
progesterone and 17a -hydroxyprogesterone (corpus luteum), androgen (theca), and estrogen (granulosa). The major sites of 
action of LH and FSH in mediating this pathway are shown by the horizontal arrows. The dotted line emphasizes that the 
metabolism of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone is limited in the human ovary. (Reproduced, with permission, from Carr BR. Disorders of 
the ovary and female reproductive tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams textbook of 
endocrinology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1992:733–798) 
and a 56-amino acid peptide termed GnRH-associated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism because of absent or 
peptide. When GnRH is released into the circulation, it is deficient gonadotropin secretion. Embryologic studies 
degraded rapidly, with a half-life of 2–4 minutes. have shown that GnRH neurons originally develop in the 

The physiologic importance of the GnRH-containing epithelium of the olfactory placode, migrate across the 
neurons is apparent from observations that specific cribriform plate, enter the forebrain with the nervus teranatomic 
lesions within the arcuate nucleus result in minalis and vomeronasal nerves, travel medially to the 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

olfactory bulbs, and eventually enter the septal–preoptic 
area of the hypothalamus. Gene defects have been found 
in the neural cell adhesion proteins that facilitate this neuronal 
migration. The result is absence of GnRH neurons 
in the hypothalamus and the olfactory bulbs, causing 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anosmia 
(Kallmann’s syndrome). In Kallmann’s syndrome, the 
pituitary gland is usually normal, and treatment with 
exogenous pulsatile GnRH can result in normal gonadal 
function and ovulation. Other neurologic abnormalities 
may be present in some patients, including cerebellar 
ataxia, nerve deafness, color blindness, and cleft lip and 
cleft palate. Abnormalities of thirst and vasopressin 
release also may occur. Thus, the absence of these migration 
facilitation proteins may cause other problems of 
neuronal differentiation. The gene defect resulting in loss 
of this adhesion molecule has been localized to Xp22.3 in 
the X-linked form, with the locus being termed KALIG-1 
(Kallmann’s syndrome interval gene 1) (6). 

Classic neurotransmitters, including norepinephrine, 
dopamine, and serotonin, as well as more recently defined 
transmitters including endogenous opiates and 
prostaglandins, appear to influence secretion of GnRH 
from the hypothalamus. Norepinephrine appears to stimulate 
GnRH release, whereas dopamine and serotonin probably 
exert inhibitory effects (7). Endogenous opioids 
inhibit hypothalamic secretion of GnRH. Corticotropinreleasing 
hormone also appears capable of suppressing 
GnRH secretion and may be part of the reason for the 
association of stress and hypothalamic amenorrhea in 
some women. In addition, both estrogens and androgens 
bind to cells within the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary, 
and progestins bind to cells within the hypothalamus, 
apparently to modulate GnRH release. The GnRH 
secreted in the arcuate nucleus is transported in high concentrations 
to the anterior pituitary via the pituitary portal 
vascular system. Because of the rapidity with which 
GnRH is degraded, as well as its dilution within the circulation, 
peripheral levels of GnRH are extremely low and 
do not reflect hypothalamic–pituitary interaction accurately. 
Very high levels of GnRH may be present in the portal 
circulation when peripheral levels are undetectable. 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone binds to specific 
receptors located on the cell membranes of pituitary 
gonadotropes. When these receptors are activated by 
GnRH, second messengers (which almost certainly 
include phospholipids and calcium and may include protein 
kinase C and cAMP/protein kinase A) result in rapid 
release of LH and FSH. 

Both LH and FSH are secreted in a pulsatile manner. 
Based on the observation that the pulses of gonadotropin 
coincide with the coordinated depolarization of many 
arcuate neurons, it appears that the pulse generator for the 
regulation of the reproductive system resides within the 
arcuate nucleus. In women, the average frequency with 
which GnRH is released, based on measurements of LH 
secretion, varies from every 60 minutes in the follicular 

phase of the menstrual cycle to every 4 hours during the 
midluteal phase. Presumably, it is the nearby neuronal 
systems and gonadal steroids that modify the pulsatile 
release of GnRH. 

With constant exposure to high doses of GnRH (ie, 
nonpulsatile), LH and FSH levels initially increase and 
then begin to decrease progressively over time. This 
biphasic response ultimately results in hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism, with markedly reduced LH and FSH 
secretion, decreased gonadal steroid secretion, and in 
effect, medical castration. 

Two separate mechanisms are believed to play roles in 
this biphasic gonadotropin response: desensitization and 
down-regulation. Desensitization refers to the uncoupling 
of the activated GnRH-receptor–binding complex from 
intracellular events that are normally set in motion after 
receptor binding. Down-regulation refers to a decrease in 
the number of unoccupied GnRH receptors. After GnRH 
binding, internalization of GnRH-receptor complexes leads 
to a decrease in the number of receptors. Continuous exposure 
to high doses of GnRH does not allow adequate 
replenishment of unoccupied receptors on the cell surface. 
Thus, continuous exposure to GnRH will lead to a dosedependent 
reduction in the number of unoccupied GnRH 
receptors because of 1) increased receptor occupancy 
(accounting for perhaps two thirds of the reduction in 
GnRH receptors) and 2) receptor loss. Despite the high percentage 
of occupied receptors, pituitary gonadotropin content 
decreases, suggesting that the occupied GnRH 
receptors are functionally uncoupled from the intracellular 
mechanisms for normal hormone synthesis and release. 
Although desensitization is not understood, it is presumed 
that conformational changes in the gonadotrope surface 
membrane occur. Down-regulation and desensitization may 
represent the mechanisms by which pituitary gonadotropes 
protect themselves from excessive stimulation. 

Down-regulation and desensitization also occur with 
administration of long-acting synthetic GnRH agonists. 
Thus, women’s disorders that depend on ovarian steroid 
secretion, including anovulatory bleeding, endometriosis, 
dysmenorrhea, hirsutism, precocious puberty, premenstrual 
syndrome, and uterine leiomyomata, can be treated 
with GnRH agonists. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
analogues are approved for only a few of their possible 
uses. Because the profound hypoestrogenism associated 
with treatment with these analogues results in accelerated 
bone loss, these drugs currently are approved for use for 
only 6 continuous months in any given individual. 
Studies are under way to determine whether the addition 
of various agents, such as progestins alone or with estro-
gen or bisphosphonates (ie, add-back therapy), may prevent 
or reduce this bone loss. 

Long-acting agonists initially stimulate gonadotropin 
secretion for perhaps 1–2 weeks before down-regulation 
leads to very low levels of LH and FSH. Because of the 
early stimulatory effects of GnRH agonists, GnRH antagonists 
were developed and are currently available for 


treatment in cycles of in vitro fertilization. Antagonists 
reduce the number of ampules of gonadotropins and prevent 
LH surges, and pregnancy rates are similar to those 
with agonists (8). 

Pulsatile GnRH can be used to induce ovulation in 
women with an intact pituitary gland. Human chorionic 
gonadotropin can be administered to support the corpus 
luteum after ovulation. Alternatively, the administration of 
GnRH can be continued. Hyperstimulation is uncommon 
with GnRH. As might be expected, it is highly effective in 
women with hypothalamic amenorrhea, in whom pulsatile 
secretion of GnRH is diminished. Even in such amenorrheic 
women, however, pregnancy rates have been no 
greater than those achieved with menotropin therapy. 

GONADOTROPIN REGULATION 
OF THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

Follicular Phase 

Initiation of follicular growth, or folliculogenesis, begins 
during the last few days of the luteal phase of the previous 
menstrual cycle and ends with ovulation. During this 
period, plasma progesterone and estrogen levels decline 
because of the demise of the corpus luteum, and FSH levels 
rise. The rise in FSH in the late luteal phase is also 
associated with a dramatic fall in the level of inhibin A 
and inhibin B (Fig. 27) (9). The rise in FSH initiates the 
development of follicles and the next menstrual cycle. 
Ovulation probably occurs randomly during consecutive 
cycles, not preferentially to one ovary or the other. 

After the onset of menses, development of the follicle 
continues, but FSH levels decline as a result of the negative 
feedback of estrogens and the rise of inhibin secreted 
by the developing follicle. The decline in FSH—together 

Days relative to midcycle LH peak 
Inhibin B (pg/mL)
Inhibin A (pg/mL) 
-14 -7 0 7 14 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
n FIG. 27. Major elevations of mean circulating concentrations 
of inhibin B (follicular phase) and inhibin A (luteal 
phase) during the menstrual cycle. Time zero represents midcycle 
luteinizing hormone surge. (Drawing based on data 
from Groome NP, Illingworth PJ, O’Brien M, et al. 
Measurement of dimeric inhibin B through the human menstrual 
cycle. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 81:1401–1405, 1996. 
Adapted by Yen SSC. The human menstrual cycle. In: Yen 
SSC, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
Physiology, pathophysiology and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:191–217) 
THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

with secretion by the growing follicle of additional 
intraovarian protein hormones, which include growth factors, 
cytokines, and a variety of other protein hormones 
(as discussed earlier)—is believed to promote steroidogenesis 
favoring the dominant follicle, while possibly 
inhibiting adjacent follicles from growing. 

Three specific stages have been described in the development 
of a dominant follicle. The first stage is recruitment. 
From a pool of nonproliferating follicles a cohort 
of follicles are recruited during days 1–4 of the menstrual 
cycle in response to FSH. Once this stage is attained, 
the recruited follicles must either continue on to ovulate 
or undergo atresia. The following stage is selection, and 
it occurs when one follicle ovulates and the others undergo 
atresia. This stage occurs around days 5 and 7 of the 
menstrual cycle. In the final stage of development—dominance—
the dominant follicle grows and continues to 
suppress other ovarian follicles. This stage occurs 
between days 8 and 12 of the cycle and ends at the time 
of ovulation, ranging from days 13 to 15 (10). 

During the proliferative phase, estrogen levels rise 
parallel to the growth of the follicle and the number of 
granulosa cells. The granulosa cells are the exclusive 
source of FSH receptors. The increase of FSH in the late 
luteal phase of the previous cycle leads to an increase in 
the number of FSH receptors and, subsequently, to an 
increase in estradiol secretion by the granulosa cells. The 
increase in FSH receptors appears to reflect an increase in 
the number of granulosa cells rather than an increase in 
FSH receptors per cell. The increase in estradiol formation 
appears to increase the number of estradiol receptors. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone also induces the enzyme 
aromatase and, in the presence of estradiol, the formation 
of LH receptors on granulosa cells. After the appearance 
of LH receptors, the preovulatory granulosa cells begin to 
secrete small quantities of progesterone. The preovulatory 
secretion of progesterone, although somewhat limited, 
is believed to exert positive feedback on the estrogenprimed 
pituitary to cause a release or help augment the 
release of LH. In addition, during the late follicular phase, 
LH stimulates thecal cell production of androgens (particularly 
androstenedione), which are then transferred to the 
adjacent follicles, where they are aromatized to estrone by 
the follicles and, in the presence of 17b -hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1, converted to estradiol. This 
sequence is believed to be the primary pathway of formation 
of estradiol in the human ovary (11). 

During the preantral and early antral follicular growth, 
follicles produce more androgens than estrogens. This 
situation may be due to the presence of the enzyme 
5a -reductase, which converts testosterone to the nonaromatizable 
androgen dihydrotestosterone. Larger antral 
follicles, particularly the dominant follicle with its larger 
quantity of aromatase, secrete more estrogens. This 
change in the microenvironment and balance of androgens 
and estrogens of the ovary appears to be important 
in the selection of the dominant follicle. The process of 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

atresia in smaller follicles may be due to an excess 
amount of dihydrotestosterone, which appears to inhibit 
aromatization. 

The fluid bathing the granulosa cells contains a large 
number of ovarian steroids and other protein hormones. 
In large follicles (>8 mm in diameter), the FSH, estrogen, 
and progesterone levels in follicular fluid are extremely 
high. (In small follicles, the levels of androgens are higher 
than they are in large follicles and in the follicular 
fluid.) These observations support the hypothesis of 
microenvironmental control of follicular growth by hormones 
in the follicular fluid. 

Gonadotropin secretion varies during the menstrual 
cycle. As discussed earlier, FSH levels, which are elevated 
in the early part of the follicular phase, decline until 
just before ovulation. In contrast, LH levels are low in the 
first part of the follicular phase. In the presence of 
increased estrogen; however, LH secretion begins to 
increase by the midfollicular phase as a result of positive 
feedback from estrogen. Secretion of LH in response to 
LH-releasing hormone increases markedly from the early 
to the late follicular phase. The frequency of spontaneous 
LH pulses varies during the menstrual cycle. During the 
early part of the cycle, LH pulses appear to be of constant 
amplitude and occur in frequencies of around 60–90 
minutes. During the late follicular phase, just before the 
midcycle surge of LH, the LH pulse frequency increases, 
and LH amplitude may also increase (Fig. 28) (11). 

Ovulation 

The onset of the LH surge resulting from increasing secretion 
of estrogen by preovulatory follicles is a relatively 
precise predictor of the time of ovulation, occurring some 
34–36 hours before the release of the ovum from the follicle. 
The peak of LH secretion occurs 10–12 hours before 
ovulation. The LH surge stimulates the resumption of the 
meiosis process in the ovum with the release of the first 
polar body. Luteinization of the granulosa cells increases 
progesterone secretion via another messenger within the 
follicle, cAMP. Spontaneous luteinization occurs in the 
absence of LH when granulosa cells are removed from the 
follicle and cultured. This finding has led to the hypotheses 
that oocyte maturation inhibitor or luteinization 
inhibitor prevents ovulation, and that the effects of these 
factors are overcome at the time of ovulation (12). 

Just before ovulation, the follicle becomes vascularized. 
At this time there appears to be a protrusion of the 
follicular wall (the stigma), which develops and is the site 
of rupture with release of the oocyte–cumulus complex. 
The precise mechanism of follicular rupture is complex. 
It appears that progesterone and cAMP augment or activate 
proteolytic enzymes (eg, collagenase and plasmin) 
that digest the collagen in the follicular wall, resulting in 
distensibility and thinning just before ovum release. 
There is no evidence that an increase in follicular pressure 
causes follicular rupture, but measurements have not 
been obtained at the precise instance of rupture of the fol


licle. Prostaglandins and other related substances reach a 
peak concentration in follicular fluid just before ovulation. 
These substances are believed to be involved in the 
rupture of the follicle, possibly by stimulating smooth 
muscle contraction and thereby aiding the extrusion of 
the oocyte–cumulus mass. It is known that women treated 
with prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors often retain 
the ovum, fail to ovulate, and develop a “luteinized 
unruptured follicle.” 

Immediately before the LH peak, estradiol levels in 
the plasma fall rapidly. The fall in LH may be due to 
down-regulation of its own receptors or to direct inhibition 
by an increase in progesterone secretion. The ovulatory 
peak of FSH, which is thought to be stimulated by 
progesterone, may have a variety of functions, including 
stimulating the plasminogen activator and increasing 
granulosa cell receptors (13). The postovulatory fall in 
LH could be due to the loss of positive feedback caused 
by a decline in estrogen levels or by the depletion of LH 
content in the pituitary. 

Luteal Phase 

During the preovulatory surge of LH, a series of morphologic 
and chemical changes (a process referred to as 
luteinization) occur in the cells of the granulosa and 
theca. During luteinization, these cells undergo hypertrophy 
and exhibit increased size and synthesis of hormones 
under LH stimulation. After ovulation, the basement 
membrane separating the granulosa from the theca breaks 
down, and blood vessels and capillaries invade the granulosa 
cells. The growth of blood vessels may be due to a 
variety of described angiogenic factors expressed in the 
developing corpus luteum. 

The morphologic change of the corpus luteum, or yellow 
body, has been well characterized. It includes the 
proliferation of granulosa cells, which occurs the day 
after ovulation, followed by capillary invasion of the 
granulosa cells, which is initiated on day 2 after ovulation; 
the capillaries reach the central cavity by day 4. 
Hemorrhage into the central cavity can occur with the 
formation of a fibrin clot, and fibroblasts appear in the 
central cavity by day 5. Maximum capillary dilation and 
blood flow is obtained by day 7 or 8. During its development, 
the corpus luteum may secrete as much as 40 mg of 
progesterone per day. Considering its small size, the corpus 
luteum is the most active steroidogenic tissue in 
humans. The cells that make up the corpus luteum 
are derived from the granulosa and theca cells, which 
make up the follicle. The granulosa cells become 
granulosa–lutein cells (or large cells), and the theca cells 
are transformed into theca–lutein cells (small cells). The 
so-called K cells, scattered throughout the corpus luteum, 
are believed to be due to macrophages. In the absence of 
pregnancy, the corpus luteum undergoes degeneration. 
This process, termed luteolysis, is first apparent by day 8 
after ovulation. During luteolysis the granulosa–lutein 
cells shrink, and the theca cells become more prominent. 


THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

Progesterone (P) (ng/mL)
Estradiol (E2 ) (pg/mL) (mlU/mL) 
Higher centers 
Hypothalamus 
Gonadotropins 
Maturing follicle 
Endometrium 
60 
40 
20 
10 
200 
100 
10 
5 
0 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
Days 
Corpus luteumOvulation 
FSH 
LH 
Anterior 
pituitary 
n FIG. 28. Diagrammatic representation of events of pituitary, ovarian, and menstrual cycles. Note that the plasma estradiol 
level peaks on approximately day 12, plasma follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels peak on 
approximately day 13, and ovulation occurs on approximately day 14. (Couchman GM, Hammond CB. Physiology of reproduction. 
In: Scott JR, DiSaia PJ, Hammond CB, Spellacy WN, eds. Danforth’s obstetrics and gynecology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
JB Lippincott, 1994:30) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Later, both cell types undergo cell death, possibly involving 
the process of apoptosis in some species. The remaining 
corpus luteum tissue is composed of a dense 
connective tissue and is termed the corpus albicans. 

The regulation of steroid hormone synthesis by the corpus 
luteum involves a number of factors. These include 
the number of granulosa–lutein cells, the number of LH 
and FSH receptors, and the availability of substrate. As 
previously discussed, the granulosa cells of the follicle are 
avascular. Thus, they do not have ready access to LDL. 
The levels of LDL in the granulosa cells—and in follicular 
fluid—are very low. As a result, the granulosa cells have 
a limited ability to form progesterone. However, after ovulation, 
extensive vascularization of the follicle takes place, 
providing increased levels of cholesterol to the luteinized 
granulosa cells. The increased availability of LDL to the 
granulosa–lutein cells provides the substrate for these cells 
to secrete increased quantities of progesterone. Treatment 
of corpus luteum tissue in vitro with hCG and LH increases 
the number of LDL receptors and enhances progesterone 
secretion. In addition, hCG increases the LDL 
receptor mRNA in granulosa cells. Binding sites for LH 
and hCG are maximal during this period. Women with 
extremely low levels of LDL cholesterol exhibit low progesterone 
secretion during the luteal phase (14). 

The pattern of hormone secretion by the corpus luteum 
is different from that of the follicle. After ovulation, estro-
gen levels decrease. This decrease is followed by a secondary 
rise that reaches a peak at the midluteal phase, 
which is followed by a secondary decrease toward the end 
of the menstrual cycle. The rise in estradiol parallels the pattern 
of progesterone secretion. Studies of the ovarian 
venous blood draining the corpus luteum suggest that the 
corpus luteum is the source of hormone secretion during the 
luteal phase. The role of LH as a primary luteotropic agent 
was first established in studies of hypophysectomized 
women. In these women, after induction of ovulation, the 
length of the luteal phase and the amount of progesterone 
secreted were entirely dependent on repeated injections of 
LH. The administration of LH or hCG during the luteal 
phase can extend the functional life span of the corpus 
luteum and the secretion of progesterone for up to 2 weeks. 

The secretion of progesterone during the luteal phase 
is episodic, and the pulses of LH correspond with pulses 
of progesterone. The frequency and amplitude of LH 
secretion during the luteal phase regulate the luteal phase 
function. A reduction in FSH during the follicular phase, 
however, is associated with a shortened luteal phase, 
smaller corpora luteum, and reduced responses of dispersed 
corpus luteum cells in vitro. In addition, continued 
administration of LH-releasing hormone analogues during 
either the follicular phase or the luteal phase reduces 
the life span of the corpus luteum. A reduction in LH 
concentration, pulse frequency, and pulse amplitude also 
reduces the length of the luteal phase. The corpus luteum 
of primates, however, can recover from a transient withdrawal 
of LH, depending on the age of the corpus luteum. 
Progesterone secretion in the luteal phase is correlated 

with the number of LH and hCG receptors and basal 
activity of adenylate cyclase. 

The role of other luteotropic factors in women is less 
clear. Prolactin does not appear to be luteotropic in women 
(in contrast to what happens in rats); however, defective 
luteal function occurs when prolactin levels are either elevated 
or significantly suppressed by bromocriptine, 
although the mechanism is not understood. In addition, 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) appears to be inhibitory to granulosa 
cells in vitro. The secretion of relaxin, inhibin, and 
oxytocin by the human corpus luteum may modulate corpus 
luteum function. It appears not to play a role in the 
maintenance of early pregnancy, however, because agonadal 
women treated with estrogen and progesterone alone 
have carried pregnancy to term after donor embryo transfer. 

In the absence of pregnancy, the function of the corpus 
luteum rapidly declines 9–11 days after ovulation, but the 
mechanism of luteolysis remains unclear. Both PGF2 and 
exogenous estrogens appear to be luteolytic in nonhuman 
primates, as well as in women. However, antiestrogens 
and aromatase inhibitors do not decrease the length of the 
luteal phase or alter corpus luteum function. In addition, 
the fact that estrogen receptors are absent in the luteal 
cells of women indicates that estrogen does not play a 
role in luteal regression. 

STEROID HORMONE EFFECTS 
ON THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE 
TRACT 

Fluctuations in estrogen and progesterone levels produce 
striking effects on the reproductive tract. Characteristic 
changes occur in the endometrium during the menstrual 
cycle, which makes dating of the endometrium possible 
(Video 1; Images 5–30) (15). The proliferative phase is 
not dated as easily as the luteal phase because it involves 
only an increase in growth of the endometrium, primarily 
of the glands. The glands are narrow and tubular, and 
mitosis and pseudostratification are present. After ovulation, 
which occurs on day 14, changes in the endometrium 
occur in a specific order. On cycle day 16, glycogen accumulates 
in the basal portion of the glandular epithelium, 
resulting in pseudostratification and subnuclear vacuoles. 
This is the first sign of ovulation that can be attributed to 
the cycle day. On day 17, the glands become more tortuous 
and dilated. By day 18, the vacuoles and epithelium 
are smaller and often are located beside the nuclei, and 
glycogen is present in the apex of the cells. On day 19, 
transluminal secretion is seen, and pseudostratification 
and vacuolation have entirely disappeared. On cycle days 
21 and 22, the endometrial stroma becomes edematous. 
On day 23, stromal cells surrounding the spiral arterioles 
begin to enlarge, and stromal mitosis becomes apparent. 
Day 24 is characterized by the appearance of predecidual 
cells surrounded by spiral arterioles and numerous stromal 
mitoses. By day 25, predecidual cells begin to differentiate 
under the surface epithelium. By day 27, the upper 
portion of the endometrial stroma appears to be a solid 


sheet of well-differentiated decidua-like cells. Differentiation 
of the decidua is accompanied by a marked increase in 
lymphocytic infiltration. Menstruation begins on day 28. 

The breakdown of the endometrium begins when the 
absence of conception is associated with the decline in corpus 
luteum, followed by declines in plasma estrogens and 
progesterones. These hormonal changes cause endometrial 
effects, including vascular changes, tissue death, and finally 
menstruation. With a reduction and shrinkage of the 
height of the endometrium, blood flow through the spiral 
arterioles decreases, and vasodilation ensues. The spiral 
vessels feeding the endometrium undergo rhythmic vasoconstriction 
and vasodilation. These responses lead to disruption 
of the blood vessels and, eventually, to endometrial 
ischemia and cell death. Menstruation ensues and consists 
of blood and desquamated superficial endometrial tissue. 
The average duration of the menstrual flow is 4–6 days, 
and the average amount of menstrual blood lost in women 
is 30 mL. After resumption of the estrogen secretion by the 
ovarian follicles, endometrial healing leads to prolonged 
vasoconstriction and formation of a fibrin clot over the 
denuded endometrial cells. 

(If a pregnancy should occur, the continuing secretion 
of progesterone carries through the decidual changes seen 
in the later portion of the cycle, causing the typical Arias-
Stella reaction seen in Image 31.) 

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME 

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) refers to the cyclic and 
repetitive emergence, during the luteal phase of the menstrual 
cycle, of distressing physical, psychologic, and 
behavioral changes that disappear by the end of the menstrual 
flow (16). Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
(PMDD), as defined by the American Psychiatric 
Association in its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 4th edition, text revision, refers to a 
moderate to severe form of PMS characterized by multiple 
symptoms that impair lifestyle (17). The criteria listed 
in Box C must be fulfilled in order for PMDD to be the 
diagnosis (18). PMS, as recently defined in the 10th revision 
of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD10), 
is a much less stringent diagnosis than PMDD (Box 
C) (19). The ICD-10 diagnostic criteria also are more 
relaxed than criteria used in the 1980s and early 1990s to 
diagnose PMS (19), which were characterized by the 
cyclic recurrence of symptoms of moderate or greater 
severity with adverse impact on quality of life (20). In 
both PMDD and PMS, symptoms follow the proper temporal 
relationship to the menstrual cycle. The diagnosis of 
PMDD additionally requires prospective documentation 
of symptoms that are severe enough to interfere with some 
aspect of family, career, social, or job-related activities. 

Symptoms 

More than 150 symptoms have been attributed to PMS. 
Symptoms can be subcategorized into psychologic symp-

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

toms, physical symptoms, and behavioral symptoms 
(Table 3). Ninety percent of all women report experiencing 
predictable mood changes or physical symptoms 
prior to the onset of their menses. The large majority 
(50% or more) experience only mild symptoms that do 
not interfere with quality of life. Mild symptoms during 
the week preceding menstruation are traditionally called 
moliminal or premenstrual symptoms; however, in ICD10, 
they may meet the diagnosis of PMS. Women with 
mild moliminal symptoms generally have not been 
included in research trials for the treatment of PMS (20). 

In women of reproductive age, 20–40% have premenstrual 
symptoms that are severe enough to interfere 
to some degree with normal activities. The term PMS 
applies when these symptoms occur with the proper 
temporal relationship to menstruation. Many patients 
with moderate PMS also meet criteria for PMDD. As 
many as 3–5% of women experience symptoms severe 
enough to incapacitate them for one or several days per 
month. Although the average age at onset of symptoms is 
26 years, symptoms usually are present for many years 
before a woman seeks medical attention. The incidence of 
PMS and PMDD is similar in adolescent females and 
adult women. 

Women who report premenstrual symptoms should 
be evaluated in a systematic manner (20). A medical and 
psychiatric history must be obtained, and underlying 
psychiatric disorders need to be identified. Many psychiatric 
disorders can be exacerbated premenstrually. 
Forty percent to 60% of women who are referred or who 
seek treatment for PMS have generalized psychiatric 
disorders, not PMS. In addition, 10% of women seeking 
PMS care have personality disorders (21). It is prudent 
to consider referral for formal mental health evaluation. 
Both PMS and PMDD may coexist with generalized 
medical problems, such as chronic fatigue syndrome or 
irritable bowel syndrome, and occasionally are superimposed 
on chronic affective disorders. A psychosocial history 
should try to identify past or present history of 
abuse, sexual trauma, and thoughts of suicide. Work, 
sleep, diet, lifestyle, and major stressors also need to be 
evaluated, as well as current medications, substance abuse 
(eg, caffeine, alcohol, smoking, and laxatives), and results 
of prior treatments. 

Frequently there is a large discrepancy between 
recalled, retrospective data and information obtained 
prospectively throughout the menstrual cycle. The suspicion 
of PMS and PMDD is confirmed or refuted with 
some form of daily symptom reporting. Symptom calendars 
and daily rating scales (see Fig. 29) are therefore the 
most important tool for diagnosing PMS. The patient 
records symptoms and their severity daily, allowing the 
physician to document the temporal and severity components 
of the symptom complex. A provisional diagnosis 
may be made after 1 month, and a diagnosis is confirmed 
after 2 months. The main feature discriminating PMS 
from psychiatric disorders is the presence of one rela



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tively symptom-free week in the follicular phase of every 
cycle. The major differential diagnosis for PMS is therefore 
a chronic affective illness that demonstrates premenstrual 
worsening of symptoms, the so-called premenstrual 
magnification or exacerbation of the underlying mood 
disorder. Symptom calendars used in conjunction with 

basal body temperature allow PMS to be diagnosed after 
hysterectomy if the ovaries were preserved. 

Gonadal steroid effects alone cannot explain PMS; it is 
due to the complex, yet poorly understood, interaction of 
reproductive endocrine factors, brain neurochemistry, and 
underlying vulnerability factors (20). Ovulation is essential 

BOX C 
Diagnosis of Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Premenstrual Syndrome 

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 

1. At least five of the following symptoms, with at least one being a core symptom, are present a week before menses and remit a 
few days after the onset of menses: 
Depressed mood or dysphoria (core symptom) Marked lack of energy 
Anxiety or tension (core symptom) Marked change in appetite, overeating, or food cravings 
Affective lability (core symptom) Hypersomnia or insomnia 
Irritability (core symptom) Feeling overwhelmed 
Decreased interest in usual activities Other physical symptoms (eg, breast tenderness, bloating, 
Concentration difficulties headache, joint or muscle pain) 

2. 
Symptoms must interfere with work, school, usual activities, or relationships. 
3. 
Symptoms must not merely be an exacerbation of another disorder. 
4. 
Criteria 1, 2, and 3 must be confirmed by prospective daily ratings for at least two cycles. 
Premenstrual syndrome 

1. 
Symptoms do not meet DSM-IV-TR criteria for premenstrual dysphoric disorder but do meet ICD-10 criteria for premenstrual 
syndrome. 
2. 
Symptoms occur only in the luteal phase, peak shortly before menses, and cease with menstrual flow or soon after. 
3. 
One or more of the following symptoms are present: 
Aches and pains

Mild psychologic discomfort 

Poor concentration

Bloating and weight gain 

Sleep disturbance

Breast tenderness 

Change in appetite

Swelling of hands and feet 

4. Functional impairment is not required. 
Abbreviations: DSM-IV-TR indicates Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition; ICD-10, International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th revision. 

Source: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 4th ed, text revision. Washington, DC: APA, 2000 
and World Health Organization. Mental and behavioural disorders. In: International classification of diseases and related health problems. 10th rev. 
Vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1992:311–387 

n TABLE 3. Common Symptoms of Premenstrual Syndrome 
Type Symptoms 
Psychologic Anxiety, irritability, labile moods, depression, anger, sadness, crying easily, nervous tension 
Physical Headaches, breast tenderness, bloating, swelling of the extremities, skin problems, aches, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, abdominal pain 
Behavioral Increased appetite, food cravings, decreased motivation, decreased concentration and efficiency, 
avoidance of activities, changes in libido, increased nap taking, social isolation 


Name: Month: 

Day of month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 
Irritability 
Anxiety 
Nervous tension 
Mood swings 
Anger/rage 
Violent behavior 
Depression 
Crying easily 
Despondency 
Overemotionality 
Fatigue 
Skin problems 
Swelling (hands, feet) 
Breast tenderness 
Abdominal bloating 
Headaches 
Migraine headaches 
Abdominal cramps 
General aches/pains 
Hot flushes 
Nausea 
Gastrointestinal problems 
Food cravings 
Insomnia 
Increased naps 
Clumsiness 
Confusion 
Inability to concentrate 
Forgetfulness 
Avoidance of activities 
Weight 
BBT 
Scale: 
No symptom 0 
Mild 1 
Moderate 2 
Severe 3 
Menstrual flow M 
Therapy 

n FIG. 29. Premenstrual syndrome symptom diary. 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

for the expression of PMS. Many mono-etiologic theories 
have been proposed and dispelled, including simple hormonal 
excesses or deficiencies. Luteal phase reductions in 
serotonin activity and endogenous opioid peptide activity 
are the biologic factors that have the strongest association 
with PMS. Abnormalities in magnesium, zinc, and circadian 
rhythms also have been associated with it. Diets high 
in fat, salts, sugar, and caffeine all have been linked to 
PMS, with high-fat diets correlating best with dysphoric 
mood. Menorrhagia, pelvic pain, and genetic predisposition 
also may play a role in PMS. 

Therapy 

The goal of PMS therapy is to reduce the number of 
affected days or the severity of symptoms or both, as well 
as to improve the level of psychosocial functioning. 
Reducing moliminal symptomatology is a realistic goal 
for most patients. Measures as simple as education, support, 
stress reduction, and exercise may have a dramatic 
impact on patients with moderate PMS. The physician 
should encourage regular sleep habits to help entrain circadian 
rhythms; meals with a good balance of protein, 
fiber, and complex carbohydrates and that are low in fat, 
salt, and simple sugars also can help. A beverage rich in 
carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals has been developed 
that stimulates increased serotonin levels and transiently 
reduces PMS symptoms (22). Caffeine and 
alcohol should be limited whenever possible. Calcium 
supplementation of 1,200 mg daily may help reduce 
physical and emotional symptoms associated with PMS 
(23). Magnesium supplementation may help reduce 
water retention, abdominal bloating, breast tenderness, 
and negative affect. Most studies fail to document clinical 
improvement with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). 

Stress appears to exacerbate premenstrual complaints. 
Relaxation techniques and cognitive behavioral treatments 
generally are used as adjuncts to other treatments; 
evidence for their benefit, however, is conflicting (24), 
Randomized clinical trials have found that moderate aerobic 
exercise improves PMS symptoms. Evening brightlight 
therapy and partial sleep deprivation also may be of 
benefit. Many patients with mild PMS and about a third 
of patients with moderate PMS or PMDD respond well to 
the self-help measures and lifestyle modifications 
described. 

Pharmacologic treatment is available for moderate to 
severe PMS symptoms and PMDD. Data from randomized 
clinical trials do not support the use of progesterone 
vaginal suppositories or orally administered progesterone 
as a primary treatment for PMS, a practice once common 
(24). Lack of data notwithstanding, because of its low 
incidence of adverse effects, orally administered progesterone 
may be tried empirically before trying other therapies 
that have high cost or significant adverse effects. 
Any long-term improvement in mood symptoms is likely 
to be due to the sedative properties of several metabolites 
of progesterone. 

Medical therapy may take a symptom-targeted 
approach or simply try to suppress ovulation (Table 4) 
(20). Results of controlled clinical trials suggest that 
either approach can help the majority of women. 
Physical symptoms such as pain and water retention may 
be managed by the luteal phase administration of nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs and diuretics, respectively. 
Diuretics are best reserved for women who have 
documented premenstrual gain in weight. Many women 
experience an improvement in mood and overall sense of 
well-being if distressing physical symptoms are relieved. 
Caution should be exercised when nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs are used in combination with diuretics 
because of the potential for renal toxicity. 

Psychotropic agents are effective for the emotional 
symptoms of PMS and PMDD. Alprazolam, a triazolobenzodiazepine, 
is the best-studied anxiolytic agent (25). 
Cyclic administration of low doses reduces symptoms of 
anxiety, depression, tension, and headaches. Buspirone 
is a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic that improves anxiety 
and irritability without sedation or dependency risk. 
Antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor class have recently emerged as the primary treatment 
for PMDD and moderate to severe PMS (26). These 
agents demonstrate a consistent and significant improvement 
in mood, function, and overall symptoms in clinical 
trials (27). Although fluoxetine is the only selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor currently approved by the FDA to 
treat PMDD, sertraline, citalopram, and paroxetine all 
have proven efficacy. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors generally are administered throughout the cycle, 
although evidence suggests that luteal phase administration 
also may be effective (28). They may be used with 
combination oral contraceptives (OCs), but generally not 
with anxiolytics. The tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine 
has been shown to improve irritability, dysphoria, 
and overall global assessment; however, adverse effects 
render clomipramine a second line to selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors and alprazolam (24). 

In the presence of severe symptoms, suppression of 
ovulation is the other effective treatment strategy. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists are the most 
effective agents for eliminating psychologic and physical 
symptoms, although they are expensive (29). These substances 
induce a hypoestrogenic, anovulatory state that 
very effectively relieves PMS symptoms. Improvement 
may not be observed during the first treatment month 
because of the biphasic response in estrogen levels. 
Because long-term therapy is required for PMS, estrogen–
progestin replacement therapy is frequently added 
back to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and ameliorate the 
vasomotor flushes and vaginal dryness associated with 
therapy. Patients in whom PMS symptoms recur on hormonal 
add-back regimens require adjustment of the addback 
schedule, usually the progestogen component. 
Tibolone may be used as an add-back alternative to estrogen–
progestin therapy (30). 


n TABLE 4. Medications for Premenstrual Syndrome 
Medication Dosage Indication Main Adverse Effects 
NSAIDs Luteal phase administration Pain Gastrointestinal upset, rash 
Diuretics Luteal phase administration Fluid retention Dizziness, palpitations, weakness, excess diuresis, dehydration 
Alprazolam 0.25 mg daily to 0.25 mg four . 
times daily in the luteal phase 
Taper dosage during menstruation 
Anxiety, depression Sedation, abuse potential, tolerance, withdrawal seizures 
Buspirone 15–30 mg daily in the luteal phase Anxiety Dizziness, nausea, headache 
Fluoxetine* 10–20 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Anxiety, nervousness, insomnia, appetite suppression, nausea, 
weight loss, headache, sexual dysfunction 
Sertraline 50–100 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Paroxetine 10–30 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Citalopram 10–20 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Clomipramine 25–75 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Dry mouth, fatigue, sweating, vertigo, nausea, constipation, 
insomnia, appetite changes, sexual dysfunction 
Danazol 200–400 mg daily generally 
inhibits ovulation 
Suppression of ovulation Oiliness of the skin, weight gain, hair growth, acne, decreased 
breast size, masculinization of fetus 
GnRH agonists Leuprolide acetate: 3.75 mg monthly 
Goserelin acetate: 3.6 mg monthly 
Suppression of ovulation Vasomotor flushes, reduced breast size, headaches, vaginal 
dryness, arthralgias, loss of bone mineral content 
Transdermal estradiol 0.2 mg daily. 
Induce menses intermittently with 
progesterone or progestin 
Suppression of ovulation Bloating, breast tenderness, nausea, headaches, weight gain. 
Endometrial hyperplasia. 
Medroxyprogesterone 
acetate 
15–20 mg daily or 150 mg 
intramuscularly every 3 mon 
Suppression of ovulation Irregular bleeding, breast tenderness, headaches, depression, 
nausea 
Tibolone 2.5 mg daily as single agent or as 
add-back with GnRH agonist 
GnRH agonist add-back Acne, oiliness of skin 

Abbreviations: NSAIDs indicates nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 
*Only drug approved for premenstrual dysphoric disorder by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Dosages of danazol sufficient to inhibit ovulation treat 
PMS and PMDD very effectively (31). Although dosages 
of 100 mg daily infrequently suppress ovulation, they are 
effective for alleviating premenstrual breast tenderness. 
Luteal phase (half-cycle) administration of 200 mg of 
danazol daily also helps premenstrual mastalgia. 
Danazol’s androgenic and hypoestrogenic adverse effects, 
however, may hinder long-term patient acceptance or 
compliance. Skin care must be emphasized, lipoprotein 
levels and liver function must be checked intermittently, 
and effective barrier contraception must be maintained. 

Very few controlled clinical trials have used oral contraceptive 
pills in PMS. However, after 30 years of 
widespread use, it is obvious that oral contraceptives are 
not a dramatic cure for PMS. In contrast, dosages of 
transdermal estradiol or medroxyprogesterone acetate 
sufficient to inhibit ovulation do lessen PMS. Women 
who are taking oral contraceptives when they present for 
PMS evaluation should discontinue their use to allow 
proper diagnosis. Tibolone has been shown to improve all 
PMS symptoms without significant adverse effects. 

A trial of medical therapy should precede surgical castration 
(18). After documenting baseline symptoms with 
a PMS diary for 1 month, a 3-month trial of a GnRH agonist 
or danazol should be instituted. The PMS symptoms 
should be documented during the trial of GnRH agonist 
alone during month 1, estrogen add-back therapy during 
month 2, and estrogen with progestogen add-back therapy 
during month 3. 

For the few women who require it, bilateral ovariectomy 
with hysterectomy is the surgical treatment of choice. 
Postoperative estrogen replacement generally does not 
result in symptom recurrence. Endometrial ablation and 
hysterectomy alone are not advised for women with PMS, 
although when performed for menorrhagia they may result 
in improvement of coexisting PMS. Symptom reduction 
appears to be related to the degree of improvement in menstrual 
flow. PMS clearly can persist after hysterectomy. 

References 

1. Yeh J, Adashi EY. 
The ovarian life cycle. In: Yen SSC, 
Jaffee RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1999:153–190 
2. Erickson GF, Magoffin DA, Dyer CA, Hofeditz C. The 
ovarian androgen producing cells: a review of structure/ 
function relationships. Endocr Rev 1985;6:371–399 
(button) 
3. Adashi EY. The ovarian follicular apparatus. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:18–40 
4. Carr BR, MacDonald PC, Simpson ER. The role of lipoproteins 
in the regulation of progesterone secretion by the 
human corpus luteum. Fertil Steril 1982;38:303–311 
(button) 
5. Brann DW, Mahesh VB. Excitatory amino acids: evidence 
for a role in the control of reproduction and anterior pituitary 
hormone secretion. Endocr Rev 1997;18:678–700 
(button) 
6. Yen SS. Neuroendocrinology of reproduction. In: Yen SS, 
Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:30–80 
7. Schwartz J. Intercellular communication in the anterior 
pituitary. Endocr Rev 2000;21:488–513 
( ) 
8. Felberbaum R, Diedrich K. Ovarian stimulation for in-vitro 
fertilization/intracytoplasmatic sperm injection with 
gonadotrophins and gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues: 
agonists and antagonists. Hum Reprod 1999;14: 
207–221 
( ) 
9. Groome NP, Illingworth PJ, O’Brien M, Pai R, Rodger PE, 
Mather JP, et al. Measurement of dimeric inhibin B 
throughout the human menstrual cycle. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1996;81:1401–1405 
( ) 
10. Hodgen GD. The dominant ovarian follicle. Fertil Steril 
1982;38:281–300 
( ) 
11. Carr BR. Disorders of the ovaries and female reproductive 
tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen 
PR, eds. Williams textbook of endocrinology. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1998:751–817 
12. Channing CP, 
Schaerf FW, Anderson LD, Tsafriri A. 
Ovarian follicular and luteal physiology. In: Greep RO, ed. 
International review of physiology: reproductive physiology 
III. Vol 22. Baltimore: University Park Press, 1980: 117–201 
13. Yen SS. The human menstrual cycle: neuroendocrine regulation. 
In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive 
endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical 
management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999: 
191–217 
14. Illingworth DR, Corbin DK, 
Kemp ED, Keenan EJ. 
Hormone changes during the menstrual cycle in abetalipoproteinemia: 
reduced luteal phase progesterone in a 
patient with homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:6685–6689 
( ) 
15. Noyes RW, 
Hertig AT, Rock J. Dating the endometrial 
biopsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1975;122:262–263 
( ) 
16. Association of Professors in Gynecology and Obstetrics. 
Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: 
scope, diagnosis, and treatment. Washington, DC: 
APGO, 1998 
17. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV-TR. 4th ed rev. 
Washington, DC: APA, 2000:771–774 
18. Casson P, 
Hahn PM, Van Vugt DA, Reid RL. Lasting 
response to ovariectomy in severe intractable premenstrual 
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:99–105 
( ) 
19. World Health Organization. Mental and behavioural disorders. 
In: International statistical classification of diseases 
and related health problems. 10th rev. Vol 1. Geneva: WHO, 
1996:311–387 
20. Smith S, Schiff I, eds. Modern management of premenstrual 
syndrome. New York: WW Norton, 1993 
21. Gise LH, Lebovits AH, Paddison PL, Strain JJ. Issues in the 
identification of premenstrual syndromes. J Nerv Ment Dis 
1990;178:228–234 
( ) 

22. Sayegh R, Schiff I, Wurtman J, Spiers P, McDermott J, 
Wurtman R. The effect of a carbohydrate-rich beverage on 
mood, appetite, and cognitive function in women with premenstrual 
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:520–528 
(button) 
23. Thys-Jacobs S, Starkey P, Bernstein D, Tian J. Calcium carbonate 
and the premenstrual syndrome: effects on premenstrual 
and menstrual symptoms. Premenstrual Syndrome 
Study Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:444–452 
(button) 
24. Wyatt K, Dimmock P, 
O’Brien PM. Premenstrual syndrome. 
Clin Evid 2000;4:1121–1133 
25. Freeman EW, Rickels K, Sondheimer SJ, Polansky M. A 
double-blind trial of oral progesterone, alprazolam, and 
placebo in treatment of premenstrual syndrome. JAMA 
1995;274:51–57 
( ) 
26. 
Dimmock PW, Wyatt KM, Jones PW, O’Brien PM. Efficacy 
of selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors in premenstrual 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

phoria. Canadian Fluoxetine/Premenstrual Dysphoria 
Collaborative Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995;332: 
1529–1534 


( ) 
28. Freeman EW. Rickels K, Arredondo F, Kao LC, Pollack SE, 
Sondheimer SJ. Full- or half-cycle treatment of severe premenstrual 
syndrome with a serotonergic antidepressant. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol 1999;19:3–8 
( ) 
29. Brown CS, Ling FW, Andersen RN, Farmer RG, Arheart 
KL. Efficacy of depot leuprolide in premenstrual syndrome: 
effect of symptom severity and type in a controlled trial. 
Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:779–786 
( ) 
30. Di Carlo C, Palomba S, Tommaselli GA, Guida M, Di 
Spiezio Sardo A, Nappi C. Use of leuprolide acetate plus 
tibolone in the treatment of severe premenstrual syndrome. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:380–384 
( ) 
31. Halbreich U, Rojansky N, Palter S. Elimination of ovulation 
syndrome: a systematic review. Lancet 2000;356: 1131–1136 

and menstrual cyclicity (with danazol) improves dysphoric 
(button) 
premenstrual syndromes. Fertil Steril 1991;56:1066–1069

27. Steiner M, Steinberg S, Stewart D, Carter D, Berger C, Reid 
R, et al. Fluoxetine in the treatment of premenstrual dys-
(button) 
Disorders of Ovulation and Menstruation 


THE APPROACH TO THE PATIENT 
WITH ABNORMAL MENSTRUATION 

The major abnormalities of menstruation are amenorrhea 
and abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). Because any abnormality 
of menstruation may be associated with pregnancy, 
pregnancy always must be ruled out as a cause. 

Amenorrhea 

Amenorrhea indicates failure of the hypothalamic–pituitary–
gonadal axis to induce the cyclic changes in the 
endometrium that normally result in menses, the absence 
of end organs, or obstruction of the outflow tract. It is 
important to remember that amenorrhea may result from 
an abnormality at any level of the reproductive tract. How 
long a woman must be amenorrheic before the condition 
is considered pathologic is arbitrary; however, any 
woman who has concerns about the absence of menses 
should be evaluated. 

Amenorrhea may be defined as 1) the absence of menstruation 
for 3 months or more in women with past 
menses (ie, secondary amenorrhea) or 2) the absence of 
menarche by age 16 years in girls who have never 
menstruated (ie, primary amenorrhea). Recent data suggest 
that pubertal development and, hence, menarche, 
continue to begin earlier in American girls (1). 
Consequently, some clinicians consider evaluating a girl 

with primary amenorrhea by age 14, particularly if 5 
years or more have passed since the first evidence of 
pubertal development. Women who menstruate fewer 
than nine times in any 12-month period should be evaluated 
in the same way as women with secondary amenorrhea. 
The separation of amenorrhea into primary and 
secondary categories is artificial and should not be considered 
in the evaluation of the amenorrheic woman. 
Likewise, the term postpill amenorrhea, which is sometimes 
used to refer to women who do not menstruate 
within 3 months of discontinuing the use of oral contraceptives, 
conveys nothing about the cause of the amenorrhea 
and should not alter the evaluation. 

Amenorrhea is not a diagnosis in itself but rather a 
sign of a disorder. Although amenorrhea is physiologic in 
prepubertal girls, during pregnancy, during lactation, and 
after menopause, it should be regarded as pathologic 
when it is present at any other time during the normal 
reproductive years. Pathologic amenorrhea has been estimated 
to occur in 5% of women of reproductive age. In 
general, menses occur at intervals of 28 days plus or 
minus 3 days in two thirds of women, with a normal 
range of 18–40 days. It is useful to think about three 
broad categories of amenorrhea (Box D): 

1. Amenorrhea with anatomic causes (including 
pregnancy), which almost always can be identified 
by physical examination alone 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX D 
Causes of Amenorrhea 

Anatomic causes 

Pregnancy 
Müllerian agenesis or dysgenesis (uterine, cervical, or vaginal) 
Imperforate hymen 
Cervical stenosis 
Various disorders of sexual differentiation 
Intrauterine adhesions (Asherman’s syndrome) 

Ovarian failure 

Cytogenetic abnormalities 
Structural alterations or absence of an X chromosome 
Trisomy X with or without mosaicism 

Enzymatic defects 
17a -Hydroxylase deficiency 
Galactosemia 

Defective gonadotropin secretion or action 
Gonadotropin receptor or postreceptor defects 
Secretion of biologically inactive gonadotropin 

Environmental insults 
Chemotherapeutic agents 
Ionizing irradiation 
Viral infection 
Surgical injury or extirpation 

Immune disturbances 
In association with other autoimmune disorders 
Isolated 
In association with congenital thymic dysplasia 

Idiopathic causes 

Chronic anovulation 

Hypothalamic causes 
Psychogenic, including pseudocyesis 
Exercise associated 
Associated with eating disorders, nutritional 
Secondary to systemic illness 
Hypothalamic neoplasms 

Pituitary causes 
Isolated gonadotropin deficiency (including Kallmann’s 
syndrome) 
Hypopituitarism 
Pituitary neoplasms, including microadenomas 

With inappropriate steroid feedback 
Functional androgen excess (polycystic ovary syndrome) 
Adrenal hyperplasia 
Neoplasms producing androgens or estrogens 
Neoplasms producing human chorionic gonadotropin 
(including trophoblastic disease) 
Liver and renal disease 
Obesity 

Other endocrine disorders 
Thyroid dysfunction 
Adrenal hyperfunction 

2. Amenorrhea caused by ovarian failure 
3. Amenorrhea due to chronic anovulation resulting 
from any of a number of endocrine disturbances 
It generally is impossible to distinguish between ovarian 
failure and chronic anovulation without laboratory testing. 

The most important aspect of the clinical evaluation is 
the history and physical examination. During the physical 
examination, special attention should be directed toward 
evaluating the following: 

• 
Body dimensions and habitus 
• 
Distribution and extent of terminal androgenstimulated 
body hair 
• 
Extent of breast development by Tanner staging, 
along with the presence or absence of breast 
secretions 
• 
External and internal genitalia, with emphasis on 
evidence of exposure to androgens and estro-
gens 
Administration of exogenous progestin is recommended 
frequently, both to aid in clinical diagnosis and to evaluate 
the biologic levels of estrogen. Either progesterone 
in oil (100–200 mg administered intramuscularly) or 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (5–10 mg administered 
orally every day for 5–10 days) can be given. Any genital 
bleeding within 10 days of the completion of these regimens 
is regarded as a positive test result. If the test result 
is negative (suggesting low levels of endogenous estro-
gen), then estrogen and progestin together (eg, oral conjugated 
estrogen, 2.5 mg daily for 25 days, together with 
oral medroxyprogesterone acetate, 5–10 mg for the last 
10 days of estrogen therapy) should induce bleeding if the 
endometrium is normal. Alternatively, a lower dose of 
conjugated estrogen, 1.25 mg daily, can be given for 
50–60 days, with oral medroxyprogesterone acetate 
added for the last 10 days. This test will determine with 
certainty if the outflow tract is intact. Although the test is 
sometimes helpful in evaluating amenorrheic women, the 
results are not always definitive. In fact, one survey found 
that almost half the women with so-called premature 
ovarian failure bleed in response to progestin (2). Thus, 
progestin challenge should never be used as the sole diagnostic 
test by which amenorrheic women are evaluated. 
Instead, basal concentrations of FSH, prolactin, and TSH 
should be determined to confirm the clinical impression 
in almost all amenorrheic women. In women with evidence 
of hirsutism, at a minimum, total testosterone and 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels should be determined 
to rule out any serious cause (Fig. 30). Endometrial 
biopsy to rule out endometrial hyperplasia is 
warranted in women with amenorrhea or irregular menses 
and evidence of continuing estrogen secretion. Therapy 
for amenorrhea should be based on the cause and the 
desires of the patient regarding fertility. 


DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Measure FSH, PRL, TSH 

­ TSH 
1° hypothyroidism 
­ PRL 
Normal TSH 
Evaluate 
hyperprolactinemia 

­ FSH Normal TSH, PRL 
Normal or low FSH 
Evaluate Hirsutism No hirsutism or 
for gonadal present virilization 
“failure” 
Measure T, DHEAS Measure T 


T >200 ng/dL Normal or mildly ­ T Normal or mildly Mildly ­ T Normal T 
or DHEAS >7.0 m g/mL DHEAS 5.0–7.0 m g/mL ­ T and/or DHEAS (normal (normal 
(normal or ­ LH) or ­ LH) or ¯ LH) 

Evaluate for Evaluate for 
neoplasm “adult-onset” CAH 


PCOS-
like HCA 
?Evaluate 
for “adultonset” 
CAH 

n FIG. 30. Flow diagram for the laboratory evaluation of amenorrhea. Such an analysis must be considered as an adjunct to 
the clinical evaluation of the patient. Measurement of basal follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin (PRL), and thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) or thyrotropin is the initial step. Elevated TSH results in evaluation for primary hypothyroidism. Elevated PRL 
in the presence of normal TSH should signal an evaluation for hyperprolactinemia. Elevated FSH leads to evaluation for premature 
ovarian failure. Normal values lead to evaluation for chronic anovulation secondary to hypothalamic causes or “peripheral” 
causes such as polycystic ovary syndrome. If hirsutism is present, serious causes such as a neoplasm or adrenal hyperplasia 
must be excluded. Abbreviations: CAH indicates congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; 
HCA, hypothalamic chronic anovulation; LH, luteinizing hormone; PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome; T, testosterone. (From Rebar 
RW. The ovaries. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil textbook of medicine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 
1992:1367) 

Abnormal Uterine Bleeding 

ETIOLOGY 

Abnormal uterine bleeding is the most common indication 
for gynecologic consultation. Abnormal uterine bleeding 
is also believed to be the indication for 80–90% of dilation 
and curettage (D&C) procedures performed in nonpregnant 
women in the United States, accounting for approximately 
350,000 procedures annually (3). By some 
measures, AUB is the second most common indication for 
hysterectomy in the United States after uterine leiomyomas, 
accounting for approximately 20%, or 120,000 
procedures annually (4, 5). 

Abnormal uterine bleeding may be defined as uterine 
bleeding that occurs at unexpected times or is of abnormal 
duration or amount. It may take any of several forms, with 
the bleeding altered in frequency, duration, or amount. It 
always must be differentiated from bleeding originating in 
the urinary or gastrointestinal tracts. Broadly speaking, 
AUB can be divided into organic causes, which are found 
in perhaps 25% of cases, and so-called dysfunctional (or 
anovulatory) uterine bleeding (Box E). Organic causes 
can be divided further into causes associated with systemic 
diseases and those associated with disorders of the 

BOX E 
Etiology of Abnormal Uterine Bleeding 

Organic causes 

Systemic disease 
Coagulation disorders (primary or secondary) 
Thyroid dysfunction 
Liver disease 

Reproductive tract disease 
Pregnancy-related disorders 
Malignancies 
Benign uterine abnormalities (fibroids, polyps) 
Iatrogenic causes (intrauterine contraceptive devices, 

estrogens) 
Lower genital tract disease 
Functional ovarian cysts and other benign ovarian 

neoplasms 

Dysfunctional (anovulatory) uterine bleeding 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

reproductive tract. Dysfunctional (anovulatory) uterine 
bleeding may be defined as bleeding resulting from a 
functional abnormality of the HPO axis and is present in 
the majority of women with AUB. 

The frequency of the various causes of AUB varies 
with the age of the patient. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding 
is more common early and late in the reproductive 
years. Organic causes, especially neoplasms, increase 
with advancing age. 

Different abnormalities cause AUB during the prepubertal 
years. Newborn girls sometimes spot for a few 
days after birth because of placental estrogenic stimulation 
of the endometrium in utero. Withdrawal of the estro-
gen at birth leads to sloughing of the endometrium. 
Accidental trauma to the vulva or vagina is the most common 
cause of bleeding during childhood. Vaginitis with 
spotting, most often because of irritation from a foreign 
body, also may occur. Prolapse of the urethral meatus and 
tumors of the genital tract also must be considered in the 
differential diagnosis. When the bleeding is due to the 
ingestion of estrogen-containing drugs (typically oral 
contraceptives) by children, there is rarely significant 
pubertal development. Of course, sexual abuse always 
must be considered in the young girl presenting with 
abnormal bleeding. In summary, it is clear that most of 
the prepubertal causes of bleeding are really not uterine 
in origin. 

Although perhaps as many as half of all menstrual 
cycles are anovulatory when menses begin, the actual 
incidence of dysfunctional uterine bleeding in adolescents 
is low. Typically, anovulatory bleeding occurs at 
intervals longer than normal menstrual cycles, whereas 
bleeding due to organic causes tends to occur more 
frequently than regular menses. In most cases of anovulatory 
bleeding beginning in adolescence, there is spontaneous 
resolution. However, it is important to remember 
that as many as 5% of patients with AUB during the 
teenage years have a primary coagulation disorder (6). It 
is also important to rule out pregnancy-related bleeding 
during the reproductive years. 

Any woman older than 40 years with AUB must be 
evaluated for a malignancy, despite the fact that most 
causes of such bleeding are benign. Endometrial hyperplasia 
clearly is a possibility in women who do not ovulate 
on a regular basis, even in women much younger than 
40 years. The finding of endometrial hyperplasia after 
menopause always should result in a search for a source 
of estrogen, either from exogenous therapy or from an 
endogenous (commonly ovarian) neoplasm. 

EVALUATION AND TREATMENT 

In the evaluation of women with AUB, obtaining a thorough 
history is of paramount importance. Emphasis 
should be placed on learning the pattern and quantity of 
bleeding. Because most women are poor at estimating 
blood loss and recalling exactly when they bled, all 

patients should be asked to keep a prospective menstrual 
calendar in which they record days and severity of bleeding. 
Menses lasting for more than 8 days or in which 
blood loss is more than 80 mL are probably abnormal (ie, 
menorrhagia). Unfortunately, there is no good simple 
method for measuring blood loss, and the diagnosis is 
often made by history, examining menstrual calendars, or 
documenting iron-deficiency anemia. It has been estimated 
that as many as 20% of women have excessive menstrual 
blood loss and that the incidence is similar for 
African-American and white U.S. women (7). 

More than half of functional ovarian cysts, most commonly 
follicular and corpus luteum cysts, induce some 
form of menstrual irregularity, ranging from amenorrhea 
to menorrhagia, and most resolve spontaneously. Clearly 
abnormal bleeding is also a common complaint of 
women using hormonal and other forms of contraception. 
It is also important to remember that thyroid dysfunction 
may cause disorders of bleeding ranging from amenorrhea 
to menorrhagia. 

The physical examination also is important. The 
hemodynamic stability of any patient with abnormal 
bleeding should be assessed. The pelvic examination will 
rule out obvious organic causes. Warranted laboratory 
tests include a complete blood count to assess hematologic 
status, a platelet count and other coagulation studies 
to rule out a coagulation defect, and thyroid function 
studies to rule out a thyroid abnormality. The most common 
coagulation defects seen in this age group are 
immune thrombocytopenic purpura and disorders of 
platelet function such as von Willebrand’s disease. 
Discussion with a hematologist is indicated, because 
coagulation studies may miss some abnormalities. 

Just which patients should undergo further assessment 
of the endometrium is problematic, as is the type of evaluation 
to be undertaken. An endometrial biopsy is indicated 
in any woman older than 35 years with AUB; in any 
woman with a prolonged history of irregular bleeding; 
and in most, if not all, women with severe bleeding. 
Measurement of endometrial thickness by transvaginal 
ultrasonography appears to be of value in postmenopausal 
women who are not taking exogenous estrogen. 
Several studies have indicated that there is almost never 
any significant pathology when the endometrial thickness 
is less than 5 mm (8). Sonohysterography, also called 
saline infusion ultrasonography, has become increasingly 
popular because it can be done in the office at the time of 
the initial evaluation and appears almost as accurate as 
hysteroscopy in diagnosing abnormalities within the uterine 
cavity (9, 10). Some clinicians prefer hysteroscopy 
because it is generally superior to blind biopsy in identifying 
abnormalities and allows for treatment of many 
abnormalities at the time of diagnosis. Unfortunately, it is 
also the most expensive of the various procedures; moreover, 
it is not clear that this procedure is necessary to 
make the diagnosis in most cases. Until definitive data 


indicate when each of these procedures is warranted, 
physicians will need to exercise their own judgment in 
evaluating women with AUB. 

The management of AUB also requires judgment, but 
following a few principles can serve the clinician well. 
First, one must rule out an organic cause for the bleeding. 
Second, hormonal therapy almost always can stop anovulatory 
bleeding, but both the patient and the physician 
must recognize that bleeding will recur at a later time (a 
time, it is hoped, that is controlled and planned). In general, 
medical management is always preferred for the 
treatment of AUB, especially if the patient is interested in 
future childbearing or if menopause will occur shortly. 
The actual management of AUB depends on the severity 
of the problem, the age of the patient, and her desire for 
future fertility. 

In young women, typically teenagers, with AUB, only 
reassurance and prospective charting may be necessary 
with mild light, irregular bleeding, especially because 
most adolescents will begin or resume regular ovulatory 
cycles within 2 years (6). In teenagers in whom the bleeding 
has been more prolonged and erratic such that there is 
some anemia (but the patient is hemodynamically stable), 
therapy must be individualized. If the young woman is 
sexually active (but not pregnant), a progestin-dominant 
oral contraceptive should control the bleeding and simultaneously 
provide contraception. If the patient is not sexually 
active, a progestin such as medroxyprogesterone 
acetate may be given for 10–14 days every 30–60 days to 
induce intermittent “chemical curettage” and prevent 
chronic unopposed stimulation of the endometrium. 
However, it often takes several months before intermittent 
progestins can control irregular uterine bleeding. 
Oral iron therapy should always be provided as well. In 
general, the hormonal therapy can be discontinued, if 
desired, in 6–12 months. Most women will have regular 
menses when therapy is stopped, but thorough evaluation 
is warranted if irregular bleeding recurs. 

In acute severe menorrhagia (with signs of acute blood 
loss such that the patient is hemodynamically unstable), 
blood transfusion may be required to restore hemodynamic 
stability. Hormonal therapy is almost always effective 
in controlling the bleeding. Any of several regimens 
may be used, but in general, large doses of estrogen must 
be given initially, and progestin must be added to stabilize 
the endometrium. For example, an oral contraceptive 
agent containing 35 m g of ethinyl estradiol may be given 
every 6 hours until the bleeding stops (generally within 
48 hours). The dosage then may be tapered by reducing it 
by one pill every other day. Withdrawal bleeding may be 
permitted after the dosage has been reduced to one tablet 
each day, or it may be deferred for several days by continuing 
to administer one tablet daily. Oral contraceptives 
then should be given in the usual cyclic fashion for 6–12 
months. If hormonal therapy cannot control the bleeding, 
the diagnosis of dysfunctional uterine bleeding should be 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

questioned, and evaluation and biopsy of the endometrium 
is warranted. 

Treatment of the woman older than 35 years with AUB 
is more problematic. Organic causes of uterine bleeding are 
more common and mandate at least visualization, if not 
sampling, of the endometrium. Hormonal therapy with a 
progestin alone or with estrogen and a progestin can be used 
to control anovulatory bleeding and menorrhagia; combination 
therapy may be more effective. It is clear that low-dose 
combination oral contraceptive agents are effective in the 
majority of women with AUB (11). Hysterectomy is more 
commonly employed in this age group, particularly if the 
patient no longer desires childbearing. 

A number of medications have proven effective in the 
treatment of menorrhagia associated with ovulatory menstrual 
cycles. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents are 
clearly of benefit in some, but not all, women with 
increased menstrual blood loss. Five of seven randomized 
trials concluded that mean menstrual blood loss was less 
with these agents than with a placebo, whereas two trials 
showed no significant difference (12). This therapy can 
be used for long-term treatment, because adverse effects, 
mainly gastrointestinal problems, are mild with intermittent 
therapy administered only when the patient is bleeding. 
These agents can be given in combination with oral 
contraceptives or progestins to achieve more effective 
reduction in menstrual blood loss. 

Studies from Europe indicate that progestin-containing 
intrauterine devices, although not approved by the 
FDA for this purpose, may be the most effective therapy 
for menorrhagia, effecting a reduction in blood loss of as 
much as 90% in some women (13). The androgenic 
steroid danazol also is effective in reducing blood loss, 
even at relatively low doses, but adverse effects are common 
and more severe than those of other medical therapies. 
Epsilon-aminocaproic acid, tranexamic acid, and 
para-aminomethylbenzoic acid are potent inhibitors of 
fibrinolysis and have been used effectively, particularly in 
Europe, to reduce menstrual blood loss. However, 
adverse effects limit their utility, and they have not been 
approved for this purpose by the FDA (14, 15). Although 
extensive data are lacking, it is likely that GnRH analogues, 
perhaps with add-back therapy to prevent bone 
loss, are very effective in reducing blood loss (16), but 
their expense mitigates their use except in women who 
fail to respond to other methods of medical management 
and who wish to retain their childbearing capacity. 

For women of reproductive age who desire childbearing, 
induction of ovulation is an effective means of controlling 
anovulatory bleeding. There is little, if any, role 
for the use of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate in the 
management of AUB, particularly in the treatment of 
acute bleeding and in individuals in whom the cause of 
the bleeding has not been established with certainty. 
Although this drug may be effective in some women, it 
also is known to cause irregular bleeding and may merely 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

compound the problem. Other, more easily reversible 
forms of contraception are equally or more effective and 
should be used. 

There are several surgical approaches to the treatment 
of abnormal uterine bleeding. The appropriate procedure 
depends on the individual circumstances. 

Dilation and curettage is indicated for diagnostic purposes 
when endometrial sampling is warranted but 
endometrial biopsy in the office is not feasible or has 
been nondiagnostic. Although D&C has been found 
empirically to be effective in the management of acute 
uterine bleeding unresponsive to medical therapy, the 
therapeutic effect of the procedure usually is limited to 
the current bleeding episode. When D&C is performed 
for acute bleeding, it should be followed immediately by 
administration of cyclic exogenous estrogen and progestin 
to optimize long-term cycle control. 

It has been estimated that the blind technique of D&C 
misses the diagnosis of intrauterine lesions in 10–25% of 
patients. Several studies have indicated that hysteroscopy 
with directed biopsy is at least as accurate as D&C in 
detecting endometrial abnormalities. Difficulties with 
hysteroscopy include its cost, the skill required to perform 
the procedure and evaluate what is seen, and the fact 
that it is not useful as a simple screening procedure. 
Hysteroscopy is probably most useful in individuals with 
AUB (as well as women with menorrhagia) in whom no 
lesion is detected by other methods but in whom the 
abnormal bleeding persists. 

The use of surgery that attempts to destroy the 
endometrium selectively, called endometrial ablation, has 
been reported for decades. The technique is most appropriate 
for women with menorrhagia who have completed 
childbearing. Early approaches used thermocoagulation 
and irradiation. Hysteroscopic endometrial ablation can 
be conducted by using laser, electrical, or thermal energy 
to coagulate or vaporize the tissue or by resecting the 
endometrium with a loop electrode deployed via a 
modified urologic resectoscope (Video 2). Nonhysteroscopic 
endometrial ablation, involving blind destruction 
of the endometrium using computer-assisted energydelivery 
systems, is becoming increasingly popular 
because newly available approaches and those in development 
are less expensive than surgical approaches and 
require less training; also, some of these procedures can 
be performed in an office setting. Thermal balloon ablation 
systems are now available in the United States. 
Although trials comparing the various approaches are relatively 
uncommon, it appears that all the approved methods 
of endometrial ablation are equally effective (17–19). 
The reported incidence of complications with endometrial 
ablation is relatively low (18). A comprehensive survey 
of 87 Dutch hospitals indicates that half of all complications 
are related to entry into the endometrial cavity (uterine 
perforation and cervical trauma) (20). Other 
complications include those related to anesthesia, failed 
access, hemorrhage, and the systemic absorption of dis


tention media. (For repair of complications, see Video 3.) 
Complications are more commonly encountered early in 
the experience of a given surgeon. 

Data from several reported series suggest that 
endometrial ablation results in initial amenorrhea in 
50–75% of patients, acceptable reduction in blood loss in 
another 20–30%, and no significant reduction in blood 
loss in approximately 10% (17, 19). Repeating the procedure 
appears to be successful in more than half the 
patients initially experiencing treatment failure. 

There is good evidence that the use of GnRH agonists 
prior to endometrial ablation results in shorter procedures, 
easier surgery, a lower rate of postoperative dysmenorrhea, 
and a higher rate of postsurgical amenorrhea (21). Several 
randomized trials allowed a meta-analysis, which found that 
women undergoing hysteroscopic endometrial ablation had 
shorter hospital stays and fewer postoperative complications, 
and that they resumed activities earlier, than women 
undergoing hysterectomy for increased menstrual bleeding 
(22). However, there was a significant advantage to hysterectomy 
in the improvement in heavy menstrual bleeding 
and satisfaction rates up to 4 years after surgery compared 
with endometrial ablation. Moreover, rates of reoperation in 
women undergoing endometrial ablation increase steadily 
over time after the initial surgery, up to approximately 40% 
at 4 years (23). The direct costs of endometrial ablation may 
well be greater than hysterectomy if patients are followed up 
long enough after their initial procedure (23). Thus, currently 
endometrial ablation may be an appropriate alternative to 
hysterectomy for the rare case of AUB or menorrhagia that 
is unresponsive to conservative management in a woman 
who does not desire future childbearing. Ablation also may 
be very useful in women who are poor candidates for hysterectomy 
because of illness. 

The most common indication for myomectomy is 
menorrhagia, followed by pelvic pain or pressure and 
infertility. The reported effectiveness of myomectomy for 
menorrhagia is approximately 80%, but it is not clear 
what percentage of these patients have failed medical 
therapy. Although recurrence of myomas following 
myomectomy is observed in up to 50% of cases, reportedly 
only 10–15% of women undergoing myomectomy 
require subsequent surgery, such as hysterectomy. 

The effectiveness of hysterectomy for AUB (virtually 
100%) has contributed to its popularity as a primary treatment 
for this disorder. Unfortunately, the inefficiency of 
hysterectomy due to its greater morbidity, mortality, and 
cost makes it an inappropriate choice for management of 
the great majority of patients with AUB. Current data suggest 
that only 1–2% of women with abnormal bleeding ultimately 
require hysterectomy after an appropriate trial of 
nonsurgical management. Hysterectomy usually should be 
reserved for the patient with other indications, such as 
leiomyomas or uterine prolapse. Hysterectomy should be 
used to treat persistent AUB after all medical therapy has 
failed and an excessive amount of blood loss has been documented 
using direct measurement (eg, a fall in hematocrit). 


POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN—SPECIAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 

Any bleeding in postmenopausal women not taking 
exogenous estrogen must be investigated. Vaginal, cervical, 
and rectal bleeding must be distinguished from uterine 
bleeding. Endometrial sampling is warranted in all 
postmenopausal women with uterine bleeding who are 
not taking estrogen. The role of ultrasonography continues 
to evolve. Many clinicians find it acceptable to defer 
biopsy if the endometrial thickness is less than 5 mm in 
diameter. In women not taking estrogen, the most common 
cause of uterine bleeding is endometrial atrophy. 

Bleeding in postmenopausal women taking estrogen is 
more problematic. In women on sequential estrogen and 
progestogen therapy, bleeding should occur only near the 
end of, or following, the course of progestogen. If such is 
the case, endometrial sampling may never be indicated. 
An endometrial biopsy is warranted for bleeding at any 
other time. 

When to sample the endometrium of women on continuous 
estrogen and progestogen therapy is less clear. 
Sampling for bleeding occurring during the first 6 months 
of therapy is rarely necessary. After the initial 6 months, 
any bleeding warrants biopsy. Yearly biopsy would 
seem to be indicated for women on continuous estrogen 
and progestogen therapy who continue to have some 
bleeding. 

A recent systematic review concluded that irregular 
bleeding was more than twice as common with a continuous 
regimen than a sequential regimen, but with longer 
duration of treatment, continuous combined therapy was 
more protective than sequential therapy in preventing 
endometrial hyperplasia (24). There was also evidence of 
a higher incidence of hyperplasia with long-cycle sequential 
therapy (progestogen every 3 months) compared with 
monthly sequential therapy. 

HYPOTHALAMIC AMENORRHEA 

Appropriate GnRH drive is required for ovulation. 
Reduced hypothalamic GnRH input lowers pituitary LH 
and FSH secretion below the threshold needed to sustain 
full ovarian function and results in a spectrum of ovarian 
compromise, ranging from luteal insufficiency to chronic 
anovulation. Menstrual patterns that include amenorrhea, 
polymenorrhea, and oligomenorrhea reflect variable follicular 
activity. Various names have been used to describe 
the more extreme forms of this syndrome, including 

exercise amenorrhea, stress-related or stress-induced 
anovulation, functional hypothalamic chronic anovulation, 
hypothalamic hypogonadism, and psychogenic amenorrhea; 
the term functional hypothalamic amenorrhea 
(FHA) will be used here. Generally, FHA is secondary, but 
it can present as primary amenorrhea. The diagnosis of 
FHA or its variants is one of exclusion. 

Reduced GnRH drive rarely has an organic or congenital 
cause, such as a brain tumor or an insufficient num-

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

ber of GnRH neurons that migrated from the olfactory 
placode into the hypothalamus during fetal development 
(eg, Kallmann’s syndrome; see “Abnormalities of 
Puberty”). Typically, the cause is functional, ie, endocrine 
consequences of certain physical and psychologic states 
or behaviors. Anorexia nervosa provides the most dramatic 
example of the endocrine consequences of psychologic 
and behavioral dysfunction, but most women who 
develop functional hypothalamic amenorrhea do not meet 
the criteria for an eating disorder, nor do they develop one 
subsequently. 

The epidemiology of FHA is not well described. 
However, in one study of 262 consecutive cases of secondary 
amenorrhea, hypothalamic causes were the most 
common (25). There appears to be a dose–response relationship 
between the type and severity of stress and the 
proportion of individuals who develop amenorrhea. 
Intermittent or milder reductions in GnRH drive that 
cause anovulation or luteal insufficiency with preservation 
of menstrual interval are generally clinically occult 
(26). In men, oligoasthenospermia may sometimes be the 
male analogue of FHA, although men are susceptible to 
functional reductions in GnRH drive without obvious 
clinical manifestations (27). Available evidence suggests 
that extreme forms of hypothalamic hypogonadism, such 
as anorexia nervosa or bulimia, affect 3% of women (28), 
that FHA unrelated to an eating disorder affects roughly 
5% of college-aged women (29), and that recreational 
running is associated with an incidence of roughly 55% 
anovulatory cycles or cycles that display luteal insufficiency 
(26). 

Role and Regulation of the GnRH 
Pulse Generator 

Understanding the pathogenesis of FHA requires knowledge 
of the regulation of hypothalamic function by central 
and peripheral signals. The term GnRH pulse generator 
refers to the collective functioning of GnRH neurons 
residing in the mediobasal hypothalamus that secrete into 
the portal vasculature and thereby release LH and FSH 
from pituitary gonadotropes. The GnRH neurons are 
endogenously pulsatile. However, for the bolus of GnRH 
to be sufficient to trigger appropriate gonadotropin 
release, a group of GnRH neurons must secrete synchronously. 
Cross-talk or synchronicity is maintained by 
GnRH-to-GnRH synapses or appositions. The GnRH 
pulse generator is active during fetal life and is then 
inhibited or desynchronized by central processes until the 
onset of puberty (30). Slowing or desynchronization of 
the GnRH pulse generator may involve glial interposition 
into the synaptic cleft to reduce the number of appositions 
and therefore the effective GnRH-secreting cohort 
size (31). Other mechanisms could involve synaptic modulation 
of individual GnRH neurons by classic neurotransmitter 
systems. Evidence from animal studies 
implicates corticotropin-releasing hormone, endogenous 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

opioids, vasopressin, dopamine, neuropeptide Y, leptin, 
g -aminobutyric acid, excitatory amino acids, and norepinephrine. 


Overall, the primary function of the hypothalamus is 
to promote homeostasis and adaptation to life’s varied 
demands. To do this, the hypothalamus receives afferent 
neural information from many brain areas, including the 
hippocampus, the brain stem, and the frontal lobe. Also, 
peripherally derived metabolic signals and other signals 

may modulate the hypothalamus via fenestrations in the 
blood–brain barrier or through neurovascular regulatory 
processes. Altogether, the hypothalamus can be viewed as 
a dynamic brain center that integrates relevant central and 
peripheral input so that appropriate neuroendocrine 
responses can be generated to meet the needs of the 
organism. Thus, GnRH production by the hypothalamus 
is under the influence of multiple central and peripheral 
factors (Fig. 31). 

Psychogenic Challenge 
• Performance pressure 
• Unrealistic expectations of self and others 
• Negative attitudes 
Metabolic Challenge 
• Exercise 
• Undernutrition 
• Hyperactivity 
Central Neuromodulation 

• Dopamine 
• Endogenous opioid peptides 
• 5-Hydroxytryptophan 
• g -Aminobutyric acid 
• Norepinephrine 
Hypothalamic Adjustment 

• Prolactin 
• Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
• Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
• Arginine vasopressin 
• Neuropeptide Y 
• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
Pituitary 
Glands 

Thyroid 
Parathyroid 
Adipocytes 
Pancreas 
Adrenal 
Gonads 


n FIG. 31. Diagram of the putative pathogenesis of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) demonstrating that FHA is more 
than an isolated disorder of reduced gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) drive. Behavioral challenges evoke responses in 
the central nervous system. In turn, the hypothalamus transduces the neurotransmitter alterations into endocrine patterns that foster 
homeostasis. Candidate neurotransmitter systems include dopamine (DA), endogenous opioid peptides (EOP), serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptophan, 5HT), g -aminobutyric acid (GABA), and norepinephrine (NE). The transduction of neurotransmitter 
changes into endocrine secretory patterns is communicated by hypothalamic peptides such as prolactin (PRL), thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH), corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), arginine vasopressin (AVP), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and GnRH. Short 
and long feedback arcs permit fine-tuning of the homeostatic system and graded responses to internal and external challenges 
and perturbations. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Pathogenesis of Functional 
Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 

Functional hypothalamic anovulation and amenorrhea 
due to reduced GnRH drive are manifested in the circulation 
as reduced LH pulse frequency; the LH pulse frequency 
of amenorrheic women with FHA is about half 

that of women in the follicular phase (32, 33) (Fig. 32). 
Levels of FSH are also reduced in FHA, but immunoreactive 
FSH levels are less reduced than levels of LH; 
the ratio of LH to FSH is usually less than 1. Evidence in 
support of the concept that FHA results from an insufficient 
or inadequate GnRH drive is provided by the 
demonstration that the administration of GnRH in a nor-

FHA 
Lights out 
Lights out 
LH IU/L 
FHA 
15 
10 
5 
0 
LH IU/L 
15 
10 
5 
0 
LH IU/L LH IU/L

Ovulatory 
Lights out 
Lights out 
Ovulatory 
15 
10 
5 
0 
0900 1300 1700 2100 0100 0500 0900 
Clock hours 
0900 1300 1700 2100 0100 0500 0900 
Clock hours 
15 
10 
5 
0 
n FIG. 32. Luteinizing hormone pulse patterns in two women with functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) are shown in the 
top two panels and in two eumenorrheic, ovulatory women in the bottom two panels. The luteinizing hormone (LH) pulse patterns 
are the best in vivo surrogate for assessing gonadotropin-releasing hormone activity in humans. The eumenorrheic women display 
regularly regular LH pulses of even amplitude, whereas the women with FHA display irregular LH pulses with an overall slower 
frequency and variable amplitude. In general, the LH pulse frequency of women with FHA is approximately half that observed in 
ovulatory women. 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

mal pulsatile fashion can cause ovulation and conception 
in women with FHA. For folliculogenesis to result in 
ovulation, however, the GnRH drive must remain above 
(and below) critical thresholds for approximately 12–14 
days. Presumably, a premature arrest of GnRH drive can 
lead to early follicular demise, whereas intermittent but 
lesser reductions lead to poor follicular development and 
ovulation with subsequent luteal insufficiency. 

Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea is more than an 
isolated interruption of GnRH to the pituitary–ovarian 
axis. A constellation of other neuroendocrine secretory 
aberrations also may be present. For example, the 24hour 
secretory pattern of cortisol is amplified, being 
greatest during sleep. In fact, amplified cortisol secretion 
is specific to FHA (34). This association is not incidental, 
as clinical and animal data demonstrate a tightly related 
temporal link between activation of the HPA axis and 
decreased GnRH drive. Elevated cortisol levels have been 
observed in women with depression, anorexia nervosa, 
and exercise amenorrhea, but not bulimia. Athletes with 
amenorrhea displayed elevated cortisol levels and 
reduced LH pulse frequency, whereas eumenorrheic athletes 
with luteal phase insufficiency had modest reductions 
in LH pulse frequency and minimally increased 
cortisol concentrations. 

However, cortisol per se is not likely to be the cause of 
reduced GnRH pulse frequency in FHA. Whereas a high 
pharmacologic dose (>300% of the physiologic requirement) 
of cortisol reduces the GnRH drive, 24-hour hydrocortisone 
infusions that mimic moderate (136% above 
normal) and severe (197% above normal) stress levels 
had no acute impact on gonadotropin secretion. In fact, 
the link between hypercortisolemia and FHA appears to 
occur at the CNS level. For example, insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia (a significant stressor) in rhesus monkeys 
caused a comparable decline in LH levels, whether or not 
cortisol synthesis was blocked with pretreatment 
metyrapone (35). Similarly, an intravenous infusion of 
corticotropin-releasing hormone caused a decrease in 
gonadotropin in monkeys with and without adrenalectomy. 
Cortisol may serve as a marker of stress, but what 
suppresses GnRH pulsatility is the central neural concomitants 
of the stress response or concomitant metabolic 
signals rather than cortisol per se. 

Cortisol also dampens TSH release in response to thyrotropin-
releasing hormone and causes “hypothalamic 
hypothyroidism.” Women with FHA had reduced thyronine 
and thyroxine levels in the face of preserved TSH 
patterns, and they displayed large-magnitude increases in 
TSH during recovery (34). Other neurosecretory aberrations 
described in FHA include aberrations of melatonin, 
growth hormone, leptin, dopamine, opioids, adrenergic 
tone, g -aminobutyric acid, and corticotropin-releasing 
hormone. In summary, as the hypothalamus tries to 
achieve homeostasis in the face of an internal or external 
stress or challenge, it effects metabolic mobilization (eg, 

via hypercortisolemia) and reproductive quiescence (eg, 
via disruption of the GnRH pulse generator). This process 
actually represents an adaptation to stress and makes teleologic 
sense. Because the process of reproduction 
demands a significant amount of energy, when the availability 
of energy is reduced or energy is diverted, the inhibition 
of reproductive processes channels energy 
expenditure away from a process not immediately necessary 
for survival. 

The Role of Behavioral Factors 

Experimental paradigms are useful in helping to understand 
the pathways by which stressors desynchronize the 
GnRH pulse generator and thereby compromise reproductive 
function. However, in the clinical setting, it is 
more difficult to identify the actual stressors involved. 
Exercise, low weight and weight loss, affective and eating 
disorders, various personality characteristics, drug use, 
and a number of external and intrapsychic stressors have 
been associated with FHA. Given individual variation in 
metabolism, autonomic tone, habitus, aptitudes, and attitudes, 
what is stressful to one person may be more or less 
stressful to another. Therefore, it is not surprising to find 
behavioral heterogeneity in the pathogenesis of FHA. 

In clinical research, the trend has been to study single 
stressors and to partition as separate populations women 
with “exercise amenorrhea,” anorexia nervosa, and “idiopathic 
amenorrhea.” In general, however, women with 
FHA do not report an easily identified solitary stressor. 
Typically, there are multiple, seemingly minor stressors, 
such as a combination of job or school pressures, unrealistic 
expectations, poor eating habits, and increased energy 
expenditure. One study suggested that women with 
FHA had trouble relaxing and having fun, attributes that 
might further predispose them to value performance at 
the expense of psychologic needs (32). Although women 
with FHA do not typically meet criteria for an eating disorder, 
they display many attitudes and behaviors similar 
to women with eating disorders. What appears to separate 
women with undifferentiated FHA from those with an 
eating disorder is the degree of disturbance, including the 
degree of food restriction, weight loss, bingeing, and perfectionism. 


In short, attitudes and expectations engender behaviors, 
such as aberrant food intake and excessive exercise, that 
further challenge the hypothalamus to maintain homeostasis. 
No matter what the identifiable behavior, the end 
result is the same, ie, disruption of the GnRH pulse generator. 
It stands to reason, then, that the key to recovery is 
to change both the behaviors and the attitudes that initiated, 
and now sustain, reduced GnRH drive. Once the 
hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator has been disrupted, it 
may take prolonged energy balance and psychologic equilibrium 
for the chronic changes in hypothalamic function 
to reverse and for ovulatory function to return. 


Diagnosis of Functional Hypothalamic 
Amenorrhea 

The diagnosis of FHA involves excluding all other causes 
of amenorrhea and anovulation. As shown in Figure 
33, ovulatory dysfunction or anovulation is not always 
accompanied by amenorrhea. When the GnRH drive is 
sufficient to provoke partial follicular development, polymenorrhea 
or even eumenorrhea may ensue even in the 
presence of anovulation (26). The spectrum of reduced 
GnRH drive is accompanied by a spectrum of clinical 
findings, ranging from ovulation with luteal insufficiency 
to outright amenorrhea. To determine that the cause of 
reduced ovarian function is functional and hypothalamic 
in origin (ie, FHA), all other potential causes, including 
anatomic anomalies and pregnancy, must be excluded. 

Reduced GnRH drive should be suspected if the ratio 
of LH to FSH is less than 1 in the face of relatively low 
estradiol levels (<60 pg/mL). If the cause of compromised 
ovarian function is hypothalamic, a thorough 
search for organic causes must be conducted. Although 
focal neurologic signs would certainly raise suspicion of 
a central organic cause, such as a CNS tumor, conditions 
such as adult-onset hydrocephalus (36) may be accompanied 
by dizziness or vague symptoms rather than lateralizing 
symptoms. In most instances, suspected organic 
causes can be confirmed (or excluded) by MRI. 

Treatment Considerations 

As noted, FHA is more than an isolated disorder of 
GnRH input. A constellation of neuroendocrine secretory 
aberrations signals metabolic mobilization, as well as 
reproductive inhibition. Therapies aimed at correcting 
only reproductive compromise will not reverse the longterm 
effects of stress and metabolic mobilization (37). 
The main reason that it is so important to identify the 
behavioral antecedents of FHA is that recovery depends 
on reducing their endocrine effects. In some instances, 
the behavior may be modifiable. If the individual’s attitudes 
are the initiating or sustaining factors, then the goal 
of treatment is to alter the problematic attitudes. 
Nonpharmacologic therapies such as stress management, 
relaxation training, and psychoeducation empower individuals 
by fostering self-care and the development of 
realistic expectations of self and others. In this regard, 
nonpharmacologic therapies have the potential to produce 
long-term mental and physical health benefits extending 
beyond the resumption of ovulatory function. 

Having realistic expectations is crucial for setting 
behavioral goals. Conflicting aspirations may seem mundane 
to the clinician, but individuals having to choose 
among goals may perceive the decisions as life defining 
and therefore life threatening. Society might admire 
achievements made possible by unbridled ambition, but 
the endocrine system seems to reward moderation. 
Furthermore, chronic intrapsychic conflict may lead to a 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

sense of poor control. In turn, behaviors such as exercise 
and dieting may be instituted to afford a greater sense of 
control in the face of unresolvable conflict. The irony is 
that these same behaviors may serve as further metabolic 
challenges that actually sensitize the endocrine or autonomic 
system to ongoing or subsequent psychogenic 
stress. Although dieting may make the individual feel 
more in control, the adverse effect is greater endocrine or 
autonomic arousal and its consequences, including reproductive 
inhibition. Thus, addressing the behaviors and 
attitudes that fuel FHA are likely to yield the greatest 
chance for neuroendocrine recovery and resumption of 
ovulation. 

If pregnancy is desired, ovulation induction is possible. 
Generally, clomiphene therapy is ineffective in this setting 
because the hypothalamus is already “insensitive” to the 
reduced ovarian secretion of estrogen. It is interesting to 
note that women with FHA rarely report hot flashes even 
in the presence of profound hypoestrogenism. This is a 
clinical sign of hypothalamic insensitivity, and it has led to 
the clinical dictum that the presence of hot flashes in a 
woman with hypothalamic hypogonadism should engender 
a thorough search for an organic etiology. Strategies 
for ovulation induction include exogenous pulsatile 
administration of GnRH and exogenous administration of 
gonadotropins (38). Ovulation induction in FHA is associated 
with increased risks to both the mother and possibly 
the fetus. For example, ovulation induction in 
underweight women with FHA increased the risk of 
intrauterine growth restriction and preterm delivery (39). 

In patients with FHA who are not seeking immediate 
conception, clinicians may use oral contraceptives or 
exogenous hormone replacement regimens, particularly 
for the prevention of osteoporosis. In support of this 
approach, in one small study of amenorrheic athletes, oral 
contraceptive use led to a small gain in bone in comparison 
to that seen in individuals who received the placebo, 
whereas cyclic progestin exposure led to greater bone 
loss than was seen in individuals who received the placebo 
(40). If sex steroid therapy is instituted, it is a good 
idea to employ an oral contraceptive with a more androgenic 
progestin to maximize the anabolic effect of the 
medication on bone. Nonetheless, bone accretion requires 
more than sex steroid exposure. Nutrition factors are critical 
to bone health, and dietary intake is likely to be deficient 
in women with FHA. Furthermore, metabolic 
balance also is required, and excess cortisol reduces 
osteoblast activity and impairs bone formation. Thus, sex 
steroid therapy alone will not ameliorate ongoing 
metabolic compromise. For example, women with 
anorexia nervosa do not build bone in response to exogenous 
sex steroid administration alone (41), possibly 
because of concurrent nutrition deficits and ongoing 
metabolic compromise. Overall, bone density in FHA 
reflects a combination of genetic factors, length of amenorrhea, 
and extent of metabolic compromise. 


250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
n FIG. 33. Graph of three types of menstrual cycles: anovulatory, ovulatory, and luteal insufficiency. Blood samples were taken daily or nearly daily across a menstrual interval 
(from the first day of vaginal bleeding of one cycle to the first day of bleeding of the next cycle) in three women between ages 20 years and 30 years who reported regularly 
regular menstrual cycles. The top panels for each menstrual cycle type show the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH; closed circles), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 
open circles). The bottom panels show estradiol (closed circles) and progesterone levels (open circles). In the anovulatory cycle (left two panels), gonadotropin levels were relatively 
low, indicating that the cause of the anovulation was not oocyte depletion or impending menopause. Late in the cycle, there was an elevation and then rapid decline in 
estradiol unaccompanied by any significant progesterone secretion. The decline in estradiol triggered withdrawal bleeding, leading to anovulatory cycling. In the ovulatory cycle 
(middle two panels), FSH was highest in the early follicular phase, and the LH surge occurred as expected at midcycle. There was the expected preovulatory exponential rise in 
estradiol and roughly 14 days of progesterone secretion higher than 1 ng/mL after the midcycle surge. In the cycle labeled luteal insufficiency (right two panels), there was an 
LH surge, but it occurred around day 22, and progesterone secretion occurred for only 6 days. None of these cycles was clinically distinguishable from the others, and the women 
assumed that they were having normal menstrual cycles. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Although psychopharmacologic approaches to 
improve unhelpful attitudes and behaviors in FHA have 
not been well studied, they probably could be used on an 
interim basis in special circumstances. Because the role 
of specific putative neuroregulators in FHA remains 
unclear, it is difficult to know which neurotropic agent to 
use. Benzodiazepines are contraindicated during pregnancy, 
so their use might carry the greatest risk were conception 
to occur during pharmacologic intervention. 
Antidepressants may reduce activation of the HPA axis, 
but it is not clear that their use will address the associated 
metabolic imbalances that might be particularly problematic 
should conception occur. Naltrexone has been 
employed with varying success (42). 

Theoretically, FHA is reversible, but few studies have 
documented the course of recovery or its likelihood. One 
study found that 72% of affected women recovered within 
6 years of initial presentation (43). Another report 
noted that 9 of 16 women with FHA who underwent ovulation 
induction and conceived became eumenorrheic 
postpartum (44). Roughly one half of women with 
anorexia nervosa or bulimia have a full recovery (28). 
Hypothalamic recovery likely involves a temporal pattern 
of readjustment—namely, restoration of normal function 
of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis followed by resumption 
of appropriate GnRH drive (34). To avoid disappointment 
and unrealistic expectations, patients should be 
counseled that reproductive recovery might not be immediate 
following lifestyle alterations. 

In summary, FHA is a clinical example of how the 
endocrine concomitants of attitudes, moods, and behaviors 
can cause reproductive compromise. Although a link 
between brain states and gonadal function has been 
hypothesized for a long time, it is only recently that we 
have been able to specify some of the mechanisms mediating 
this relationship. This understanding has concrete 
clinical implications and expands our appreciation of 
what it means to be healthy. In the context of psychoneuroendocrinology, 
health depends on achieving psychologic 
harmony through realistic expectations of self 
and others, along with metabolic harmony through balanced 
diet and energy expenditure. 

HYPERPROLACTINEMIA AND 
OTHER PITUITARY DISORDERS 

Hyperprolactinemia has a fivefold greater incidence in 
females than in males, attesting to the fact that estrogen 
stimulates the growth of the prolactin-secreting pituitary 
cells (chromophobes). There are four principal causes of 
hyperprolactinemia: idiopathic hyperprolactinemia or 
pituitary hyperplasia, microprolactinomas and macroprolactinomas, 
hypothyroidism, and drug intake. However, 
there are multiple other, less frequent causes of hyperprolactinemia 
that also need to be considered (Box F). 

BOX F 
Causes of Hyperprolactinemia 

Central nervous system 

Trauma 
Tumors and cysts (all types) 
Infections 
Neurofibromas 
Granulomas (tuberculosis and syphilis) 
Infiltrative disease (histocytosis X) 
Cavernous sinus thrombosis 
Temporal arteritis 


Pituitary 

Trauma 
Tumors 
Prolactinomas 
Functional disease 


Thyroid 

Hypothyroidism 

Body 

Chest trauma, surgery, or burn 
Herpes zoster 
Breast manipulation 
Renal failure 
Hysterectomy/oophorectomy 
Breast reduction or augmentation 
Pregnancy 


Medications (examples) 

Tranquilizers (major and minor) 
Antidepressants 
Steroid hormones 
Oral contraceptives 
Antihypertensives 
Histamine2 receptors 
Antituberculins 


Idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, which also can present 
as pituitary hyperplasia (ie, diffuse enlargement), is 
believed to result from a dysfunction in the regulation of 
prolactin secretion, either at the cellular level or in the 
hypothalamic–pituitary axis. The origin of prolactinomas 
is unknown, and it is possible that there are many causes 
for these tumors. It has been suggested that these lesions 
may develop a blood supply independent of the normal 
hypothalamic portal anatomy. In addition, errors of signal 
transduction have been demonstrated, tumors have been 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

found that lack dopamine receptors on their surfaces, and 
various gene mutations have been found in tumors. It is 
likely that similar defects in prolactin regulation may 
result in idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, pituitary hyperplasia, 
or overt prolactinomas. In fact, idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, 
hyperprolactinemic pituitary hyperplasia, 
microprolactinomas, and macroprolactinomas can be 
considered as a spectrum of similar disorders. 

Female patients with hyperprolactinemia may present 
with ovulatory dysfunction, galactorrhea, delayed 
pubescence, or signs of a polyendocrinopathy. The ovulatory 
dysfunction may be as subtle as a shortened luteal 
phase or, more commonly, complete amenorrhea. 
Intermittent hyperprolactinemia generally occurs in the 
periovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle and can be 
associated with infertility. It requires multiple prolactin 
measurements to detect. Initial symptoms also may be 
mild androgen excess, with acne and minimal hirsutism, 
because prolactin has a direct stimulatory effect on adrenal 
androgen production. Many patients with hyperprolactinemia 
also report headaches, although this symptom is more 
common in patients with a prolactinoma. Visual disturbances 
are much less frequent and are the result of compression 
of the optic chiasm by an expanding pituitary 
tumor. Although only approximately 20% of patients with 
galactorrhea actually have hyperprolactinemia, approximately 
50% of patients with hyperprolactinemia have 
galactorrhea. Hypogonadism frequently accompanies 
hyperprolactinemia and often is manifested clinically by 
amenorrhea or other ovulatory disorders. Because mean 
serum estradiol levels in amenorrheic women with hyperprolactinemia 
are comparable to the estradiol levels seen 
in the early follicular phase of normal women, hyperprolactinemic 
amenorrheic women often have absolute or relative 
estrogen deficiency. This estrogen deficiency can 
result in osteopenia in hyperprolactinemic amenorrheic 
women; prolactin itself does not appear to have an independent 
deleterious effect on bone density. 

Evaluation of the 
Hyperprolactinemic Patient 

The evaluation of patients with hyperprolactinemia 
should consist of the measurement of basal prolactin 
levels on multiple occasions, because hyperprolactinemia 
may be intermittent. Unfortunately, prolactin assays 
can be subject to great variation. Some of the contemporary 
chemoluminescence assays will show markedly 
elevated prolactin levels in patients who have normal 
prolactin levels according to several different radioimmunoassays. 


There are five distinct isoforms of prolactin, with variable 
biologic activity. The various isoforms are formed 
when monomeric prolactin molecules complex with IgG 
antibodies (forming macromolecular prolactin, such as 
big-big prolactin or macroprolactin) or when the pro


lactin molecule becomes glycosylated. Many commercial 
assays for prolactin measure macromolecular prolactin, 
which may result in falsely elevated prolactin levels. 

The evaluation of hyperprolactinemia is complicated 
further by the fact that prolactin is a dynamic hormone 
whose release is pulsatile, and its levels can be affected 
by breast examination, exercise, sex, and sleep. However, 
recent observations have indicated that breast examination 
in normally menstruating women fails to produce a 
significant elevation in prolactin levels. In addition, the 
oral intake of tryptophan, tyrosine, and arginine-containing 
foods or medications, which have been shown to elevate 
prolactin under experimental circumstances, fails to 
increase serum levels of this hormone in normally menstruating 
women. Thus, it is possible that prolactin levels 
are less affected by environmental factors in normal ovulatory 
patients, although they may still be a consideration 
when evaluating anovulatory patients. 

The laboratory evaluation of hyperprolactinemia 
would not be complete without assessment of thyroid 
function. It is assumed that the elevated thyroid-releasing 
hormone (TRH) levels secreted by the hypothalamus in 
primary hypothyroidism also can stimulate the secretion 
of prolactin. Hence, in addition to the measurement of 
prolactin, free thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
levels should be determined to rule out compensated 
hypothyroidism. If signs of a polyendocrinopathy (ie, 
involving multiple endocrine systems) are present, 
growth hormone, corticotropin, and other hormones may 
be measured. 

Radiographic imaging is required when hyperprolactinemia 
is not secondary to untreated hypothyroidism 
and should consist of either computed tomography or 
MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamic regions. Each of 
these techniques is capable of detecting tumors approximately 
2 mm in diameter. 

A visual field examination is generally unnecessary 
except in patients with pituitary macroadenomas (tumors 
³ 1 cm). By definition, a microadenoma (tumors <1 cm) 
does not protrude out of the sella or involve the optic 
chiasm; therefore, it cannot produce alteration of visual 
fields. Macroadenomas produce superior bitemporal 
hemianopsia only 68% of the time. Prolactinomas often 
behave similarly to meningiomas, growing along dural 
planes and projecting into the cavernous sinus, without 
producing compression of the optic chiasm. 

Treatment of Hyperprolactinemia and 
Prolactinomas 

The treatment of patients with hyperprolactinemia hinges 
on several factors: 1) symptoms; 2) desire for pregnancy; 
3) whether there is a tumor and if so, whether it is a 
microadenoma or macroadenoma; and 4) whether the 
patient is hypoestrogenic. When the cause of hyperprolactinemia 
can be determined, specific therapy should be 


instituted. For instance, hyperprolactinemia secondary to 
hypothyroidism resolves in patients treated with thyroid 
replacement therapy. Patients who take a medication that 
induces hyperprolactinemia should stop taking it if medically 
feasible. 

The mainstays of the treatment of hyperprolactinemia 
are the dopamine agonists. The stimulation of prolactin 
secretion is normally under the inhibitory control of 
hypothalamically produced dopamine. Hence, the systemic 
administration of dopamine agonists results in suppression 
of prolactin levels and, frequently, a reduction in 
the growth of prolactinomas. 

Various preparations of dopamine agonists are used 
worldwide, but in the United States, only three are available: 
bromocriptine, cabergoline, and pergolide mesylate. 
Bromocriptine, an ergot-derivative D2 agonist, is 
the prototype dopamine agonist available in the United 
States. It acts on the dopamine D1 and D2 receptors. The 
therapeutic dosage is usually 5–7.5 mg/d, but it can 
range from 2.5 to 15 mg per day, although it is frequently 
started at an oral dosage of 1.25 mg/d. Over the course 
of several weeks, the dosage is gradually increased to 2.5 
mg twice daily. Additional increases may be necessary, 
to a maximum of 10 mg/d given in two or three divided 
doses. 

A third-generation dopamine agonist is cabergoline, a 
pure D2 receptor agonist. It is available in a dose of 0.5 
mg and is taken twice a week. The initial dosage is 0.25 
mg twice weekly, increased gradually over several weeks 
to a dosage of 0.5 mg twice weekly, to a maximum of 1.0 
mg twice weekly. It is purported to have fewer adverse 
effects than bromocriptine (45). 

Pergolide mesylate is approved by the FDA only for the 
treatment of Parkinson’s disease, although it is marketed 
worldwide for the treatment of hyperprolactinemia. 
Reported adverse effects are fewer than with bromocriptine. 
Tumors that are resistant to other dopamine agonists 
have been shown to respond to this form of therapy. In 
general, dopamine agonist dosage should be increased 
weekly until basal levels of prolactin are in the normal 
range. 

Adverse effects are common with dopamine agonist 
therapy and include nausea, nasal congestion, lethargy, 
and dysphoria. Several factors help improve patients’ tolerance 
of dopamine agonist therapy. First, the medication 
should be started at the lowest possible dose and slowly 
increased over the following weeks. Vaginal administration 
of the dopamine agonist bromocriptine can result in 
sustained levels of the drug and may minimize the 
adverse effects. Ingestion of dopamine agonists at bedtime 
also may minimize adverse effects. 

Prolactinomas also may be treated by transsphenoidal 
hypophysectomy. Surgery results in a failure to cure the 
underlying endocrine disorder in 50–70% of patients, 
although tumor recurrence is uncommon. Consequently, 
surgery is seldom used today; medical therapy is the 
mainstay. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Women with functional hyperprolactinemia or a microprolactinoma 
and who have slightly elevated levels and 
withdrawal bleeding after a progestogen challenge (ie, 
adequate endogenous estrogen production) may be treated 
with cyclic progestogens or an oral contraceptive 
agent alone as long as their pituitary status is monitored 
periodically. This monitoring can be accomplished by 
pituitary radiographic studies every 2–5 years if a prolactinoma 
is present, or by measurement of prolactin levels 
alone if a tumor is not present. Prolactin levels should 
be measured at least yearly in women not treated with 
dopamine agonists. 

Patients who are hypoestrogenic secondary to hyperprolactinemia 
also should be given some form of estrogen 
replacement therapy to prevent bone loss if a dopamine 
agonist is not used to correct the hyperprolactinemia. 
Bone loss has been shown to be reversible with the 
administration of a dopamine agonist. Overall, a number 
of retrospective and prospective studies have shown that 
patients with idiopathic hyperprolactinemia or microprolactinomas 
have a 0–22% incidence of tumor progression. 
Furthermore, prospective trials in patients with 
microadenomas who receive an oral contraceptive have 
demonstrated slight increases in their prolactin levels but 
no clinically significant alterations in tumor growth. 

Patients with macroadenomas generally are managed 
with dopamine agonists throughout their lifetime. 
Lesions that do not respond to dopamine agonists are best 
treated with either surgery or radiation therapy. As noted, 
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy results in as high as a 
70% failure rate to cure either the tumor or the underlying 
endocrine process. Dopamine agonists, although not 
tumoricidal, frequently result in long-term remission of 
hyperprolactinemia. Clinical studies have demonstrated 
that 10% of patients with macroadenomas followed up 
for 8–10 years in an untreated state show a slight increase 
in the size of their tumors, whereas 30% exhibit regression 
of the tumors. Therefore, it is unnecessary to repeat 
radiographic imaging for patients with macroadenomas 
who are maintained in a euprolactinemic state by 
dopamine agonists. 

The patient who desires pregnancy and is hyperprolactinemic 
is best treated with a dopamine agonist until 
prolactin levels are in the normal range. The vast majority 
of these patients will have a restoration of normal ovulatory 
function and achieve pregnancy in a relatively 
short time. When pregnancy is achieved, the medication 
can be discontinued in patients with functional hyperprolactinemia 
or microadenomas (because these tumors do 
not grow significantly during gestation). Patients with 
macroadenomas either may be treated with dopamine 
agonists throughout pregnancy or may be followed 
expectantly with visual field examinations every 2 
months. There is no point in obtaining routine radiographic 
studies during pregnancy, because the normal 
pituitary gland doubles in size during pregnancy, causing 
unnecessary concern. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Other Pituitary Tumors Relevant to 
Reproduction 

A number of other functioning pituitary tumors that 
secrete growth hormone, corticotropin, TSH, and FSH, 
may alter reproductive function. Children who have 
excess growth hormone production present with 
giantism, whereas adults show the clinical features of 
acromegaly and characteristic changes in the face and 
extremities. The patient with acromegaly after age 45 has 
twice the mortality of the normal population from cardiovascular, 
cerebrovascular, and respiratory diseases. 
Enlargement of the heart, liver, and kidneys are common. 
The growth hormone–secreting tumor is diagnosed by 
elevated basal serum growth hormone levels. Serum concentrations 
of growth hormone of more than 10 ng/mL 
are abnormal and occur in more than 90% of patients with 
the disorder. Growth hormone levels between 5 ng/mL 
and 10 ng/mL are inconclusive and require challenge 
testing. According to immunocytochemistry findings, 
tumors taken from patients with acromegaly also secrete 
prolactin 45% of the time. The treatment of growth hormone–
secreting tumors is primarily surgical; somatostatin 
suppression is used as adjunctive therapy. 

Corticotropin-secreting tumors give rise to Cushing’s 
syndrome. These tumors are characteristically small. The 
diagnosis is established by nonsuppression of cortisol 
after the administration of low-dose dexamethasone and 
by partial suppression following the administration of 
high-dose therapy (the so-called Liddle test). These findings 
are complemented by elevated plasma corticotropin 
levels and an abnormal computed tomography scan. The 
normal subject’s plasma corticotropin level is less than 
100 pg/mL; in patients with corticotropin-secreting 
tumors, the level may range from 50 pg/mL to 200 
pg/mL. These tumors frequently are treated by transsphenoidal 
removal. 

Tumors that secrete TSH are rare. Patients with these 
lesions have elevated TSH levels, blunted TSH response 
to TRH, and abnormal radiographic imaging. Likewise, 
FSH-secreting tumors are rare. A few isolated cases have 
been reported with increased serum LH or FSH or both. 
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors frequently are misdiagnosed 
as nonsecreting adenomas that sometimes can be 
diagnosed by the increased response of serum LH to TRH 
challenge. 

A variety of pituitary tumors that do not secrete hormones 
also can be encountered. These tumors generally 
grow slowly and insidiously, and clinical symptoms are 
associated with progressive enlargement and compression 
of adjacent tissues. In most cases the symptoms are 
recognized only after significant extrasellar tumor growth 
has occurred. The most common symptom is visual 
impairment or, usually, bilateral visual loss in the superior 
temporal quadrants. Thereafter, the inferior quadrants 
are involved, leading to bitemporal hemianopsia. Visual 
acuity also may be affected. Headache frequently is asso


ciated with large tumors, but there is no characteristic pattern 
of location or intensity. In rare instances, suprasellar 
extension of these tumors may affect hypothalamic function, 
causing diabetes insipidus, irregularities of sleep, 
temperature deregulation, or appetite deregulation. 
Amenorrhea occurs in approximately 50% of women 
with nonfunctioning pituitary tumors, primarily because 
of compression of surrounding tissue. 

A number of recently described tumors merit mention. 
The first is termed a silent subtype III adenoma, based on 
ultrastructural criteria. It is an aggressive pituitary adenoma, 
although a small number respond to bromocriptine 
therapy. A second type of adenoma, the “null cell” variety, 
constitutes about one third of the adenomas found in 
the pituitary when classified by ultrastructural, functional, 
and immunologic means. These adenomas are often 
large neoplasms that are diagnosed late because of the 
lack of hormone production. These tumors may be 
accompanied by modest hyperprolactinemia. Unfortunately, 
because of the tumor size, a significant number 
of patients with null cell pituitary adenomas experience 
visual loss and some hypopituitarism. 

At the other end of the spectrum is an entity described 
as the incidentaloma. These lesions usually are identified 
when radiography is carried out for evaluation of symptoms 
such as headaches, and when followed over time the 
lesions show no change in size. It should be recalled that 
in 1936 Costello evaluated 1,000 pituitary glands 
obtained from unselected autopsies and found the lesions 
in 22.5% of the glands and no correlation with tumors 
with clinical symptoms during the subject’s lifetime. 

Craniopharyngiomas, although not pituitary tumors 
per se, are the most common sellar neoplasms of childhood 
and adolescence, although one third of cases are 
adults. Craniopharyngiomas have been described in siblings. 
The tumors arise from remnants of Rathke’s pouch 
and are commonly seen as suprasellar cystic lesions with 
intrasellar tumors. The latter are radiologically indistinguishable 
from functional pituitary adenomas; however, 
suprasellar calcification is present in more than half the 
patients. Unlike the nonfunctional tumor, the craniopharyngioma 
demonstrates aggressive growth extending 
into the optic chiasm, hypothalamus, and third ventricle, 
causing visual defects, diabetes insipidus, and signs of 
increased intracranial pressure. These lesions frequently 
are treated surgically. Often, postoperative radiation therapy 
is employed as well. 

The Empty-Sella Syndrome 

The empty-sella syndrome is a frequent cause of sellar 
enlargement, particularly in middle-aged obese women 
who are hypertensive. Patients with empty-sella syndrome 
also may have modest elevations in prolactin levels. 
Headache is a common symptom. Associated 
conditions include those that result in increased intracranial 
pressure, such as pseudotumor cerebri. The empty 


DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

sella develops from a congenital defect of the sellar 
diaphragm through which herniation of the arachnoid 
membrane occurs. Consequently, cerebrospinal fluid 
pressure is transmitted into the sellar space, thus enlarging 
it. In general, sellar enlargement is uniform and symmetric, 
although symmetry suggestive of an intrasellar 
neoplasm may be observed. It has been speculated that a 
pituitary tumor that existed for an extended time underwent 
infarction and gave rise to the empty sella. In addition, 
antipituitary antibodies have been noted in some 
patients with empty-sella syndrome, although the significance 
of this finding is unclear. The diagnosis of this 
lesion is made radiographically, and management of these 
patients is conservative and expectant. 

POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME, 
HIRSUTISM, AND OTHER 
ANDROGEN EXCESS DISORDERS 

Signs and Symptoms of Androgen Excess 

Patients with androgen excess can present with a variety 
of symptoms, but it is skin manifestations, such as hirsutism, 
acne, and alopecia, that usually prompt medical 
treatment. Androgen excess disorders result from either 
the excessive production or the excess effect of androgens. 
Both the adrenal glands and ovaries contribute to 
the circulating androgen pool in women. The adrenal 

gland preferentially secretes weak androgens, such as 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) or its sulfated “depot” 
form, DHEAS (up to 90% is of adrenal origin). These 
hormones, in addition to androstenedione (which is often 
elevated in women with PCOS), may serve as prohormones 
for more potent androgens such as testosterone or 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The ovary is the preferential 
source of testosterone. It is estimated that 75% of circulating 
testosterone originates from the ovary (mainly 
through peripheral conversion of prohormones by liver, 
fat, and skin, but also through direct ovarian secretion). 
Androstenedione, of both adrenal (50%) and ovarian 
(50%) origin, is the only circulating androgen that is 
higher in premenopausal women than in men, yet its 
androgenic potency is only 10% of testosterone. 
Dihydrotestosterone is the most potent androgen, though 
it circulates in negligible quantities, and it results primarily 
from the intracellular 5a -reduction of testosterone. 

SKIN MANIFESTATIONS OF ANDROGEN EXCESS 

Hirsutism is defined medically as the presence of terminal 
hair in a male pattern distribution, but in the popular 
mind it often refers to any type of excess body hair in an 
undesirable location. Hirsutism should be viewed much 
as polycystic ovaries are—as a sign rather than a diagnosis. 
Most commonly, hirsutism is associated with androgen 
excess (androgen-dependent hirsutism). This type 
tends to be a midline-predominant hair growth (Fig. 34). 


n FIG. 34. Modified Ferriman-Gallwey Scale, a clinical tool for assessing the extent and distribution of hirsutism. (Reproduced 
from Hatch R, Rosenfield RL, Kim MH, Tredway D. Hirsutism: implications, etiology, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1981;140:815–830 with permission from Mosby, Inc. Users may not print or otherwise reproduce copies without the written permission 
of the copyright holder.) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

The degree of androgen excess that can result in hirsutism 
most commonly has its source in the increased 
production (or intake) of androgens (Fig. 35). However, 
the potency of the androgen produced (DHT > testosterone 
> androstenedione > DHEA), the amount of 
androgen that is free or weakly bound in serum and thus 
bioavailable (sex hormone–binding globulin, or SHBG, 
preferentially binds more potent androgens than estro-
gens), and the peripheral metabolism of androgens (primarily 
the intracellular production of DHT from 
precursors) are all factors in determining the presence and 
degree of hirsutism. In the past, measurement of 3a androstenediol 
glucuronide, a peripheral metabolite of 
DHT, was used as a circulating marker of androgen 
excess in the skin (hirsutism and acne), but its clinical use 
today is negligible. 

Factors other than androgens may contribute to the 
development of hirsutism. Hyperinsulinemia, which 
accompanies many benign forms of virilization, also can 
stimulate the pilosebaceous unit both directly and indirectly 
by contributing to hyperandrogenemia. 

The pilosebaceous unit is the skin structure that gives 
rise to both hair follicles and sebaceous glands, and are 
found everywhere on the body except the palms of the 
hand, the soles of the feet, and the lips. The density is 
greatest on the face and scalp (400–800 glands per square 
centimeter) and lowest on the extremities (50 glands per 
square centimeter). The total number of pilosebaceous 
units does not increase after birth (about 5 million), but 
pilosebaceous units can become more prominent through 
activation and differentiation. Before puberty, the body 

Cholesterol 


1 
4 
Pregnenolone 


17a -OH pregnenolone 


2 
4 

2 

Progesterone 


17a -OH progesterone 


3 


3 

11-Deoxycorticosterone 11-Deoxycortisol 


5

5 


Corticosterone Cortisol 


Aldosterone 

hair is primarily fine, unpigmented vellus. After puberty 

and its increased androgen stimulation, some of these 

hairs (mainly midline hair) are transformed into coarser 

pigmented terminal hairs. A similar mechanism may 

explain the increase in acne with puberty that accompa


nies increased sebum production by the sebaceous 

glands. Hair in some regions of the body, such as the eye


brows, lashes, and scalp, undergoes conversion to termi


nal hair without androgen exposure. 

After a period of active growth (anagen), the hair fol


licle enters a resting phase (telogen) of varying length. 

The period of transition from anagen to telogen is some


times referred to as catagen. During this transition, the 

hair shafts separate from the dermal papillae at their base. 

The period of anagen varies from 3 years on the scalp to 

4 months on the face. For corresponding parts of the skin, 

men have longer anagens than women do, which in part 

may be a result of higher circulating androgen levels. 

Hirsutism occurs when androgens stimulate the trans


formation of fine, unpigmented vellus to coarse, pig


mented, thickened terminal hair. Paradoxically, androgens 

can exert opposite effects on hair follicles on the scalp, 

causing conversion of terminal follicles to velluslike fol


licles, leading to hair thinning and balding. The pattern in 

women of androgenic alopecia involves progressive thin


ning of the crown region (Fig. 36). The mechanism by 

which androgens may cause regression of a terminal hair 

follicle is unknown. Androgens also can cause increased 

sebum production and abnormal keratinization in the 

pilosebaceous unit, contributing to the development of 

acne. 

46 
DHEA 



Androstenediol 


2 


2 

6 
Androstenedione 



Testosterone 


7 

Dihydrotestosterone 

Key to enzymes 

1: Side chain cleavage (CYP11A) 
2: 3-b -hydroxysteroid reductase (3b HSD) 
3: 21 hydroxylase (CYP21) 
4: 17 hydroxylase, 17,20 lyase (CYP17) 
5: 11b hydroxysteroid reductase (11b HSD) 
6: 17b hydroxysteroid reductase (17b HSD) 
7: 5a -reductase (SRD5A) 
n FIG. 35. Androgen biosynthesis from cholesterol. Abbreviations: DHEA indicates dehydroepiandrosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone. 

n FIG. 36. Ludwig scale for grading androgenic alopecia 
in females. Note the pattern of thinning at the crown, which 
characterizes female balding. (Ludwig E. Classification of the 
types of androgenic alopecia [common baldness] occurring 
in the female sex. Br J Dermatol 1977;97:247–254) 
Patients with complete inactivation of the androgen 
receptor in type I androgen resistance syndrome do not 
develop hirsutism and acne. There are also ethnic and, 
presumably, genetic differences that can ameliorate the 
effects of androgen excess in the periphery, as demonstrated 
by Asian women with PCOS who do not have significant 
hirsutism (46). This may be mediated through 
differences in 5a -reductase activity. 

VIRILIZATION 

Virilization in an adult woman is a rare disorder and must 
be separated from more common and less severe causes 
of androgen excess in women, such as PCOS. 
Amenorrhea may occur in a premenopausal woman. A 
rapid presentation of the virilization often leads to a 
speedy evaluation and diagnosis, whereas the more lingering 
forms may be overlooked until masculinization is 
marked. Virilization is never idiopathic, and all cases 
need to be investigated until a cause is discovered. 
Polycystic ovary syndrome or the adult forms of nonclassic 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia rarely cause virilization. 


Virilization presents with a variety of peripheral 
effects. Acne and severe hirsutism are invariably present. 
Balding, especially with centripetal balding and frontal 
recession, is more characteristic of androgenic alopecia in 
men. With the more indolent presentation of androgenic 
alopecia in women, a generalized thinning of the crown 
region is common. A deepening of the voice has been 
reported in women with androgen-secreting tumors or 
women undergoing exogenous androgen treatment; it 
does not necessarily improve after removal of the androgen 
excess. Increase in the size of the larynx is one factor 
in the voice change. Clitoromegaly, a clitoral index 
greater than 35 mm2, also is reported. (The clitoral index 
is the product of the sagittal and transverse diameters of 
the glans of the clitoris. In normal women these diameters 
are in the range of 5 mm each.) The degree of clitoral 
enlargement correlates with the degree of androgen 
excess. Androgens can lead to body composition 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

changes, especially in the upper body, including 
increased muscle mass and decreased fat mass. These 
changes are accompanied by breast atrophy. 

Differential Diagnosis of Androgen 
Excess 

POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME 

Overview and Diagnosis. Polycystic ovary syndrome is 
probably the most common cause of androgen excess, 
affecting 4–6% of women in the developed world (47). 
Although there is no consensus as to the definition of 
PCOS, the diagnostic criteria from the 1990 National 
Institutes of Health, National Institute of Child Health 
and Development conference on PCOS can be used: 

• 
Hyperandrogenism or hyperandrogenemia or both 
• 
Oligo-ovulation 
• 
Exclusion of other potential causes, such as con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia, hyperprolactinemia, 
Cushing’s syndrome, and androgen-secreting 
tumors 
Thus, PCOS represents unexplained hyperandrogenic 
chronic anovulation and is a diagnosis of exclusion. It 
represents a heterogeneous disorder of unknown etiology. 

Elevation of circulating androgen levels can be used to 
document hyperandrogenemia. Testosterone, the major 
potent circulating androgen in women, often has been 
used in both clinical practice and clinical trials to identify 
women with PCOS. A variety of measurements of testosterone 
are available, including total testosterone, free 
testosterone, and bioavailable testosterone (which 
includes both the free component and testosterone weakly 
bound to other circulating serum proteins, such as 
albumin). Others have used the free androgen index 
derived from both testosterone and SHBG (testosterone ´ 
100/SHBG). 

Other diagnostic criteria have been proposed, including 
the polycystic ovary morphology found on ultrasonography, 
with multiple 2–8-mm subcapsular preantral 
follicles forming a black “pearl necklace” sign (Fig. 37). 
Polycystic ovaries are distinct from PCOS. As many as 
25% of an unsolicited population may have polycystic 
ovaries on ultrasonographic examination, and many are in 
women with normal androgen levels and regular menstrual 
cycles. 

Women with PCOS appear to be uniquely insulin 
resistant, although this is not part of the diagnostic criteria 
(48). Insulin resistance in the periphery—primarily 
skeletal muscle, which uses approximately 85–90% of 
circulating insulin—is compensated for by excess insulin 
secretion by the beta cells of the pancreas. The compensatory 
hyperinsulinemia may contribute to androgen 
excess by directly stimulating androgen production in the 
adrenal glands and ovaries, as well as suppressing production 
of key binding globulins such as SHBG (with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 37. Characteristic transvaginal ultrasonographic appearance of a polycystic ovary with the “pearl necklace” sign. 
corresponding increased bioactivity of circulating androgens) 
or IGF-binding globulins (leading to increased IGF 
action in key target tissues such as the ovary). Insulin also 
has myriad effects on cellular metabolism, including 
transporting amino acids and electrolytes, stimulating 
lipogenesis, and serving as a mitogenic factor. Overall, 
the net effects are increased storage of energy in the form 
of carbohydrate, protein, and fat. 

Unfortunately, there is no accurate, inexpensive, 
reproducible test for assessing insulin sensitivity clinically. 
Tests for assessing insulin sensitivity are dynamic tests 
such as the euglycemic clamp (the gold standard) and the 
frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test 
(Table 5). These tests primarily determine insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake (mostly in the skeletal muscle, the 
primary user of circulating insulin). Insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake, however, is just one aspect of insulin’s 
protean actions. Although these methods are the most 
accurate for determining decreased sensitivity to insulin 
(insulin resistance), they are too laborious and expensive 
to use in the routine clinical evaluation of insulin resistance. 


A ratio of fasting glucose to insulin levels that is less 
than 4.5 may be a good marker of insulin resistance in 
obese white women with PCOS (49), and a fasting insulin 
level may be useful in investigating suspected cases of 
stromal hyperthecosis. However, in other populations, 
insulin levels (either fasting or postprandial) have only a 
moderate correlation with findings in more detailed studies 
of insulin action and are less useful in patients with 
impaired glucose tolerance or frank diabetes caused by 
deficiencies in insulin secretion. There is a wide range of 

insulin sensitivity in normal populations and substantial 
overlap of even the most precise measure of insulin action 
between insulin-resistant and control populations. 
Approximately 50% of obese women with PCOS may 
not have clinically recognizable insulin resistance on the 
basis of either fasting values or more dynamic tests. On 
an individual basis, therefore, it often is not possible to 
diagnose insulin resistance. 

Clinical Features of PCOS. Polycystic ovary syndrome 
tends to develop shortly after menarche and lasts for most 
of the reproductive life, although questions persist about 
its natural history during the reproductive years. It has 
been proposed that premature pubarche may be the earliest 
recognizable PCOS phenotype; affected girls display 
hyperinsulinemia and elevated DHEAS levels and, after 
menarche, become oligomenorrheic (50). At the other 
end of the reproductive spectrum, both menstrual irregularity 
(51) and hyperandrogenemia (52) appear to normalize 
as women with PCOS approach their late 30s or 
early 40s. The benefits of treatment on sequelae of PCOS, 
especially destructive ovarian interventions such as 
wedge resection or ovarian drilling, have been suggested 
but not proven. 

Inappropriate gonadotropin secretion has been one of 
the characteristic signs of PCOS since assays have been 
available to characterize gonadotropins, and many practitioners 
have used elevated ratios of LH to FSH of 2:1 or 

3:1 as diagnostic criteria for PCOS. Although some early 
studies suggested a decreased secretion of FSH from the 
pituitary, most subsequent studies have demonstrated 
normal or low normal amounts of FSH production by 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

n TABLE 5. Tests to Consider Administering in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome 
Blood Tests Normal Range* Purpose 
Total testosterone (consider also free 
or bioavailable measures) 
<60 ng/dL* Determine extent of androgen excess 
Fasting blood tests 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone <2 ng/mL Evaluate for nonclassic congenital adrenal 
hyperlasia; use <4 ng/mL for random sample, 
corticotropin stimulation test if abnormal 
Prolactin <20 ng/mL Evaluate for prolactin excess 
Glucose <126 mg/dL Screen for diabetes 
Insulin <20 mU/mL* Screen for insulin resistance 
Glucose to insulin ratio >4.5 Screen for insulin resistance 
Cholesterol <200 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
HDL >35 mg/dL (and preferably 
>45 mg/dL) 
Identify cardiovascular risk 
LDL <130 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
Triglycerides <200 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
Dynamic blood tests 
Oral glucose tolerance test, give 75 g 
glucose in AM after overnight fast 
2-h glucose ³ 140–<200 mg/dL* Identify or diagnose diabetes, 
impaired glucose tolerance, repeat if abnormal 
2-h glucose ³ 200 mg/dL 
type 2 diabetes mellitus 

*Greater variation may be seen, depending on laboratory or assay.*Greater variation may be seen, depending on laboratory or assay. 

women with PCOS. However, ratios of LH to FSH tend 
to normalize with increasing body mass index, and 
gonadotropin level appears to be an insensitive marker of 
PCOS in an obese population. 

In addition to reporting peripheral manifestations of 
androgen excess (primarily hirsutism and acne), women 
with PCOS present to the gynecologist with infertility 
resulting from chronic anovulation. These women are not 
absolutely infertile but rather are subfertile as a result of 
the low frequency and unpredictability of their ovulatory 
cycles. As a general rule, it is difficult to induce ovulation 
both successfully and safely in women with PCOS. Many 
of these women are unresponsive to clomiphene citrate 
and human menopausal gonadotropins, a situation that is 
exacerbated by underlying obesity. On the other end of the 
spectrum are women with PCOS who overrespond to both 
these medications. Women with PCOS are at especially 
increased risks of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, a 
syndrome of massive enlargement of the ovaries and transudation 
of ascites into the abdominal cavity that can lead 
to rapid and symptomatic enlargement of the abdomen, 
intravascular contraction, hypercoagulability, and systemic 
organ dysfunction. They are also at increased risk 
for multiple pregnancy. Polycystic ovaries provide a plentiful 
source of preantral follicles that contribute to these 
complications. There is also emerging evidence that baseline 
hyperinsulinemia may contribute to the increased risk 
of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (53). 

Long-term Sequelae of PCOS. Long-term sequelae of 
PCOS relate primarily to the presence of ovulatory dysfunction 
and insulin resistance in the syndrome. They 
include an increased risk for endometrial cancer, type 2 
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. 

Many gynecologic cancers, including ovarian, breast, 
and endometrial cancers, have been reported to be more 
common in women with PCOS. The best case of an association 
between PCOS and cancer can be made for 
endometrial cancer. Many risk factors for endometrial 
cancer, including obesity, chronic anovulation, hypertension, 
and type 2 diabetes, overlap with the PCOS phenotype 
(54). It is not yet known how many induced 
withdrawal bleeds per year are necessary for adequate 
prophylaxis of the development of uterine cancer in the 
PCOS population. 

Women with PCOS have been found to be profoundly 
insulin resistant at the level of the skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue. The mechanism is unknown. This baseline 
insulin resistance, combined with the worsening effect of 
obesity (which may affect up to 50% of the U.S. PCOS 
population), places these women at increased risk for 
impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes. 
Approximately 30–40% of obese women of reproductive 
age with PCOS have been found to have impaired glucose 
tolerance, and approximately 10% have type 2 diabetes 
based on a 2-hour glucose level greater than 200 mg/dL 
(55). Of note is that only a small fraction of women with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PCOS with either impaired glucose tolerance or type 2 
diabetes display fasting hyperglycemia consistent with 
the definition of type 2 diabetes according to the 1997 
American Diabetes Association criteria (fasting glucose 
³ 126 mg/dL) (56). 

Given the high prevalence of abnormalities in glucose 
tolerance, women with PCOS should be screened for glucose 
intolerance with an oral glucose tolerance test: 75 mg 
of glucose are given after an overnight fast and a fasting 
and 2-hour glucose level are obtained. Impaired glucose 
tolerance (2-hour glucose from 140 mg/dL to 199 mg/dL 
by the criteria of the World Health Organization [57]) is a 
clear risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes and may 
also be an independent risk factor for cardiovascular 
events, such as myocardial infarction and stroke. The 
development of glucose intolerance heralds beta cell dysfunction 
with inadequate insulin secretion for the degree 
of reduced peripheral insulin sensitivity. The conversion 
rate to glucose intolerance over time is unknown, which 
makes recommendations for frequency of screening for 
glucose intolerance and diabetes difficult. A conservative 
estimate would be to screen every 5 years or less. 

Many of the studies suggesting an increased incidence 
of cardiovascular disease for women with PCOS are inferential 
based on risk factor models. Women with PCOS 
appear to form a subset of the insulin resistance syndrome 
that consists of insulin resistance, hypertension, and lipid 
abnormalities (58). Hyperinsulinemia represents a homeostatic 
response to insulin resistance, which may develop as 
a consequence of a variety of factors, including advancing 
age, obesity, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. The clinical 
consequences of these factors and their resultant 
hyperinsulinemia include lipid abnormalities, atherosclerosis, 
and coronary heart disease. 

In individuals with essential hypertension, insulin resistance 
results from impairment of insulin action in peripheral 
tissues, primarily muscle. Several reasons have been 
suggested to account for this relationship between hyperinsulinemia 
and hypertension, including sodium retention, 
overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system, impairment 
of membrane transport, and stimulation of vascular 
smooth muscle cells. Other effects of hyperinsulinemia 
and insulin resistance include the development of an 
atherogenic plasma lipid profile resulting from insulin 
enhancement of synthesis of very low density lipoproteins 
and hypertriglyceridemia. Insulin also causes the proliferation 
of smooth muscle cells in arterioles, as well as 
stimulation of collagen synthesis. These effects, in combination 
with insulin-induced growth factor elaboration and 
inhibition of regression of lipid plaques, contribute to 
atherosclerosis and its resultant coronary vascular disease. 

Many women with PCOS have significant dyslipidemia. 
Studies have shown that these women have lower 
high-density lipoprotein levels and higher triglyceride 
and low-density lipoprotein levels than do age-, sex-, and 
weight-matched control subjects (59). This elevation in 
low-density lipoprotein levels is not one of the character


istic findings of the insulin resistance syndrome, but it 
contributes to increased cardiovascular risk (60). Longterm 
follow-up of women with PCOS may reveal an 
increased incidence of hypertension compared with ageand 
weight-matched controls, because this may represent 
a later sequela of prolonged insulin resistance. Recent 
studies have documented other interim risk factors (eg, 
increased carotid artery intimal thickness) that suggest 
that these women have earlier and more advanced 
atherosclerotic disease than do appropriate control 
women (61). Studies confirming this idea that are based 
on actual cardiovascular events (such as stroke or 
myocardial infarction) in women with PCOS have not 
been published. 

Establishing risk factors for the insulin resistance syndrome 
is critical to the long-term health of the women. A 
family history of diabetes and cardiovascular disease 
(especially first-degree relatives with premature onset, in 
males younger than 55 years and in females younger than 
65 years) is notable. Lifestyle factors such as smoking 
and alcohol consumption, as well as diet and exercise histories, 
should be recorded. Signs of insulin resistance on 
physical examination, such as obesity, a centripetal fat 
distribution, and the presence of acanthosis nigricans 
(Image 32), should be recorded. 

Weight should be corrected for height by using the body 
mass index (kilograms per square meters). However, the 
pattern of fat distribution, rather than body mass index, 
seems to be most predictive of morbidity and mortality. 
Centrally distributed fat giving women an apple shape is 
referred to as an android distribution. This characteristic 
has been associated with women who have an increased 
risk for cardiovascular disease, especially myocardial 
infarction, and with index of death from all causes. Fat also 
may be distributed mainly in the hips, giving the patient a 
pear shape, often referred to as gynoid obesity. This pattern 
is best detected by measuring a circumference both at the 
umbilicus and at the hips around the level of the symphysis 
pubis and creating a fraction known as the waist-to-hip 
ratio. Values greater than 0.72 (primarily android fat distribution) 
are considered abnormal, but increased morbidity 
and mortality become more noticeable at values greater 
than 1.0. The android pattern of obesity has been associated 
with abnormal lipid profiles and increased insulin resistance 
compared with the gynoid pattern. 

ANDROGEN-SECRETING TUMORS 

The differential diagnosis of androgen excess leading to 
virilization, especially combined with a sudden onset and 
rapid progression, begins and ends with evaluation for 
tumors or dysfunctional states, usually of the ovary and 
less commonly of the adrenal gland. Androgen-secreting 
tumors are invariably accompanied by elevated circulating 
androgen levels. However, there is no absolute level 
that is pathognomonic for a tumor, just as there is no minimum 
androgen level that excludes a tumor. In the past, 
testosterone levels greater than 2 ng/mL (200 ng/dL) and 


DHEAS levels greater than 700 m g/dL were regarded as 
suggestive of a tumor of ovarian and adrenal etiology, 
respectively, but these cutoffs display poor sensitivity and 
specificity. However, in one study, less than 10% of 
patients with a total testosterone finding greater than 2.50 
ng/mL had a tumor (62). 

The most common androgen-producing tumor in a premenopausal 
woman is a Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. Other 
common tumors are thecomas and hilus cell tumors. Hilus 
cell tumors are often small and can be less than 1 cm in 
diameter—theoretically below the range of imaging visualization 
by ultrasonography. Tumors also may have a 
more indolent history, such as granulosa cell tumors, 10% 
of which primarily secrete androgens instead of estrogens. 
Any large ovarian tumor can produce androgens indirectly 
by causing hyperplasia of the surrounding normal stroma 
(eg, benign cystic teratomas, dysgerminomas, and 
epithelial tumors). 

The vast majority of ovarian androgen-secreting 
tumors are benign. Adrenal tumors are rare, with an estimated 
incidence of two cases per 1 million persons per 
year, which are divided equally among adenomas and 
carcinomas. The age of onset in adults peaks in the fifth 
decade. Virilization can accompany both tumors primarily 
producing androgens and tumors primarily producing 
cortisol (Cushing’s syndrome). A pelvic examination 
should be performed, because 90% of ovarian tumors 
have unilateral enlargement. A transvaginal ultrasonographic 
examination, increasingly an office-based examination, 
should be able to identify ovarian masses greater 
than 1 cm in diameter, although physiologic follicular and 
cystic developments throughout the normal menstrual 
cycle, especially a corpus luteal cyst, can masquerade as 
more serious pathology. 

A long history of symptoms, as may be the case with an 
ovarian tumor, does not exclude the presence of an adrenocortical 
neoplasm. A physician who suspects the presence 
of an androgen-secreting tumor can use a computed topography 
scan or MRI to detect adrenal nodules less than 5 
mm in diameter; these imaging techniques provide a 
greater resolution than ultrasonography and can detect 
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia in the case of a corticotropinsecreting 
tumor. However, approximately 2% of the population 
harbors a clinically insignificant adrenal adenoma 
(ie, incidentaloma), such that localization is not diagnostic 
for an androgen-secreting adrenal tumor. Functional radiologic 
techniques, such as selective venous catheterization 
or scintigraphy with 131iodomethylnorcholes-terol, rarely 
are used in the initial screening for such tumors. 

OTHER CAUSES OF OVARIAN DYSFUNCTION 

Dysfunctional states of the ovary, primarily hyperthecosis, 
also may result in marked androgen excess. In stromal 
hyperthecosis, most of the ovarian androgen overproduction 
results from hyperplasia of the ovarian stroma and not 
from the accumulation of small follicles, as is the case with 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

PCOS. Most women with stromal hyperthecosis have 
severe hyperinsulinemia, which may be the stimulus for 
stromal androgen overproduction. It has been reported in 
both premenopausal and postmenopausal women, often 
with coexisting sequelae of the insulin resistance syndrome, 
such as dyslipidemia and glucose intolerance. 

Although rare, extreme elevations in insulin levels 
occur in individuals with insulin receptor defects. A substantial 
number of such defects have been identified. They 
are sometimes caused by single-base-pair substitutions or 
deletions in the gene encoding the insulin receptor, resulting 
in truncated or modified receptors with markedly deficient 
function. In such individuals, the elevated insulin 
levels may stimulate excess ovarian androgen production, 
resulting in what has been described as the hyperandrogenism, 
insulin resistance, and acanthosis nigricans 
(HAIR-AN) syndrome. 

Acanthosis nigricans is a dermatologic condition 
marked by velvety, mossy, verrucous, hyperpigmented skin 
(Image 32). It has been noted on the back of the neck, in the 
axillae, underneath the breasts, and even on the vulva. It is, 
however, a nonspecific finding and is common in other conditions, 
such as PCOS. The HAIR-AN syndrome represents 
the extreme manifestation of the association of 
hyperandrogenism and hyperinsulinism and affects only a 
small number of women in whom severe elevations of 
androgens and insulin occur concomitantly. Presumably, 
mutations in a number of genes may cause this phenotype. 

CUSHING’S SYNDROME 

Coexisting signs of Cushing’s syndrome, including a 
moon facies, buffalo hump, abdominal striae, centripetal 
fat distribution, and hypertension, should be documented 
and lead to further screening (Image 33). In rare instances 
the patient may present with low back pain due to vertebral 
compression fracture or to a long-bone fracture 
caused by steroid-induced osteoporosis. Cortisol excess 
can be screened for with a 24-hour urine test for free cortisol 
(which better quantifies excess cortisol production 
than do random spot blood levels; normal values <100 
m g/24 h) or a 1-hour overnight dexamethasone suppression 
test. Dexamethasone given orally at 11 PM is followed 
with a test of serum cortisol on blood obtained at 

8:00 AM. A suppressed value less than 5 m g/dL makes the 
diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome extremely unlikely. 
Overall, Cushing’s syndrome is an extremely rare cause 
of clinically evident androgen excess. 
NONCLASSIC CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA 

Nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia, also referred 
to as late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, generally 
is caused by an inherited defect of 21-hydroxylase activity. 
Patients may have clinical characteristics similar to 
those of women with PCOS, although they frequently 
have a milder presentation. The condition is estimated to 
be present in 1–2% of unselected U.S. women with hir



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

sutism (63, 64). The frequency of nonclassic congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia appears to be highest in Ashkenazi 
Jews (65). 

Patients with 21-hydroxylase–deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia are homozygous for a mutation of 
CYP21, the gene encoding for P450c21, which is the 
enzyme with 21-hydroxylase activity. In nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (and the classic form of the disorder), 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone, the immediate precursor for 
P450c21, accumulates in excess. Theoretically, because of 
the lack of cortisol synthesis, corticotropin levels 
increase, resulting in an overproduction and accumulation 
of cortisol precursors. These, in turn, can be shunted 
to androgen biosynthetic pathways, which causes excessive 
production of androgens, resulting in virilization. A 
vicious circle can arise in classic forms, with increased 
corticotropin levels persisting because of lack of cortisol 
production. The phenotype is largely due to the amount of 
functional enzymatic activity of the allelic variants, and 
those with nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia have 
10–20% activity. However, because of enzymatic activity, 
patients with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia generally 
do not have elevated circulating corticotropin levels or 
hyperresponsiveness of corticotropin to corticotropinreleasing 
hormone stimulation. 

Nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia screening 
involves determining a fasting 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
in the morning. A value of less than 2 ng/mL is normal, 
and recently cutoffs as high as 4 ng/mL have been proposed 
if obtained in the morning and during the follicular 
phase (66). Patients with androgen excess who have 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
screening values above the cutoff 
should undergo a corticotropin stimulation test. This test 
is performed by intravenously administering 250 m g of 
cosyntropin, a synthetic form of corticotropin, after a 
baseline 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level has been 
obtained. A second blood sample for 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
measurement is obtained 30–60 minutes later. 
Stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone values above 10–15 
ng/mL can be considered to be diagnostic of 21-hydroxylase–
deficient nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (64). 

OTHER CAUSES OF ANDROGEN EXCESS 

A prolactin level can identify prolactinomas that secrete 
massive amounts of prolactin. Hyperprolactinemia can 
cause oligo-ovulation and may stimulate adrenal androgen 
production, but this cause of androgen excess is 
extremely rare. Approximately 5–10% of women with 
PCOS have a coexisting mild elevation in circulating prolactin 
levels. A serum TSH determination is also useful, 
given the high incidence of thyroid disorders in women 
and their association with menstrual disorders. The use of 
exogenous androgens (eg, anabolic steroid use by a 
bodybuilder) or an overdose of androgens in a postmenopausal 
woman also can cause clinically evident 
androgen excess. Severe hirsutism, and even virilization, 
that occurs during pregnancy has a unique differential 

diagnosis. This diagnosis includes benign ovarian sources 
such as hyperreactio luteinalis (ie, gestational ovarian 
theca–lutein cysts), or luteomas, and extremely rare fetoplacental 
sources such as aromatase deficiency, resulting 
in androgen excess due to the placental inability to convert 
precursor androgens into estrogens. 

IDIOPATHIC HIRSUTISM 

The term idiopathic hirsutism was coined to identify the 
presence of hirsutism in a eumenorrheic women with normal 
circulating androgens, but this may reflect our limited 
ability to assess androgen action in the peripheral 
compartment. When thoroughly investigated for androgen 
excess, most cases are found not to be idiopathic 
(67). Androgen-independent hirsutism may be a familial 
tendency (familial hypertrichosis) or be due to medications 
such as cyclosporin, diazoxide, or minoxidil. These 
medications often result in hypertrichosis, a generalized 
increase in body hair rather than the midline development 
of marked terminal hair growth. 

Treatment of Androgen Excess 

ANDROGEN-SUPPRESSIVE THERAPIES 

Women with documented hyperandrogenemia theoretically 
would benefit most from androgen-suppressive therapies. 
Suppressing the ovary has been achieved through the 
use of oral contraceptive, depot progestin, or GnRH analogue 
treatment. Oral contraceptives 1) inhibit ovarian 
steroid production by lowering gonadotropin levels and 
2) increase SHBG as a result of their estrogen effect, 
further lowering the level of bioavailable testosterone. 
They also may inhibit dihydrotestosterone binding to the 
androgen receptor and 5a -reductase activity, as well as 
increase hepatic steroid clearance (because of stimulation 
of the P450 system). These myriad actions contribute to 
improving stigmas of androgen excess. There are theoretical 
reasons for choosing an oral contraceptive that uses a 
less androgenic progestin, but few studies show a clinical 
difference among different types of progestins. 

A GnRH agonist may lower the level of circulating 
androgens more, but comparative trials with other agents 
and combined-agent trials have been mixed and have not 
shown a greater benefit to one or the other or combined 
treatment (68–71). A GnRH agonist given alone results in 
unacceptable bone loss (71). The primary therapy in nonclassic 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia is corticosteroid 
suppression of the HPA axis, and it can result in improved 
acne and ovulatory function. However, significant hirsutism 
in the patient with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia 
will respond best to antiandrogen therapy. 

Corticosteroid suppression of the adrenal gland also 
offers theoretic benefits in the treatment of PCOS, but 
deterioration in glucose tolerance is problematic, and 
long-term effects such as osteoporosis are of significant 
concern. This treatment may be useful as adjunctive ther



apy in inducing ovulation with clomiphene citrate. 
Ketoconazole inhibits the P450 enzyme system and thus 
inhibits androgen biosynthesis, but it is hepatotoxic. 

HIRSUTISM THERAPY 

Most medical methods that improve hirsutism do not produce 
the dramatic results that patients desire. In general, 
combination therapies appear to produce better results 
than single-agent approaches, although it often takes 3–6 
months for medical therapy to produce noticeable 
improvement, and adjunctive mechanical removal methods 
are often necessary. 

The majority of women will experience improvement 
in their hirsutism. Unfortunately, there are no universally 
accepted techniques for assessing hirsutism and its 
response to treatment. Some of the depilatory treatments 
used by patients are so effective that it is difficult to 
determine baseline hirsutism and response to treatment, 
and thus the patient’s subjective assessment guides therapy. 
Hirsutism scales are often used, but they remain problematic 
in both research and clinical practice. The most 
commonly used grading system is the modified 
Ferriman-Gallwey scoring system (see Fig. 34). It is 
heavily influenced by peripheral hair on the extremities 
and, like other grading systems, is highly subjective. 
Other assessments of hirsutism have included measurement 
of hair shaft diameter, hair follicle density, growth 
rate, and weight of shaved hair from a given area. Some 
investigators have conducted pilot studies of the use of 
prostate-specific antigen as a serum marker of response to 
therapy, but results have been mixed. 

Lifestyle Modifications. For obese patients with hirsutism, 
weight loss is frequently recommended. Increases in 
SHBG through improved insulin sensitivity from weight 
loss may lower bioavailable androgen levels. In one 
study, approximately 50% of the women who lost weight 
experienced improvement in their hirsutism (72). 

Ornithine Decarboxylase Inhibitors. Ornithine decarboxylase 
is necessary for the production of polyamines, the 
proteins that stimulate and regulate the growth of hair follicles 
and other organs. Ornithine decarboxylase is also a 
sensitive and specific marker of androgen action in the 
prostate. Inhibition of this enzyme limits cell division and 
function. Recently, a potent inhibitor of this enzyme, 
eflornithine hydrochloride, has been tested in a facial 
cream and found to be effective against hirsutism; it has 
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of unwanted 
facial hair. It is available as a 13.9% cream and is applied 
to affected areas twice a day for a minimum of 4 hours 
each. In clinical trials, 32% of patients showed marked 
improvement after 24 weeks compared with 8% of 
women treated with placebo, and benefit was first noted 
at 8 weeks. It is pregnancy category C and appears to be 
well tolerated. A variety of minor adverse skin conditions 
occurred in 1% of subjects. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Mechanical Methods of Hair Removal. Mechanical hair 
removal (shaving, plucking, waxing, using depilatory 
creams, electrolysis, and laser vaporization) can control 
hirsutism and often is the frontline treatment used by 
women. Laser vaporization is receiving increasing attention. 
Hair is damaged using the principle of selective 
photothermolysis with wavelengths of light well 
absorbed by follicular melanin and pulse durations that 
selectively thermally damage the target without damaging 
surrounding tissue. Patients with dark hair and light 
skin are ideal candidates. It appears to be most effective 
during anagen. 

ANTIANDROGEN THERAPY 

Androgen-Receptor Antagonists. Androgen-receptor 
antagonists antagonize the binding of testosterone and 
other androgens to the androgen receptor. As a class, 
therefore, they are teratogenic and pose risk of feminization 
of the external genitalia in a male fetus, should the 
patient conceive. Spironolactone, a diuretic and aldosterone 
antagonist, also binds to the androgen receptor 
with 67% of the affinity of dihydrotestosterone. It has 
other mechanisms of action, including inhibition of ovarian 
and adrenal steroidogenesis, competition for androgen 
receptors in hair follicles, and direct inhibition of 
5a -reductase activity. There is a dose–response effect and 
a long period of onset (6 months or more). Because 
approximately 20% of women undergoing this therapy 
experience increased menstrual frequency, it often is 
combined with the oral contraceptive. Other adverse 
effects include polyuria, orthostatic hypotension, nausea, 
and fatigue. Because it can cause and exacerbate hyperkalemia, 
it should be used cautiously in patients with 
renal impairment. The medication also has potential teratogenicity, 
as does any antiandrogen, although exposure 
has rarely resulted in ambiguous genitalia in male infants. 
Acne also has been successfully treated with spironolactone. 
Thus, much of the treatment basis is empiric. 

Cyproterone acetate, which is not available commercially 
in the United States, is a progestogen with antiandrogen 
properties. It frequently is combined in an oral 
contraceptive. Recently, an oral contraceptive containing 
drospirenone, another progestin with antiandrogenic 
properties, was approved for use in the United States as a 
contraceptive. Flutamide is another nonsteroidal antiandrogen 
that has been shown to be effective against hirsutism. 
The most common adverse effect is dry skin; its 
use has rarely been associated with hepatitis. Because 
there is greater risk of teratogenicity with this compound, 
contraception should accompany its use. 

Antiandrogens: 5a -Reductase Inhibitors. There are two 
forms of the enzyme 5a -reductase: type 1, which is 
predominantly found in the skin, and type 2, which is predominantly 
found in the prostate and reproductive tissues. 
Both forms are found in the pilosebaceous unit and 
may contribute to hirsutism, acne, and balding. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Finasteride inhibits both forms and is available as a 5-mg 
tablet for the treatment of prostate cancer and a 1-mg 
tablet for the treatment of male alopecia. It has been 
found to be effective for the treatment of hirsutism in 
women. Finasteride is better tolerated than other antiandrogens, 
but it has the highest and clearest risk for teratogenicity 
in a male fetus, and adequate contraception 
must accompany its use. Randomized trials have found 
that spironolactone, flutamide, and finasteride all have 
similar efficacy in improving hirsutism (73, 74). 

TREATMENT OF ACNE AND ANDROGENIC ALOPECIA 

Many of the treatments previously discussed have been 
adapted to treat acne and androgenic alopecia. Although 
two triphasic oral contraceptives (containing norgestimate 
and norethindrone acetate) have been shown to 
improve acne and have received an FDA indication for 
this purpose, other pills may offer similar results. Other 
agents for the treatment of acne include topical cleansing 
agents, as well as topical and systemic antibiotics and 
retinoids. Oral isotretinoin, a retinoid, requires careful 
monitoring because it is both hepatotoxic and teratogenic 
(category X). 

The treatment of androgenic alopecia in women is primarily 
empiric. Minoxidil in a 2% or 5% solution is 
approved for the treatment of androgenic alopecia. It is 
thought to increase the recruitment and development of 
pilosebaceous units in the scalp through its peripheral 
vasodilatory actions. It has shown mild efficacy in 
increasing hair growth in women with alopecia. 

IMPROVING INSULIN RESISTANCE IN POLYCYSTIC 
OVARY SYNDROME 

The treatment of PCOS tends to be symptom based, and 
the number and variety of treatment options are proportional 
to our ignorance of the true pathophysiology of the 
syndrome. No treatments used as monotherapy consistently 
improve all aspects of the syndrome. Multiple studies 
have shown that improving insulin sensitivity, be it 
through lifestyle modifications or pharmacologic intervention, 
can result in lowered circulating androgen levels 
(primarily mediated through increased SHBG and less 
bioavailable androgen, but also through decreased total 
testosterone), spontaneous ovulation, and spontaneous 
pregnancy. However, long-term studies documenting 
decreases in sequelae such as diabetes or endometrial cancer 
that accompany improvements in insulin sensitivity 
are lacking. Although improving insulin sensitivity is a 
promising goal, it should not be viewed as the “cure” for 
PCOS. The published studies of insulin-sensitizing agents 
also show a substantial nonresponse rate, so improvements 
in insulin sensitivity alone may not produce clinical 
improvements in all women with PCOS. 

Medications that worsen insulin sensitivity, such as 
corticosteroids, should be used on a long-term basis with 
caution in women with PCOS. There has been some evi


dence in the literature that oral contraceptives can worsen 
insulin resistance and glucose tolerance in women with 
PCOS. However, in the larger population, there is no evidence 
that the effects of oral contraceptives on glucose 
metabolism increase the risk for developing type 2 diabetes, 
and their use should not be limited by this concern. 

The standard for improving insulin sensitivity in obese 
women with PCOS should be weight loss, diet, and exercise. 
Obesity has become epidemic in our society and 
contributes substantially to reproductive and metabolic 
abnormalities in PCOS. Unfortunately, there are no effective 
treatments that result in permanent weight loss, and 
it is estimated that 90–95% of patients who experience a 
weight decrease will relapse. Multiple studies in women 
with PCOS have shown that weight loss can improve the 
fundamental aspects of the endocrine syndrome of 
PCOS; it can lower circulating androgen levels and cause 
spontaneous resumption of menses (75–78). These 
changes have been reported with a weight loss as small as 
5% of the initial weight. Other benefits that have been 
reported include decreased circulating insulin levels. The 
decrease in unbound testosterone levels after weight loss 
may be largely mediated through increases in SHBG. 

There have been few studies on the effect of exercise 
alone on insulin action in women with PCOS, unfortunately, 
and one limited study with only a short period of 
exercise displayed little benefit (77). It is reasonable to 
assume that exercise would have the same beneficial 
effects in women with PCOS as in women with type 2 
diabetes. The preliminary results of the diabetes prevention 
trials also underline the importance of lifestyle interventions 
of diet and exercise in reducing the risk for 
developing diabetes by more than 50% in high-risk individuals. 
The beneficial effects on insulin sensitivity of 
diets of varying composition are touted, with many popular 
sources advocating a high-protein diet as the diet of 
choice in women with PCOS. Few studies support this 
recommendation, and there are theoretical concerns 
about the adverse effects of a high-protein diet on renal 
function in a population at high risk for diabetes, as well 
as the adverse effects of the increased fat composition of 
these diets on dyslipidemia. 

Drugs developed initially to treat type 2 diabetes also 
have been used to treat PCOS. None of these agents are 
currently approved by the FDA for the treatment of PCOS 
or related symptoms such as anovulation, hirsutism, or 
acne. These drugs include metformin (79), thiazolidinediones, 
and the experimental insulin-sensitizer drug 
D-chiro-inositol (80). 

Metformin has been examined in a number of small 
studies, including several randomized controlled trials. 
Metformin was approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes 
by the FDA in 1994, but it was used clinically for 
close to 20 years before that in other parts of the world. 
Metformin is a biguanide that works primarily by suppressing 
hepatic gluconeogenesis, but it also improves 
insulin sensitivity in the periphery. Gastrointestinal symp



toms (diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal bloating, flatulence, 
and anorexia) are the most common reactions to 
metformin. They are approximately 30% more frequent 
than in placebo-treated patients. There is a small risk of lactic 
acidosis among women taking this medication, which 
may be triggered by exposure to intravenous iodinated 
radiocontrast agents in susceptible individuals. This most 
commonly occurs in patients with poorly controlled diabetes 
and impaired renal function. Metformin is pregnancy 
category B, with no known human teratogenic risk and no 
known embryonic lethality in humans. There have been no 
reported abnormalities associated with its use during pregnancy 
in women with diabetes, to women with marked 
hyperandrogenism during pregnancy, or to the small number 
of women with PCOS who have conceived during 
treatment. Some clinicians advocate its use during early 
pregnancy to reduce the miscarriage rate, but the documentation 
for this claim is poor. Studies of longer use of metformin 
for PCOS suggest long-term improvement in 
ovulatory function in about half the patients (81). 

Thiazolidinediones are peroxisome proliferator–activating 
receptor agonists and are thought to improve 
insulin sensitivity through a postreceptor mechanism. In 
the largest multicenter randomized trial of an insulin-sensitizing 
agent in women with PCOS, troglitazone has been 
shown to have a dose–response effect in improving ovulation 
and hirsutism (82). This effect appeared to be mediated 
through decreases in hyperinsulinemia and free 
testosterone levels. Troglitazone subsequently has been 
removed from the market because of the risk of hepatotoxicity. 
Newer thiazolidinediones such as rosiglitazone 
and pioglitazone appear to be safer in terms of hepatotoxicity, 
but they also have been associated with embryotoxicity 
in animal studies (both are pregnancy category C), 
and little has been published on their effects in women 
with PCOS. Women using these medications should have 
their liver function monitored on a regular basis. 

It is difficult to separate the effects of improving insulin 
sensitivity from the effects of lowering serum androgen 
levels, because any “pure” improvement in insulin sensitivity 
can raise SHBG and thus lower bioavailable androgen. 
Given the long onset of action for improving 
hirsutism, longer periods of observation are needed. In the 
largest and longest randomized trial of these agents to 
date, troglitazone administered in a dose–response fashion 
was found to significantly improve hirsutism in women 
with PCOS without lowering total testosterone levels (a 
benefit presumably achieved through significantly lowering 
free testosterone levels) (82). 

SURGICAL OPTIONS 

The role of ovarian drilling, if any, in the treatment of hirsutism 
is uncertain. Many argue that the best monotherapy 
results for the endocrine abnormalities in PCOS 
can be obtained through surgical destructive processes of 
the ovary, wedge resection, or ovarian drilling. The value 
of laparoscopic ovarian drilling as a primary treatment for 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

subfertile patients with anovulation (failure to ovulate) 
and PCOS is undetermined, according to a Cochrane 
review (83). There is insufficient evidence to determine if 
ovulation or pregnancy rates improve more with ovarian 
drilling than with gonadotropin therapy as a secondary 
treatment for clomiphene-resistant women. None of the 
various drilling techniques appear to offer obvious advantages 
(83). Furthermore, in some cases the results of the 
ovarian drilling may be temporary. Surgery consisting of 
total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy 
is not a usual treatment option for androgen 
excess, but it may be indicated in some cases of 
refractory ovarian hyperandrogenism. 

PREMATURE OVARIAN FAILURE 

Premature ovarian failure (POF) or premature menopause 
generally is defined as consisting of the triad of amenorrhea, 
hypergonadotropinism, and hypoestrogenism in 
women younger than 40 years. Several studies have confirmed, 
however, that the use of these terms is inappropriate. 
In 50% of cases, women with spontaneous POF 
have follicles remaining in the ovaries that function intermittently 
even many years after diagnosis. Sometimes 
these follicles proceed to ovulation. In 5–10% of patients, 
spontaneous pregnancy can occur many years after the 
initial diagnosis of POF (84, 85). Consequently, it might 
be more appropriate to refer to this disorder as primary 
hypogonadism or primary ovarian insufficiency. 
Unfortunately, the term premature ovarian failure is well 
rooted in the literature. 

Etiology 

Premature ovarian failure is clearly a heterogeneous disorder 
(Box G). In some cases, the ovarian insufficiency is 
due to depletion of functional primordial follicles (Fig. 
38). However, in approximately 50% of cases, the ovarian 
insufficiency is a result of follicle dysfunction (84, 85). 
In perhaps half of all cases, follicles remain in the ovary, 
but some pathophysiologic process prevents them from 
functioning normally. 

Defects in genes that influence primordial follicle formation 
and their rate of expenditure would be expected to 
result in POF on the basis of ovarian follicle depletion. A 
study of cases with chromosomal deletions and translocations 
that interrupt gene function provides insight into 
this type of genetic pathogenesis. Two independent loci 
on the X chromosome have been identified at Xq26–28 
(POF1) and Xq13.3–q22 (POF2). One gene in the POF2 
region has homology to the DIA allele, mutants of which 
in Drosophila cause male and female infertility. A breakpoint 
in the last intron of the DIAPH2 gene (the second 
homologue of the Drosophila diaphanous gene) has been 
associated with familial POF in women (86). 
Undoubtedly, other genes in these loci eventually will be 
identified as causes of POF. The FOXL2 gene at map 
locus 3q23 has been associated with POF in a familial 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX G 
Causes of Premature Ovarian Failure 

Ovarian follicle depletion 

Low initial follicle number 
Pure gonadal dysgenesis 
Thymic aplasia/hypoplasia 
Idiopathic 


Accelerated follicle atresia 

X chromosome related 
Turner’s syndrome 
X chromosome deletions 


Galactosemia 
Viral oophoritis* 
Autoimmunity* 
Environmental toxins* 
Idiopathic 


Ovarian follicle dysfunction 

Steroidogenic enzyme defects 
17a -hydroxylase deficiency 
17–20 desmolase deficiency 
20,22 desmolase deficiency 


Autoimmunity 
Lymphocytic oophoritis 
Gonadotropin receptor antibodies* 


Signal defects 
Abnormal gonadotropin receptor 
Abnormality in the G-protein signaling pathway 


Idiopathic (resistant ovary syndrome) 

* Theoretical possibilities that have not been proved. 
syndrome that includes the eyelid defects blepharophimosis, 
ptosis, and epicanthus inversus (87). Fragile X 
premutations also have been demonstrated in a small percentage 
of women with POF, but the significance of this 
association is unclear (88). Galactosemia, deficiency of 
the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase, also 
causes POF. 

Follicle-stimulating hormone receptor mutations 
(gene map locus 2p21–p16) have been reported as a cause 
of POF in Finland; however, these mutations appear to be 
an uncommon cause of this disorder in North America 
(89, 90). Partial loss of function of the FSH receptor also 
has been associated with POF. A woman with POF was 
found to carry compound heterozygotic mutations 
(Ile160Thr and Arg573Cys substitutions) located in the 

n FIG. 38. Premature ovarian failure. Note the absence of 
follicles. (Tulandi T, Kinch RAH. Premature ovarian failure. 
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1981;36:521–527) 
extracellular domain and in the third intracellular loop of 
the FSH receptor, respectively (21). Deficiencies of 
enzymes such as 17,20-desmolase and 17-hydroxylase 
are also causes of ovarian follicle dysfunction. 

Inappropriate luteinization of graafian follicles is 
another demonstrated mechanism of follicle dysfunction 
in women with karyotypically normal POF (85). Antral 
follicles have been imaged by ultrasonography in more 
than 40% of patients with this condition, and serum estradiol 
levels are significantly greater when an antral follicle 
is present. However, when compared with normal women, 
patients with POF have poor correlations between follicle 
diameter and serum estradiol. In other words, graafian 
follicles may be present, but in most instances they are not 
functioning normally. Based on histologic evidence, 
luteinized graafian follicles account for at least 60% of the 
antral structures imaged in these patients. Thus, inappropriate 
luteinization of graafian follicles appears to be one 
pathophysiologic mechanism of follicle dysfunction in 
patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous POF. 

It is well recognized that autoimmune lymphocytic 
oophoritis is associated with POF (92). This disorder was 
initially described in association with autoimmune 
adrenal insufficiency and is characterized by lymphocytic 
infiltration of the theca interna of developing follicles. 
Primordial follicles are spared the autoimmune attack. In 
established disease, the cellular infiltrate includes 
macrophages, NK cells, T lymphocytes, B cells, and plasma 
cells. Follicle development may progress to the 
graafian stage, and markedly enlarged ovaries containing 
luteinized cysts may be present. Local lymphokine production 
likely impairs follicle steroidogenesis; this situation 
has been reported in animal studies. Theoretically, 
the development of antibodies against FSH or LH receptors 
could cause ovarian follicle dysfunction, but this 
mechanism appears to be rare (93). 

Physical examination may reveal atrophic vaginitis or 
absence of cervical mucus as a result of estrogen deficiency, 
but these physical signs have poor sensitivity in 


detecting ovarian endocrine insufficiency. Patients with 
POF often produce estrogen intermittently. Therefore, 
finding evidence of estrogen effect on physical examination 
should not be considered evidence against the diagnosis 
of ovarian insufficiency or POF. The progestin 
challenge test can be misleading and delay the diagnosis 
for the same reason. Indeed, one half of women with this 
condition will experience withdrawal bleeding in 
response to a progestin challenge test despite the presence 
of clearly elevated serum gonadotropin levels (84). 
A search should be made for the physical stigmata of 
Turner’s syndrome (45,X) (see Fig. 22). However, 
patients may develop POF as a result of abnormalities of 
the X chromosome without manifesting these signs. In 
some patients, interstitial deletions or translocations will 
be detected only by karyotype analysis. A search also 
should be made for the physical findings of potentially 
associated autoimmune disorders such as hypothyroidism 
and primary adrenal insufficiency. Several laboratory 
studies are indicated in women with POF, including measurement 
of thyroid-stimulating hormone; adrenal antibodies; 
fasting glucose, electrolytes, and creatinine; and 
bone density by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry examination; 
as well as analysis of karyotope and fragile X 
premutation screening if there is a family history of mental 
retardation. 

Women with X-chromosomal abnormalities have 
delivered normal children and subsequently developed 
POF after age 35 years. Thus, neither age nor parity rules 
out the possibility of a chromosomal abnormality as the 
etiology. Unexpected karyotype findings that may be 
inherited have important implications for other family 
members. Also, by finding an explanation for the POF, 
patients with normal karyotypes may be reassured, and 
the few patients found to have abnormal karyotypes will 
be helped. 

Management 

Young women who experience spontaneous POF are 
unprepared for the diagnosis. They feel as if a part of their 
life has been taken away. These patients fare best when 
the clinician is prepared to meet their special needs with 
care and understanding. This approach involves several 
aspects of management: 

• 
Make the diagnosis promptly and accurately. 
Inform the patient of the diagnosis in a sensitive 
and supportive manner. 
• 
Counsel the patient so as to validate her emotional 
concerns and help her to maintain control of her 
physical and emotional health. 
• 
Provide cyclic estrogen and progestin replacement 
therapy. 
• 
Assess, and continue to reassess at intervals of 
1–2 years, for the presence of other disorders 
related to POF. 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Patients who desire fertility may feel an urgent need to 
achieve a pregnancy immediately. It is important to stress 
that there are no prospectively proven treatments that will 
restore ovulation. Gonadotropin therapy carries a theoretical 
risk of exacerbating unrecognized autoimmune ovarian 
failure. Prednisone therapy for suspected autoimmune 
ovarian failure is unproven and carries a risk of osteonecrosis 
of the hip, requiring joint replacement (92). 
Also, although it is rarely considered, unproven therapies 
carry a real risk of interfering with the development of a 
spontaneous conception that would have occurred except 
for the fact that the system had been perturbed by the 
intervention. 

Some couples prefer to avoid high-technology intrusion 
into their private lives and choose adoption or a 
change of their life goals to deal with the infertility associated 
with POF. Other couples are satisfied to accept the 
low, but real, chance for subsequent spontaneous conception. 
Ovum donation is a successful solution for some 
couples. Although couples may feel an urgency to proceed 
to ovum donation, in reality there is no rush. Ovum 
donation success rates depend primarily on the age of the 
ovum donor. 

Young women with POF need full replacement doses 
of estrogen, not the lower doses used for osteoporosis 
prophylaxis in normally menopausal women. Evidence 
suggests that the lower doses of estrogen do not maintain 
bone density as effectively in younger women (94). To 
further help maintain bone mass, patients should be 
advised to follow a regular weight-bearing exercise program 
and be instructed on methods to ensure an adequate 
calcium and vitamin D intake. The need for androgen 
replacement therapy is currently under investigation. 

Young women with POF should be given cyclic estro-
gen and progestin replacement therapy that will induce 
regular menses. This is important because 5–10% of 
these patients will experience a spontaneous and unexpected 
pregnancy. If the patient misses a menses on this 
regimen, a pregnancy test should be performed and the 
hormone replacement therapy stopped. In most cases, 
spontaneous pregnancies progress normally in these 
patients, and there appears to be no need for exogenous 
hormone supplementation during early pregnancy. 

Replacement therapy includes the administration of 
100 m m of estradiol per day by a skin patch, combined 
with 10 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate given for 12 
days each calendar month. The skin patch delivers a constant 
infusion of estradiol, avoids the “first pass” effect on 
the liver, and will maintain regular menses and be well 
tolerated by most women. It is important to note that 
pregnancies have been reported even in women taking 
combined oral contraceptive agents. 

Women with POF are at risk for developing other 
endocrine gland insufficiencies. One series evaluated 119 
patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous POF 
and found that 32 patients had hypothyroidism (27%), 
and 3 patients had adrenal insufficiency (2.5%) (95). 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

When the diagnosis of spontaneous primary ovarian failure 
is first established, patients should undergo laboratory 
screening for hypothroidism and adrenal insufficiency 
and then be followed annually. Hypothyroidism can be 
detected by measuring serum-free thyroxine and TSH. 
Measuring adrenal antibodies may be an effective screening 
process for autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (96). 
Patients should be forewarned about the early symptoms 
of adrenal insufficiency, a potentially fatal disorder that is 
readily treated once identified. 

References 

1. Kaplowitz PB, Oberfield SE. Reexamination of the age 
limit for defining when puberty is precocious in girls in the 
United States: implications for evaluation and treatment. 
Drug and Therapeutics and Executive Committees of the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society. Pediatrics 
1999;104:936–941 
( ) 
2. Rebar RW, Connolly HV. Clinical features of young women 
with hypergonadotropic amenorrhea. Fertil Steril 1990;53: 
804–810 
( ) 
3. Owings MF, Kozak LJ. Ambulatory and inpatient procedures 
in the United States, 1996. National Center for Health 
Statistics. Vital Health Stat 1998;13:1–119 
( ) 
4. Gambone JC, Reiter RD, Lench JB, Moore JB. The impact 
of a quality assurance process on the frequency and confirmation 
rate of hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;163:545–550 
( ) 
5. Lepine LA, Hillis SD, 
Marchbanks PA, Koonin LM, 
Morrow B, Kieke BA, et al. Hysterectomy surveillance— 
United States, 1980–1993. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep CDC 
Surveil Summ 1997;46(SS-4):1–15 
( ) 
6. Falcone T, Desjardins C, Bourque J, Granger L, Hemmings 
R, Quiros E. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding in adolescents. 
J Reprod Med 1994;39:761–764 
( ) 
7. Kjerulff KH, Erickson BA, Langenberg PW. Chronic gynecological 
conditions reported by US women: findings from 
National Health Interview Survey, 1984 to 1992. Am J 
Public Health 1996;86:195–199 
( ) 
8. deVries LD, Dijkhuizen FB, Mol BW, 
Brolmann HA, 
Moret E, Heintz AP. Comparison of transvaginal sonography, 
saline infusion sonography, and hysteroscopy in premenopausal 
women with abnormal uterine bleeding. J Clin 
Ultrasound 2000;28:217–223 
( ) 
9. Widrich T, 
Bradley LD, Mitchinson AR, Collins RL. 
Comparison of saline infusion sonography with office hysteroscopy 
for the evaluation of the endometrium. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1327–1334 
( ) 
10. Saidi MH, Sadler RK, Theis VD, Akright BD, Farhart SA, 
Villanueva GR. Comparison of sonography, sonohysterography, 
and hysteroscopy for evaluation of abnormal uterine 
bleeding. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:587–591 
( ) 
11. Davis A, Godwin A, Lippman J, Olson W, Kafrissen M. 
Triphasic norgestimate-ethinyl estradiol for treating dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. Obstet Gynceol. 2000;96: 
913–920 
( ) 
12. Lethaby A, Augood C, 
Duckitt K. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs for heavy menstrual bleeding. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2):CD000400 
( ) 
13. Crosignani PG, Vercellini P, Mosconi P, Oldani S, Cortesi I, 
DeGiorgi O. Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device 
versus hysteroscopic endometrial resection in the treatment 
of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90: 
257–263 
( ) 
14. Bonnar J, Sheppard BL. Treatment of menorrhagia during 
menstruation: randomized controlled trial of ethamsylate, 
mefenamic acid, and tranexamic acid. BMJ 1996;313: 
579–582 
( ) 
15. Lethaby A, Farquhar C, Cooke I. Antifibrinolytics for heavy 
menstrual bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(4): 
CD000249 
( ) 
16. Thomas EJ, Okuda KJ, and Thomas NM. The combination 
of a depot gonadotrophin releasing hormone agonist and 
cyclical hormone replacement therapy for dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1991;98:1155–1159 
(button) 
17. Vercellini P, Oldani S, Yaylayan L, Zaina B, De Giorgi O, 
Crossignani PG. Randomized comparison of vaporizing 
electrode and cutting loop for endometrial ablation. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;94:521–527 
( ) 
18. Overton C, Hargreaves J, Maresh M. A national survey of 
the complications of endometrial destruction for menstrual 
disorders: the MISTLETOE study. Minimally Invasive 
Surgical Techniques—Laser, Endothermal, or Endoresection. 
Br J Obstet Gynecol 1997;104;1351–1359 
( ) 
19. Meyer WR, Walsh BW, Grainger DA, Peacock LM, Loffler 
FD, Steege JF. Thermal balloon and rollerball ablation to 
treat menorrhagia: a multicenter comparison. Obstet Gynecol 
1998;92:98–103 
( ) 
20. Jansen FW, Vredevoogd CB, Van Ulzen K, Hermans J, 
Trimbos JB, Trimbos-Kemper TC. Complications of hysteroscopy: 
a prospective multicenter study. Obstet Gynecol 
2000;96:266–270 
( ) 
21. Sowter MC, Singla AA, Lethaby A. Pre-operative endometrial 
thinning agents before hysteroscopic surgery for heavy 
menstrual bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2): 
CD00124 
( ) 
22. Lethaby A, Sheppard S, Cooke I, Farquhar C. Endometrial 
resection and ablation versus hysterectomy for heavy menstrual 
bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;2:CD00329 
(button) 
23. A randomized trial of endometrial ablation versus hysterectomy 
for the treatment of dysfunctional uterine bleeding 
outcome at four years. Aberdeen Endometrial Ablation 
Trials Group. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999;106:360–366 
( ) 
24. Lethaby A, Farquhar C, Sarkis A, Roberts H, Jepson R, 
Barlow D. Hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal 
women: endometrial hyperplasia and irregular 
bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2):CD000402 
(button) 
25. Reindollar RH, Novak M, Tho SP, McDonough PG. Adultonset 
amenorrhea: a study of 262 patients. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1986;155:531–543 
( ) 
26. De Souza MJ, Miller BE, 
Loucks AB, Luciano AA, 
Pescatello LS, Campbell CG, et al. High frequency of luteal 
phase deficiency and anovulation in recreational women 

runners: blunted elevation in follicle-stimulating hormone 
observed during luteal-follicular transition. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:4220–4232 


( ) 
27. Nachtigall LB, Boepple PA, Pralong FP, Crowley WF Jr. 
Adult-onset idiopathic hypogonatropic hypogonadism—a 
treatable form of male infertility. N Engl J Med 1997; 
336:410–415 
( ) 
28. Becker AE, Grinspoon SK, Klibanski A, Herzog 
DB. 
Eating disorders. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1092–1098 
(button) 
29. Drew FL. The epidemiology of secondary amenorrhea. J 
Chronic Dis 1961;14:396–407 
30. Terasawa E. Control of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone 
pulse generation in nonhuman primates. Cell Mol 
Neurobiol 1995;15:141–164 
( ) 
31. Witkin JW, 
O’Sullivan H, Miller R, Ferin M. GnRH 
perikarya in medial basal hypothalamus of pubertal rhesus 
macaque are ensheathed with glia. J Neuroendocrinol 
1997;9:881–885 
( ) 
32. Berga SL, Mortola JF, Girton L, Suh B, Laughlin G, Pham 
P, et al. Neuroendocrine aberrations in women with functional 
hypothalamic amenorrhea. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1989;68:301–308 
( ) 
33. Perkins RB, Hall JE, Martin KA. Neuroendocrine abnormalities 
in hypothalamic amenorrhea: spectrum, stability, 
and response to neurotransmitter modulation. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1905–1911 
( ) 
34. Berga SL, Daniels TL, Giles DE. Women with functional 
hypothalamic amenorrhea but not other forms of anovulation 
display amplified cortisol concentrations. Fertil Steril 
1997;67:1024–1030 
( ) 
35. Van Vugt DA, Piercy J, Farley AE, Reid RL, Rivest S. 
Luteinizing hormone secretion and corticotropin-releasing 
factor gene expression in the paraventricular nucleus of rhesus 
monkeys following cortisol synthesis inhibition. 
Endocrinology 1997;138:2249–2258 
( ) 
36. Lowry DW, Lowry DL, Berga SL, Adelson PD, Roberts 
MM. Secondary amenorrhea due to hydrocephalus treated 
with endoscopic ventriculocisternostomy. Case report. J 
Neurosurg 1996;85:1148–1152 
( ) 
37. McEwen BS. Protective and damaging effects of stress 
mediators. N Engl J Med 1998;338:171–179 
( ) 
38. Martin KA, 
Hall JE, Adams JM, Crowley WF Jr. 
Comparison of exogenous gonadotropins and pulsatile 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone for induction of ovulation 
in hypogonadotropic amenorrhea. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1993;77:125–129 
( ) 
39. van der Spuy ZM, Steer PJ, McCusker M, Steele SJ, Jacobs 
HS. Outcome of pregnancy in underweight women after 
spontaneous and induced ovulation. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 
1988;296:962–965 
( ) 
40. Hergenroeder AC, Smith EO, Shypailo R, Jones LA, Klish 
WJ, Ellis K. Bone mineral changes in young women with 
hypothalamic amenorrhea treated with oral contraceptives, 
medroxyprogesterone, or placebo over 12 months. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1017–1025 
( ) 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

41. Miller KK, Klibanski A. Clinical review 106: amenorrheic 
bone loss. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1775–1783 
(button) 
42. Wildt L, Leyendecker G, Sir-Petermann T, Waibel-Treber S. 
Treatment with naltrexone in hypothalamic ovarian failure: 
induction of ovulation and pregnancy. Hum Reprod 
1993;8:350–358 
( ) 
43. Hirvonen E. Etiology, clinical features, and prognosis in 
secondary amenorrhea. Int J Fertil 1977;22:69–76 
( ) 
44. Lewinthal D, 
Corenblum B, Brooks JH, Taylor PJ. 
Spontaneous return of menstruation in hypothalamic amenorrhea 
following gonadotropin-releasing hormone-induced 
pregnancy. Fertil Steril 1987;47:870–871 
( ) 
45. Paoletti AM, Depau GF, Mais V, Guerriero S, Ajossa S, 
Melis GB. Effectiveness of cabergoline in reducing folliclestimulating 
hormone and prolactin hypersecretion from 
pituitary macroadenoma in an infertile woman. Fertil Steril 
1994;62:882–885 
( ) 
46. Carmina E, Koyama T, Chang L, Stanczyk FZ, Lobo RA. 
Does ethnicity influence the prevalence of adrenal hyperandrogenism 
and insulin resistance in polycystic ovary syndrome? 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1807–1812 
( ) 
47. Knochenhauer ES, Key TJ, Kahsar-Miller M, Waggoner W, 
Boots LR, Azziz R. Prevalence of the polycystic ovary syndrome 
in unselected black and white women of the southeastern 
United States: a prospective study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1998:83:3078–3082 
( ) 
48. Dunaif A. Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome: 
mechanism and implications for pathogenesis. 
Endocr Rev 1997;18:774–800 
( ) 
49. Legro RS, Finegood D, Dunaif A. A fasting glucose to 
insulin ratio is a useful measure of insulin sensitivity in 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1998;83:2694–2698 
( ) 
50. Ibanez L, de Zegher F, Potau N. Anovulation after precocious 
pubarche: early markers and time course in adolescence. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metabol 1999;84:2691–2695 
(button) 
51. Elting MW, Korsen TJ, Rekers-Mombarg LT, Schoemaker 
J. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome gain regular 
menstrual cycles when ageing. Hum Reprod 2000; 
15:24–28 
( ) 
52. Winters SJ, Talbott E, Guzick DS, Zborowski J, McHugh 
KP. Serum testosterone levels decrease in middle age in 
women with the polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril 
2000;73:724–729 
( ) 
53. Fulghesu AM, Villa P, Pavone V, Guido M, Apa R, Caruso 
A, et al. The impact of insulin secretion on the ovarian 
response to exogenous gonadotropins in polycystic ovary 
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82: 644–648 
(button) 
54. Dahlgren E, Friberg LG, Johansson S, Lindstrom B, Oden 
A, Samsioe G, et al. Endometrial carcinoma; ovarian dysfunction—
a risk factor in young women. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol 1991;41:143–150 
( ) 
55. Legro 
RS, Kunselman AR, Dodson WC, Dunaif A. 
Prevalence and predictors of risk for type 2 diabetes melli

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tus and impaired glucose tolerance in polycystic ovary syndrome: 
a prospective, controlled study in 254 affected 
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:165–169 


( ) 
56. Anonymous. American Diabetes Association: clinical practice 
recommendations 1997. Diabetes Care 1997;20 Suppl 
1:S1–70 
( ) 
57. Modan M, Harris MI, Halkin H. Evaluation of WHO and 
NDDG criteria for impaired glucose tolerance. Results 
from two national samples. Diabetes 1989;38:1630–1635 
(button) 
58. Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988. Role of insulin resistance 
in human disease. Diabetes 1988;37:1595–1607 
(button) 
59. Talbott E, Clerici A, Berga SL, Kuller L, Guzick D, Detre 
K, et al. Adverse lipid and coronary heart disease risk profiles 
in young women with polycystic ovary syndrome: 
results of a case-control study. J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51; 
415–422 
( ) 
60. Legro RS, Kunselman AR, Dunaif A. Prevalence and predictors 
of dyslipidemia in women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome. Am J Med 2001;111:607–613 
( ) 
61. Talbott EO, Guzick DS, Sutton-Tyrrell K, McHugh-Pemu 
KP, Zborowski JV, Remsberg KE, et al. Evidence for association 
between polycystic ovary syndrome and premature 
carotid atherosclerosis in middle-aged women. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol 2000;20;2414–2421 
( ) 
62. Waggoner W, Boots LR, Azziz R. Total testosterone and 
DHEAS levels as predictors of androgen-secreting neoplasms: 
a populational study. Gynecol Endocrinol 1999; 
13:394–400 
( ) 
63. Chetkowski RJ, DeFazio J, Shamonki I, Judd HL, Chang 
RJ. The incidence of late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency among hirsute 
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1984;58:595–598 
(button) 
64. Azziz R, Dewailly D, Owerbach D. Clinical review 56: 
Nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia: current concepts. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:810–815 
( ) 
65. New MI, Speiser PW. Genetics of adrenal steroid 21hydroxylase 
deficiency. Endocr Rev 1986;7:331–349 
(button) 
66. Azziz R, Hincapie LA, Knochenhauer ES, Dewailly D, Fox 
L, Boots LR. Screening for 21-hydroxylase-deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia among hyperandrogenic 
women: a prospective study. Fertil Steril 1999;72:915–925 
67. Azziz R, Waggoner WT, Ochoa T, Knochenhauer ES, Boots 
LR. Idiopathic hirsutism: an uncommon cause of hirsutism 
in Alabama. Fertil Steril 1998;70:274–278 
( ) 
68. Azziz R, Ochoa TM, Bradley EL Jr, Potter HD, Boots LR. 
Leuprolide and estrogen versus oral contraceptive pills for 
the treatment of hirsutism: a prospective randomized study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:3406–3411 
( ) 
69. Heiner JS, Greendale GA, Kawakami AK, Lapolt PS, 
Fisher M, Young D, et al. Comparison of a gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonist and a low dose oral contraceptive 
given alone or together in the treatment of hirsutism. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:3412–3418 
( ) 
70. Elkind-Hirsch KE, Anania C, Mack M, 
Malinak R. 
Combination gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist and 
oral contraceptive therapy improves treatment of hirsute 
women with ovarian hyperandrogenism. Fertil Steril 
1995;63:970–978 


( ) 
71. Carr BR, Breslau NA, Givens C, Byrd W, Barnett-Hamm C, 
Marshburn PB. Oral contraceptive pills, gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonists, or use in combination for treatment 
of hirsutism: a clinical research center study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:1169–1178 
( ) 
72. Pasqual R, Antenucci D, Casimirri F, et al. Clinical and hormonal 
characteristics of obese amenorrheic hypoandrogenic 
women before and after weight loss. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1989;68:173–179 
73. Moghetti P, Tosi F, Tosti A, Negri C, Misciali C, Perrone F, 
et al. Comparison of spironolactone, flutamide, and finasteride 
efficacy in the treatment of hirsutism: a randomized, 
double blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2000;85:89–94 
( ) 
74. Wong IL, Morris RS, Chang L, Spahn MA, Stanczyk FZ, 
Lobo RA. A prospective randomized trial comparing finasteride 
to spironolactone in the treatment of hirsute women. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:233–238 
( ) 
75. Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Hirsch J. Obesity. N Engl J Med 
1997;337:396–407 
( ) 
76. Okajima T, 
Koyanagi T, Goto M, Kato K. [Hormonal 
abnormalities were improved by weight loss using very low 
calorie diet in a patient with polycystic ovary syndrome]. 
[Japanese]. Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi 1994;85:263–266 
( ) 
77. Jaatinen TA, Anttila L, Erkkola R, Koskinen P, Laippala P, 
Ruutiainen K. Hormonal responses to physical exercise in 
patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Fertil Steril 
1993;60:262–267 
( ) 
78. Clark AM, Ledger W, Galletly C, Tomlinson L, Blaney F, 
Wang X, et al. Weight loss results in significant improvement 
in pregnancy and ovulation rates in anovulatory obese 
women. Hum Reprod 1995;10:2705–2712 
( ) 
79. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Evans WS, Pasquali R. Effects 
of metformin on spontaneous and clomiphene-induced ovulation 
in the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1998;338:1876–1880 
( ) 
80. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Reamer P, Gunn RD, Allan G. 
Ovulatory and metabolic effects of D-chiro-inositol in the 
polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
1314–1320 


(button) 
( ) 
81. Moghetti P, Castello R, Negri C, Tosi F, Perrone F, Caputo 
M, et al. Metformin effects on clinical features, endocrine 
and metabolic profiles, and insulin sensitivity in polycystic 
ovary syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
6-month trial, followed by open, long-term clinical 
evaluation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:139–146 
( ) 
82. Azziz R, Ehrmann D, Legro RS, Whitcomb RW, Hanley R, 
Fereshetian AG, et al. Troglitazone improves ovulation and 
hirsutism in the polycystic ovary syndrome: a multicenter, 
double blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2001;86:1626–1632 
( ) 
83. Farquhar C, 
Vandekerckhove P, Lilford R. Laparoscopic. 
“drilling” by diathermy or laser for ovulation induction 

in anovulatory polycystic ovary syndrome. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2000;4:CD001122 


( ) 
84. Rebar RW, Connolly HV. Clinical features of young women 
with hypergonadotropic amenorrhea. Fertil Steril 
1990;53:804–810 
( ) 
85. Nelson LM, Anasti JN, Kimzey LM, Defensor RA, Lipetz 
KJ, White BJ, et al. Development of luteinized graafian follicles 
in patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous 
premature ovarian failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1994;79:1470–1475 
( ) 
86. Bione S, Sala C, Manzini C, Arrigo G, Zuffardi O, Banfi S, 
et al. A human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster 
diaphanous gene is disrupted in a patient with premature 
ovarian failure: evidence for conserved function in oogenesis 
and implications for human sterility. Am J Hum Genet 
1998;62(3):533–541 
( ) 
87. Crisponi L, Deiana M, Loi A, Chiappe F, Uda M, Amati P, 
et al. The putative forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is 
mutated in blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus 
syndrome. Nat Genet 2001;27:159–166 
( ) 
88. Conway GS, Hettiarachchi S, Murray A, Jacobs PA. Fragile 
X premutations in familial premature ovarian failure. 
Lancet 1995;346:309–310 
( ) 
89. Aittomaki K, 
Lucena JL, Pakarinen P, Sistonen P, 
Tapanainen J, Gromoll J, et al. Mutation in the follicle-stimulating 
hormone receptor gene causes hereditary hypergonadotropic 
ovarian failure. Cell 1995;82:959–968 
( ) 
90. Layman LC, Amde S, Cohen DP, Jin M, Xie J. The Finnish 
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene mutation is rare 
in North American women with 46,XX ovarian failure. 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Fertil Steril 1998;69:300–302 


( ) 
91. Beau I, Touraine P, Meduri G, Gougeon A, Desroches A, 
Matuchansky C, et al. A novel phenotype related to partial 
loss of function mutations of the follicle stimulating hormone 
receptor. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1352–1359 
( ) 
92. Kalantaridou SN, Braddock DT, Patronas NJ, Nelson LM. 
Treatment of autoimmune premature ovarian failure. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1777–1782 
( ) 
93. Anasti JN, Flack MR, Froehlich J, Nelson LM. The use of 
human recombinant gonadotropin receptors to search for 
immunoglobulin G-mediated premature ovarian failure. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:824–828 
( ) 
94. Sugimoto AK, Hodsman AB, 
Nisker JA. Long-term 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist with standard 
postmenopausal estrogen replacement failed to prevent vertebral 
bone loss in premenopausal women. Fertil Steril 
1993;60:672–674 
( ) 
95. Kim TJ, Anasti JN, Flack MR, Kimzey LM, Defensor RA, 
Nelson LM. Routine endocrine screening for patients with 
karyotypically normal spontaneous premature ovarian failure. 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:777–779 
( ) 
96. Bakalov 
V, Kalantaridou SN, Godoy H, Vanderhoof V, 
Papanicolaou DA, Bondy CA, et al. Anti-adrenal antibodies 
are an effective screenting test for autoimmune adrenal 
insufficiency in young women with premature ovarian failure. 
The Endocrine Society’s 82nd Annual Meeting, June 
2000, Toronto, Canada 2001 Ref Type: Abstract 

100 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Other Endocrine Problems 


THYROID DISEASES 

Women commonly have thyroid disorders, as well as 
potentially misleading clinical and laboratory findings 
that falsely suggest thyroid diseases. There also are 
important interrelationships between thyroid dysfunction 
and female reproductive disorders. Consequently, knowing 
how to diagnose and manage thyroid diseases is vital 
for obstetricians and gynecologists. 

Clinical Physiology 

Thyroid hormones act in target tissues by binding to 
nuclear receptors, which ultimately induce changes in 
gene expression. Triiodothyronine (T3) binds the receptor 
with higher affinity and is the more biologically active 
thyroid hormone; thyroxine (T4), the main product of the 
thyroid gland, provides a stable hormonal reservoir for 
extrathyroidal conversation to T3. Pituitary TSH is the 
principal regulator of thyroid growth and hormone production. 
In turn, TSH is regulated by hypothalamic thyrotropin-
releasing hormone and thyroid hormone 
negative feedback. Thyroid-stimulating hormone stimulates 
thyroid cells by binding to a membrane receptor, 
which acts via the cAMP second messenger system. 
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins that bind this 
same receptor are the cause of hyperthyroid Graves’ disease. 
Activating mutations of the TSH receptor itself can 
cause toxic adenomas. 

More than 99% of circulating T4 and T3 is bound by 
plasma proteins, predominantly thyroxine-binding globulin. 
Changes in levels of these plasma proteins alter the 
serum total, but not the free, thyroid hormone levels; 
therefore, these changes do not affect patients’ clinical 
status. In women, an excess of thyroxine-binding globulin 
is common because estrogens (in oral contraceptives, 
in postmenopausal replacement therapy, and during pregnancy) 
increase hepatic glycosylation of thyroxine-binding 
globulin, decreasing its rate of clearance and 
elevating its plasma concentration. 

Thyroid function tests may be misleading in women 
with systemic illnesses or in women taking certain drugs. 
Conversion of T4 to T3 is decreased in a variety of illnesses 
(eg, sepsis, malignancy, and hyperemesis gravidarum) 
and with the administration of propranolol and 
amiodarone. Severe nonthyroidal illnesses also can cause 
low serum T4 and TSH concentrations. In healthy women, 
puberty, menopause, and aging do not alter thyroid hormone 
concentrations. At the end of the first trimester of 
pregnancy, levels of serum TSH are subnormal in approximately 
18% of normal women, with 9% being subnormal 
but detectable and an additional 9% being 

undetectable. The timing of the subnormal TSH level 
coincides with peak serum hCG concentrations, which 
acts as a thyroid stimulator because of its molecular similarity 
to TSH. This suggests a likely physiologic role for 
hCG in stimulating thyroidal hormone production in 
early pregnancy. The stimulatory effects of hCG are magnified 
in patients with hyperemesis gravidarum, as discussed 
later. 

Fetal thyroid development begins late in the first 
trimester and is independent of the mother (1). There is 
minimal transplacental passage of maternal thyroid hormones, 
but they are probably important in fetal brain 
development before the appearance of the fetal thyroid 
gland. Maternal immunoglobulins causing autoimmune 
thyroid diseases cross the placenta and can cause transient 
thyroid dysfunction in the fetus and neonate. The 
fetus also is exposed to the drugs commonly used to treat 
hyperthyroidism. 

Hypothyroidism 

Overt hypothyroidism occurs in 2% of women; mild 
hypothyroidism (also called subclinical hypothyroidism), 
which is evidenced only by an elevated serum TSH level, 
affects 5–15% of women older than 40 years. 
Furthermore, transient hypothyroidism affects approximately 
5% of postpartum women. 

CAUSES 

The principal cause of hypothyroidism is autoimmune 
(Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis. Although there is a familial 
predisposition, the specific genetic and environmental 
factors that trigger this condition are unknown. 
Autoimmune thyroiditis is increasingly prevalent with 
age, affecting approximately 15% of women older than 
65 years. Most have mild hypothyroidism, which can 
cause mild symptoms and hypercholesterolemia that can 
be reversed by administration of thyroid hormone. 

Patients with underlying autoimmune thyroiditis usually 
have a diffuse, firm, and painless goiter; however, the 
gland may be nonpalpable in the atrophic variant of the 
disease. Autoimmune thyroiditis may be associated with 
other endocrine disorders (eg, type 1 diabetes, primary 
ovarian failure, adrenal insufficiency, or hypoparathyroidism) 
and nonendocrine diseases (eg, vitiligo or pernicious 
anemia). 

Hypothyroidism also occurs frequently after surgical 
or radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism. 
Thyroid gland irradiation in the course of treatment for 
head and neck tumors also can cause hypothyroidism. All 
patients who have received these therapies should be 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 101 

monitored yearly for the possible development of 
hypothyroidism. Thyroid gland inflammation causes 
spontaneously resolving hypothyroidism in postpartum 
thyroiditis and subacute thyroiditis. Hypothyroidism is 
rarely the result of pituitary or hypothalamic diseases 
causing TSH deficiency. Finally, although congenital 
hypothyroidism is a rare disorder, affecting one in 4,000 
infants, it is vital that obstetricians recognize its clinical 
features (Fig. 39). 

CLINICAL FEATURES 

Manifestations of hypothyroidism include fatigue, lethargy, 
cold intolerance, dry skin, hair loss, constipation, 
myalgia, carpal tunnel syndrome, and weight gain, which 
is typically less than 5–10 kg (Box H). Common neuropsychiatric 
symptoms include impaired memory, depression, 
irritability, and dementia. Many of the classic 
symptoms and signs are difficult to distinguish from complaints 
associated with normal pregnancy. Menstrual dysfunction 
is common; menorrhagia is most frequent, but 
amenorrhea also occurs. Anovulation related to mild 
hypothyroidism may cause infertility, but thyroid hormone 
therapy is not useful for anovulatory euthyroid 
women. Hypothyroidism does not cause PMS, and thyroid 
hormone therapy for PMS is no more effective than 
placebo. Hypothyroidism in childhood can cause precocious 
or delayed puberty. Hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea 
are unusual manifestations of hypothyroidism. In 
patients with amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and modest 

hyperprolactinemia, it is vital to distinguish primary 
hypothyroidism from a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma 
by measuring the serum TSH level. 

DIAGNOSIS 

Clinical diagnosis of hypothyroidism requires laboratory 
confirmation. Hypothyroidism can be classified as primary, 
in which thyroid function is directly impaired, or 
secondary, in which hypothalamic–pituitary dysfunction is 
the fundamental cause. Overt primary hypothyroidism is 
characterized by a low serum free T4 or free T4 index and 
an elevated serum TSH level. During pregnancy, the serum 
total T4 level may remain normal because of the increased 
level of thyroxine-binding globulin; accurate diagnosis of 
primary hypothyroidism can be ensured by serum TSH 
measurement. Diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis can be 
confirmed by the presence of serum antithyroid peroxidase 
antibodies (formerly called antimicrosomal antibodies). 
For unclear reasons, circulating antithyroid antibodies may 
be associated with recurrent abortion. 

THERAPY 

Levothyroxine is the treatment of choice for hypothyroidism 
(2). Its conversion to T3 provides a stable hormonal 
milieu. Levothyroxine is well absorbed, unless 
there is coadministration of ferrous sulfate, calcium carbonate, 
cholestyramine, aluminum hydroxide, or sucralfate. 
The levothyroxine dose requirement is weight 


n FIG. 39. Congenital hypothyroidism. (Fisher DA. The thyroid. In: Kaplan SA, ed. Clinical pediatric endocrinology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:101) 

102 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX H 
Common Symptoms and Signs of 
Hypothyroidism and Hyperthyroidism 


Hypothyroidism 

Fatigue 
Somnolence 
Weight gain 
Cold intolerance 
Dry skin, brittle nails, hair loss 
Constipation 
Muscle cramps, stiffness, and aching 
Impaired memory 
Depression 
Dementia, delirium, and coma 


Hyperthyroidism 

Fatigue 
Insomnia 
Weight loss (although 25% gain weight) 
Heat intolerance and increase sweating 
Hair loss 
Hyperdefecation 
Muscle weakness, proximal 
Palpitations 
Dyspnea and atypical chest pain 
Anxiety 
Tremor 


related (approximately 1.8 mg/kg), decreases in elderly 
women, and should be adjusted to maintain the serum 
TSH within the lower one half of the normal range. In 
approximately one half of pregnant women, the levothyroxine 
dose requirement is increased by 25–100% (3). 
Consequently, serum TSH levels should be reassessed 
every 4–6 weeks during the pregnancy. Postpartum, the 
prepregnancy levothyroxine dose usually can be resumed. 
An increased thyroxine dose requirement has also recently 
been shown to occur in one third of postmenopausal 
women receiving estrogen (4). 

Treatment of mild hypothyroidism may be justified 
under five circumstances: 

• 
The presence of antithyroid antibodies, which 
predict progression to overt hypothyroidism 
• 
Symptoms consistent with mild hypothyroidism 
• 
An elevated serum LDL cholesterol concentration, 
which may improve with levothyroxine therapy 
• 
Significant goiter 
• 
Pregnancy, because thyroid hormone deficiency 
has been associated with increased fetal loss and 
subtly impaired subsequent childhood neuropsychologic 
development. 
Administration of excessive levothyroxine doses 
should be avoided. Even mild T4 excess, which is recognizable 
solely by a suppressed serum TSH, has been associated 
with bone loss and atrial fibrillation, particularly in 
older women. In women with known or suspected 
ischemic heart disease, which can be exacerbated by 
levothyroxine therapy, a low levothyroxine dosage should 
be used initially and the dose increased slowly. 

Hyperthyroidism 

Hyperthyroidism affects 2% of women during their lifetime. 
It often affects women during their childbearing 
years. 

CAUSES 

Graves’ disease, by far the most common underlying disorder 
in hyperthyroidism, is caused by immunoglobulins 
that bind to and activate the TSH receptor. In addition to 
hyperthyroidism, Graves’ disease is associated with 
orbital inflammation and a characteristic dermopathy 
(pretibial myxedema; Fig. 40). The environmental factors 
that trigger the onset of Graves’ disease in genetically 
susceptible women are as yet unidentified, but stress and 
cigarette smoking may be risk factors. Graves’ disease 
often develops in the postpartum period. 

Less commonly, hyperthyroidism may result from 
autonomously functioning benign thyroid neoplasia: 
toxic adenoma and toxic multinodular goiter. Transient 
thyrotoxicosis also results from the unregulated glandular 
release of thyroid hormone in subacute (painful) thyroiditis 
and in postpartum (painless, silent, or lymphocytic) 
thyroiditis. Rarely, thyroid gland overactivity is caused by 
a choriocarcinoma that secretes hCG or a pituitary 
adenoma that secretes TSH. Ovarian teratomas (struma 
ovarii) can produce thyroid hormones ectopically. 
Thyrotoxicosis also is caused by the iatrogenic prescription 
or factitious ingestion of T4 or T3, a possibility to be considered, 
particularly in patients with eating disorders. 

CLINICAL FEATURES 

Classically, thyrotoxic patients report fatigue, heat intolerance, 
palpitations, dyspnea, nervousness, and weight 
loss, although as many as one fourth of younger women 
actually gain weight because of increased appetite. 
Patients with thyrotoxicosis may present with vomiting, 
particularly pregnant women, in whom the vomiting may 
be confused with hyperemesis gravidarum. On examination, 
tachycardia; lid lag; tremor; proximal muscle weakness; 
and warm, moist skin are often present. Elderly 
women may lack these typical symptoms and signs, and 


n FIG. 40. Neonatal Graves’ disease. (LaFranchi S. 
Disorders of the thyroid. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, 
Jenson HB, eds. Nelson textbook of pediatrics. 16th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2000;1711) 
they present with unexplained weight loss, atrial fibrillation, 
or angina pectoris. Hyperthyroidism can cause or 
exacerbate osteoporosis. Most patients with hyperthyroidism 
have regular menses with lighter flow. In a recent 
series of 214 women with thyrotoxicosis, 78% had regular 
menses, and 22% had irregular cycles (5). No patient 
was amenorrheic, an observation that differs from older 
data in which amenorrhea was reported in as many as 
10% of patients. Anovulatory menses and associated 
infertility are common and are related to the severity of 
the thyroid hyperfunction. Goiter is present in most 
younger women with Graves’ disease, but it is absent in 
50% of affected older patients. 

Ophthalmologic signs of Graves’ disease, including lid 
retraction, periorbital edema, and proptosis, occur in 
fewer than one third of women with hyperthyroidism; 
more severe ophthalmologic complications (eg, corneal 
ulceration, extraocular muscle dysfunction, and vision 
loss) occur in fewer than 5%. Rarely, orbital inflammation 
(euthyroid Graves’ disease) can occur in patients 
without hyperthyroidism. 

Toxic nodular goiter is associated with inhomogeneous 
gland enlargement. In subacute thyroiditis, the 
gland is tender, hard, and enlarged. In postpartum or painless 
thyroiditis, it is minimally enlarged and nontender. 

DIAGNOSIS 

Most patients with thyrotoxicosis have elevated total and 
free T4 and T3 concentrations. However, as has been discussed, 
high serum total T4 or T3 levels are not pathognomonic 
of hyperthyroidism. In individuals with 
euthyroidism, elevations of thyroid hormone concentrations 
can be caused by increased protein binding, 
decreased peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, or, rarely, 
congenital tissue resistance to thyroid hormones. 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 103 

In all common forms of thyrotoxicosis, the serum TSH 
concentration is undetectable or very low in sensitive 
assays (ie, assays with detection limits of £ 0.1 mU/L). 
Consequently, serum TSH measurement is an extremely 
accurate way to exclude the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. 
Patients with a low TSH concentration despite 
normal free T4 and T3 concentrations may have subclinical 
hyperthyroidism, which is associated with increased 
risk of osteoporosis and atrial tachyarrhythmias in older 
postmenopausal women. 

It is essential to differentiate accurately among the causes 
of hyperthyroidism, because different forms of treatment 
often are indicated. The radioiodine uptake 
measurement and scanning are useful in the differential 
diagnosis of chemically established hyperthyroidism. 
There is homogeneously increased uptake in patients with 
Graves’ disease, heterogeneous tracer distribution in 
patients with toxic nodular goiter, and diminished radioisotope 
concentrations in the thyroid glands of patients with 
the various forms of thyroiditis and in medication-induced 
thyrotoxicosis. In patients with Graves’ disease, serum 
immunoglobulins that mimic TSH-mediated adenylate 
cyclase activation (thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins) 
or compete with TSH for receptor binding (thyroid-binding 
inhibitory immunoglobulins) can be detected but seldom 
are required for diagnosis. High levels of maternal thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulins predict a greater likelihood 
of neonatal hyperthyroidism in pregnant women 
with Graves’ disease, including those who may themselves 
be euthyroid after previous thyroid ablation therapy. 
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is increased in 
patients with subacute thyroiditis. The serum TSH level is 
inappropriately elevated or normal in rare patients with 
TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas. 

THERAPY 

The treatments of choice for women with hyperthyroid 
Graves’ disease are widely considered to be either the 
antithyroid medications (methimazole or propylthiouracil) 
or radioiodine (6). The antithyroid drugs block 
thyroid hormone biosynthesis and may have additional 
immunosuppressive effects. Although propylthiouracil 
also partially inhibits conversion of extrathyroidal T4 to 
T3, this benefit is outweighed in most patients by the 
longer half-life of methimazole, a drug that can be administered 
in a single daily dose. Euthyroidism is typically 
restored in 3–10 weeks, and treatment usually is continued 
for 6–24 months. Although continued antithyroid 
medication is effective in controlling hyperthyroidism, 
remissions are sustained in less than one half of patients 
after a course of drug therapy. All patients should be cautioned 
about the drugs’ minor adverse effects (eg, fever, 
rash, and arthralgias), which are infrequent (5%), and 
particularly about major drug toxicities (eg, hepatitis, 
vasculitis, and agranulocytosis), which are rare 
(0.2–0.5%). If a remission is achieved, lifelong monitor



104 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ing is warranted. Relapses are common, particularly in 
the postpartum period. 

Iodine I131 therapy leads to a permanent cure of hyperthyroidism 
in 75% of patients within 2–6 months. The 
principal drawback to radioactive iodine therapy is the 
high incidence of postablative hypothyroidism, which 
occurs in at least 50% of patients within 1 year and continues 
to develop at a rate of 3% per year. Obviously, 
radioactive iodine never should be given to a woman during 
pregnancy or nursing. However, large retrospective 
surveys have failed to demonstrate infertility or any 
increased carcinogenic or teratogenic risk for the children 
of women previously treated with radioactive iodine, 
regardless of age at treatment. The estimated ovarian 
radiation in the course of radioactive iodine therapy for 
hyperthyroidism is 0.2 rad/mCi administered or approximately 
1–2 rad (0.01 Gy) total, which is similar to the 
dose in widely used diagnostic procedures (eg, barium 
enema with fluoroscopy and hysterosalpingography). The 
radioiodine will have been excreted or decayed within 1 
month, but pregnancy probably should be avoided for 4–6 
months after radioiodine therapy, until most patients have 
become euthyroid or are receiving T4 replacement therapy. 
Because hyperthyroidism may be temporarily exacerbated 
by radioactive iodine therapy, pretreatment with 
methimazole is advisable in some individuals with severe 
thyrotoxicosis, older patients, and those with intrinsic 
cardiopulmonary disease. 

b -Adrenergic blocking drugs are a useful adjunctive 
therapy for control of sympathomimetic symptoms in 
patients with hyperthyroidism. b -Blockers are usually the 
sole treatment for patients with spontaneously resolving 
hyperthyroidism caused by thyroiditis. Patients with subacute 
thyroiditis also are treated with aspirin or other nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs for relief of thyroid 
pain. In 20% of patients, a 2–8-week course of glucocorticoids 
is required. In the rare instance of a woman with 
thyrotoxicosis resulting from primary trophoblastic, ovarian, 
or pituitary disease, surgical excision of the responsible 
tumor is indicated. 

Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy 

Hyperthyroidism affects 1 of every 1,000 pregnant 
women. The treatment of thyroid disease in pregnancy is 
straightforward: achieve and maintain maternal euthyroidism. 
Uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis is associated with 
high rates of fetal loss and possible malformations. 
Consequently, prompt treatment is essential despite any 
minimal risks associated with maternal antithyroid drug 
and b -blocker therapy. Radioactive iodine scanning and 
treatment are absolutely contraindicated in women who 
are pregnant or breastfeeding. Antithyroid medication is 
the treatment of choice. Propylthiouracil is preferred 
because it has no known teratogenic effects (7, 8). The 
notion that it crosses the placenta less readily than methimazole, 
however, has been questioned recently. Although 

methimazole has been anecdotally associated with a con-
genital scalp anomaly, aplasia cutis, as well as more 
severe fetal anomalies, it also has been used widely and 
safely in pregnant women. The lowest dose of drug 
required to maintain the free T4 concentration at the upper 
limit of normal should be used. As pregnancy progresses, 
the activity of Graves’ disease often wanes, and the 
antithyroid medication dose can be reduced or discontinued. 
Long-term follow-up studies have documented that 
children exposed to antithyroid drugs in utero grow and 
develop normally. Concurrent levothyroxine therapy will 
not protect the fetus from hypothyroidism, because 
levothyroxine crosses the placenta poorly. Following 
delivery, antithyroid drugs are safe to use in lactation. 

b -Blockers may be used for short-term relief of symptoms, 
although neonatal bradycardia and hypoglycemia 
can occur when these agents are used at the time of delivery. 
Thyroid surgery is indicated in pregnant women only 
if they have a major adverse effect from an antithyroid 
drug or do not follow instructions for therapy. 

Neonates with Graves’ disease have failure to thrive, 
irritability, tachycardia, goiter, heart failure, and craniosynostosis 
(see Fig. 40). However, neonatal thyrotoxicosis 
occurs in only 1% of infants of mothers with Graves’ 
disease. If the mother received antithyroid medication 
during the pregnancy, the child may not develop hyperthyroidism 
until 7–10 days postpartum. Antithyroid drug 
therapy should be continued for 6–8 weeks, until the passively 
transferred antibodies have been cleared from the 
infant’s circulation. 

Some women with hyperemesis gravidarum develop 
concomitant mild biochemical hyperthyroidism (9). This 
phenomenon is thought to be due to the extremely high 
serum levels of hCG that often are observed in hyperemesis. 
Serum free T4 levels correlate with serum hCG 
concentrations, as well as the severity of nausea and vomiting. 
Although more than half the patients with so-called 
gestational thyrotoxicosis have suppressed serum TSH 
levels and elevated free T4 levels, they rarely display the 
clinical features of hyperthyroidism, including goiter and 
eye findings. In general, the hyperthyroidism resolves 
without specific therapy as the hyperemesis wanes, usually 
by 20 weeks of gestation. If it persists beyond this 
point, the patient probably has true thyrotoxicosis due to 
mild Graves’ disease and should be treated with antithyroid 
drugs. 

Postpartum Thyroid Disease 

A spectrum of autoimmune thyroid dysfunction is common 
during the postpartum period, occurring in approximately 
5–10% of women (10). The classic sequence of 
events is transient hyperthyroidism followed by transient 
hypothyroidism, with the onset 1–8 months after delivery 
and each phase lasting 2–12 weeks. Other common patterns 
include transient hyperthyroidism (due either to 
Graves’ disease or transient hyperthyroidism with low 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 105 

radioiodine uptake) or transient hypothyroidism alone. 
When patients present with postpartum hyperthyroidism, 
it may be difficult to distinguish postpartum thyroiditis 
from recurrent or new-onset Graves’ disease. The thyroid 
uptake of radioiodine is an important diagnostic tool, 
because it is elevated in Graves’ disease and low in postpartum 
thyroiditis. Although this test is contraindicated in 
women who are breastfeeding, it can be performed safely 
with iodine I123 or technetium Tc99m pertechnetate if 
breastfeeding is suspended for several days until radioactivity 
above the background level is no longer detectable 
in the breast milk. The presence of orbital involvement or 
serum anti-TSH receptor antibodies also favors the diagnosis 
of Graves’ disease. 

Most women with postpartum thyroiditis have detected 
antimicrosomal antibodies before pregnancy or in the 
first trimester, but it has not been shown to be cost-effective 
to screen all pregnant women for the presence of 
these antibodies. Because 25% of women with type 1 diabetes 
develop postpartum thyroiditis (11), screening this 
patient population does seem to be indicated. Such 
screening should be performed either in the first trimester 
or at the 6-week postpartum visit. Women with previous 
episodes of postpartum thyroiditis are likely to have 
recurrences after subsequent pregnancies. 

Women with postpartum transient hypothyroidism 
have higher incidences of fatigue and depression than 
women with euthyroidism. These symptoms may be ame


liorated with thyroid replacement therapy. If thyroid 
replacement treatment is instituted, it should be discontinued 
after approximately 12–18 months to assess 
whether recovery of endogenous thyroid function has 
occurred. Long-term follow-up studies have documented 
that women with postpartum thyroid dysfunction have a 
25% chance of developing permanent hypothyroidism. 

ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS 
Adrenal Structure: Function and 
Development 

The adrenal glands are paired, suprarenal organs that consist 
of two distinct regions: the cortex and the medulla. 
The cortex is divided into three zones, each with unique 
steroid products. The outermost zone, the zona glomerulosa 
(15% of the cortex), is under the control of the 
renin–angiotensin system and secretes the mineralocorticoid 
aldosterone. The middle zone, the zona fasciculata 
(75% of the cortex), is under the control of corticotropin 
and secretes the corticosteroid cortisol. The inner zone, the 
zona reticularis (10% of the cortex), secretes the androgen 
DHEAS. The medulla is part of the sympathetic nerve system 
and produces epinephrine (Fig. 41). 

The cortex is derived from the coelomic cavity from 
cells adjacent to the urogenital ridge. At 2 months of gestation, 
the cortex is invaded by neuroectodermal cells that 


n FIG 41. Histology of the adrenal gland. The adrenal gland consists of the cortex and the medulla. The cortex is divided into 
three zones, according to the type and arrangement of cells. These are designated the zona glomerulosa (ZG), the zona fasciculata 
(ZF), and the zona reticularis (ZR). Abbreviations: BV indicates blood vessels; Cap, capsule. (Reith EJ, Ross MH, eds. 
Atlas of descriptive histology. 2nd ed. New York: Harper and Row, 1977:213) 

106 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

will develop into the medulla. The fetal adrenal cortex 
develops normally in anencephalic fetuses up to 15 weeks 
of gestation (12). After 15 weeks of gestation, further 
development of the adrenal cortex is under the control of 
corticotropin and IGF-II (13). In the second trimester, the 
adrenal gland grows into an organ larger than the kidney 
and has a prominent inner, fetal zone that secretes large 
amounts of DHEAS. After birth, the fetal zone regresses 
and is gone by 1 year of age. Levels of DHEAS are high 
in cord blood, fall rapidly after birth, and remain low until 
the onset of adrenarche. For girls, adrenarche begins at 
approximately age 8 years, and DHEAS secretion reaches 
a peak at approximately 20 years of age. Levels of 
DHEAS then fall throughout the remainder of life, reaching 
a nadir between ages 60 years and 80 years 
(adrenopause) (Fig. 42) (14). 

Adrenal Steroid Secretion 

Cholesterol is the substrate for the synthesis of all steroid 
hormones. The cells in the adrenal cortex can obtain 
cholesterol from circulating LDL cholesterol, circulating 
HDL cholesterol, or de novo synthesis of cholesterol 
from acetate. Cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone 
by cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme. Pregnenolone 
is converted to 17-hydroxypregnenolone and then DHEA 
by the 17-hydroxylase–17,20-lyase enzyme. Pregnenolone 
can be converted to aldosterone by the sequential 
action of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase, 
21-hydroxylase, 11-hydroxylase, and aldosterone syn


n FIG. 42. Concentrations of serum dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate (DHEAS) as a function of age in females and 
males. Values are high in cord blood; fall rapidly immediately 
after birth, in the first month of life; and remain low until the 
onset of adrenarche. (Miller WL, Styne DM. Female puberty 
and its disorders. In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. 
Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, 
and clinical management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders, 1999:391) 
thetase. 17-Hydroxypregnenolone is converted to cortisol 
by the sequential action of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-
isomerase, 21-hydroxylase, and 11-hydroxylase. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone is converted to androstenedione 
by the 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase and to 
DHEAS by a sulfokinase (Fig. 43). 

Adrenal Steroid Pharmacology and 
Treatment 

The daily secretion of cortisol is approximately 20 mg. 
Under maximal stress, the adrenal gland can increase the 
daily production of cortisol to 300 mg. Corticosteroids 
can be chemically synthesized to enhance either corticosteroid 
properties (antiinflammatory, regulation of central 
metabolism) or mineralocorticoid properties (electrolyte 
metabolism). The relative potencies of five commonly 
used corticosteroids are presented in Table 6. High-dose 
corticosteroid treatment may be associated with 1) 
cushingoid features, including weight gain, central obesity, 
moon facies, and abdominal striae; 2) osteoporosis; 3) 
glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus; 4) an increased 
risk of infections; and 5) psychiatric disorders, including 
psychosis. 

Corticosteroids at doses equivalent to 7.5 mg of prednisone 
daily or greater are known to induce osteoporosis 
in women (15). Women on long-term corticosteroid treatment 
should have their bone mineral density measured by 
a technique such as dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. 
The administration of alendronate at doses of 5 mg (for 
euestrogenic women) and 10 mg (for hypoestrogenic 
women) is approved for the prevention and treatment 
of corticosteroid–induced osteopenia and osteoporosis 
(16). 

Adrenal Androgen Excess 

The most common causes of adrenal androgen excess are 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency), 
adrenal adenomas, and adrenal carcinomas. Adrenal 
carcinomas and adenomas that secrete androgens typically 
are accompanied by virilization and can be diagnosed 
with a combination of measurement of blood androgen 
levels (testosterone, DHEA, and DHEAS) and imaging of 
the adrenal glands. 

Mutations in the genes that code for the 21-hydroxylase 
and 11-hydroxylase enzymes can be associated with 
hyperandrogenism and menstrual irregularity. Mutations 
in the 21-hydroxylase enzyme are far more common than 
mutations in the 11-hydroxylase enzyme; thus, the spectrum 
of disease associated with 21-hydroxylase mutations 
will be covered in greater depth. Pituitary 
corticotropin secretion stimulates the conversion of 
cholesterol to cortisol. Cortisol exerts negative feedback 
on the hypothalamus and pituitary to suppress corticotropin 
secretion. Mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene 
can result in decreased activity of the enzyme step that 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 107 
COLUMN 1 COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 
Mineralocorticoids Glucocorticoids Sex Steroids 

Dehydroepiandrosterone17-HydroxypregnenoloneCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OProgesteronePregnenoloneCholesterolHOHOHOO12323232OOOHOHOAndostenedione17a-HydroxyprogesteroneHOO
4
4
CH3-OH

CH3-OH 


C=O

C=O 



Deoxycortisol

Deoxycorticosterone 



OH 


O

O 


5
CH2-OH 


5
CH2-OH 
C=O 
C=O 
Cortisol 


HO 


Corticosterone 



OH 


HO 


6
OO 



Aldosterone 


n FIG. 43. Steroid synthesis in the adrenal gland. Enzyme 1: cholesterol side-chain cleavage. Enzyme 2: 17-hydroxylase–17,20lyase. 
Enzyme 3: 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase. Enzyme 4: 21-hydroxylase. Enzyme 5: 11-hydroxylase. Enzyme 6: 
aldosterone synthetase. Column 1 leads to the production of mineralocorticoids. Column 2 leads to the production of corticosteroids. 
Column 3 leads to the production of the adrenal androgens. 

108 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 6. Commonly Used Corticosteroids 
Relative Relative 
U.S. Pharmacopeia Approximate Antiinflammatory Mineralocorticoid 
Name Structure Equivalent Dose (mg) Potency Potency 

Hydrocortisone Cortisol 30 1.0 1.0 
Cortisone 11-Keto-cortisol 25 0.8 0.8 
Prednisone Delta-1-cortisone 7.5 3.0 0.8 
Dexamethasone 9-Fluoro-16-alpha-methyl 

prednisolone 0.5 20 0 
Betamethasone 9-Fluoro-16-beta-methyl 

prednisolone 0.5 20 0 

converts 17a -hydroxyprogesterone to deoxycortisol. This 
results in a decrease in cortisol production, decreased 
negative feedback to the hypothalamic–pituitary unit, and 
increased corticotropin secretion, which drives more 
cholesterol into the steroidogenic pathway (Fig. 44). 
Although more cholesterol is driven into the steroidogenic 
pathway by corticotropin, the steroids cannot be 
converted to cortisol efficiently because of the relative 
block in 21-hydroxylase. This leads to a marked accumulation 
of the substrate for the 21-hydroxylase, 17a hydroxyprogesterone, 
and a relative overproduction of 
DHEA and androstenedione, two adrenal androgens. If 
the defect in the 21-hydroxylase gene is severe (eg, gene 
deletion), adrenal androgen overproduction will be 
markedly elevated in utero, and the phenotype will be 
classic adrenal hyperplasia (clitoromegaly, labioscrotal 
fusion, abnormal course of the urethra, and virilization) 
(Fig. 45) with an external structure similar to male genitalia 
(Fig. 46). If the defect in the 21-hydroxylase gene is 
mild (a mutation resulting in a change in one amino acid), 
the phenotype will be nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, and infertility). Additional 
terms used to describe nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia 
include late onset, attenuated, or acquired. A review of 
the genetics of the 21-hydroxylase gene can help practitioners 
understand the possible range of mutations and 
phenotypes. 

Genetic mutations have a marked effect on enzyme 
activity; for example, gene deletions result in nearly complete 
loss of 21-hydroxylase activity and are associated 
with the most severe phenotype: classic adrenal hyperplasia. 
Classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency occurs in about 1 in 
14,000 live births. With complete loss of 21-hydroxylase 
activity, adrenal androgen overproduction is marked and 
begins in utero. In severe forms of 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 
the conversion of progesterone to mineralocorticoids 
also is reduced, resulting in “salt wasting.” The 
salt-wasting form of the disease is associated with low 
aldosterone production, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and 
death in the neonatal period if undetected and untreated. 
Seventy-five percent of cases of classic 21-hydroxylase 

deficiency are salt wasting; 25% present with virilization 
but are not salt wasting. For the obstetrician evaluating a 
newborn with ambiguous genitalia, the most important 
disease to exclude is 21-hydroxylase deficiency associated 
with salt wasting. Failure to recognize this disease can 
result in dehydration and death of the newborn. 

Many cases of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia are due 
to gene conversion. In addition to the active 21-hydroxylase 
gene, there is also an inactive pseudogene. This pseudogene 
contains mutations that render it inactive. During 
gametogenesis, crossing over during meiosis can result in 
the transfer of genetic material from the pseudogene into 
the active gene, reducing the enzymatic activity of the 
active gene. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic 
material between homologous chromosomes during meiosis. 
In many cases of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, gene 
conversion has resulted in the substitution of one amino 
acid. In nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia the most common 
amino acid substitution, occurring in 60% of cases, is the 
replacement of the normal valine at codon 281 with a 
leucine. This replacement results in a 50% decrease in 21hydroxylase 
enzyme activity. Twenty percent of the cases 
are due to a proline-to-serine substitution (codon 453), 
and 10% are due to a proline-to-leucine substitution 
(codon 10). Although 21-hydroxylase nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia is a homozygous recessive disorder, in most 
cases the same mutation is not present on both alleles. 
Many women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia are 
compound heterozygotes and carry one allele associated 
with only mild impairment of enzyme activity and a second 
allele associated with a marked reduction in enzyme 
activity. In nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, enough 
21-hydroxylase activity is present in utero to result in only 
modest increases in adrenal androgens, elevations that are 
not sufficient to alter the normal development of the external 
genitalia. However, at puberty, the increased capability 
of the adrenal gland to produce androgens (adrenarche) 
and the modest decrease in 21-hydroxylase activity results 
in an excess production of adrenal androgens. The excess 
adrenal androgens can result in hirsutism, oligo-ovulation, 
oligomenorrhea, and infertility. 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 109 
COLUMN 1 COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 
Mineralocorticoids Glucocorticoids Sex Steroids 

Dehydroepiandrosterone17-HydroxypregnenoloneCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OProgesteronePregnenoloneCholesterolHOHOHOO12323232OOOHOHOAndostenedione17a-HydroxyprogesteroneHOO
21-Hydroxylase block 


4
4
CH3-OH

CH3-OH 


C=O

C=O 



Deoxycortisol

Deoxycorticosterone 



OH 


O

O 



5
CH2-OH 


5
CH2-OH 
C=O 
C=O 



Cortisol 


HO 


Corticosterone 



OH 


HO 


6
O

O 


Aldosterone 


n FIG. 44. In 21-hydroxylase deficiency, a relative or complete block in the 21-hydroxylase enzyme results in an increase in the precursor 
steroid 17a -hydroxyprogesterone, as well as overproduction of adrenal DHEA and androstenedione. Enzyme 1: cholesterol 
side-chain cleavage. Enzyme 2: 17-hydroxylase–17,20-lyase. Enzyme 3: 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase. Enzyme 4: 21hydroxylase. 
Enzyme 5: 11-hydroxylase. Enzyme 6: aldosterone synthetase. Column 1 leads to the production of mineralocorticoids. 
Column 2 leads to the production of corticosteroids. Column 3 leads to the production of the adrenal androgens. 

110 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 45. Genitalia of a severely virilized 2-week-old, 
46,XX female with severe salt-wasting 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
At birth, the infant was assigned a male gender and 
was thought to have undescended testes and mild hypospadias. 
When re-admitted to the hospital, the infant had vomiting 
and dehydration. Serum sodium level was 107 mEq/L; 
potassium, 10.1 mEq/L. (Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. The adrenal 
cortex. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman L. eds. Endocrinology 
and metabolism. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995: 
555–717. Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
Women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia usually 
develop hyperandrogenism and oligo-ovulation as 
teenagers and present to their clinicians to report hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, infertility, or a combination. 
Women with 21-hydroxylase nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia have a clinical presentation identical to that 
of women with PCOS. Consequently, hormone testing 
must be performed to differentiate between these two disorders. 
Serum testosterone, androstenedione, and 
DHEAS levels are commonly elevated in women with 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia or PCOS. However, 
women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia due to a 
21-hydroxylase disorder typically have a fivefold elevation 
of serum 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels (follicular 
phase, 8 AM level) compared with women with PCOS or 
normal women. 

An important issue is the incidence of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency in women presenting to gynecologists for hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, or both. In most studies, 
less than 3% of women with this presentation have nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (17). The majority have 
PCOS. The highest incidence of nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia occurs in Ashkenazi Jews and Eskimos. 

The best laboratory method for diagnosing 21hydroxylase 
deficiency is either measurement of 8 AM 


n FIG. 46. Embryonic development of male and female 
external reproductive structures from common anlagen. 
Excess adrenal androgen in a female can result in an abnormally 
large genital tubercle (resulting in clitoromegaly) and 
in genital folds and genital swelling that fuse (resulting in 
labioscrotal fusion). The appearance is much like that of the 
male external structure. (Fig. 28-1, p. 810 from Human anatomy 
and physiology, 3rd ed. by Alexander P. Spence and 
Elliott B. Mason. Copyright © 1987 by The Benjamin/ 
Cummings Publishing Company, Inc. Reprinted by permission 
of Pearson Education, Inc.) 
follicular-phase serum 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels 
(levels >4 ng/mL suggest the diagnosis of nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia) or 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels 
measured 60 minutes after the intravenous injection of 
synthetic corticotropin (cosyntropin, 250 m g) (levels >10 
ng/mL are diagnostic). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate is 
of no value in screening for nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, 
because DHEAS levels overlap in women with nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia and those with PCOS. 

The conventional treatment of hirsutism in women 
with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia is low-dose corticosteroid 
therapy (dexamethasone 0.25–0.5 mg nightly). 
Dexamethasone will suppress corticotropin secretion and 
decrease adrenal androgen secretion. However, dexamethasone 
has the disadvantage of being associated with 
the development of iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, 
including central obesity, striae, osteopenia, and newonset 
diabetes. It is important to note that antiandrogen 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 111 

therapy may be more effective than the use of corticosteroids 
in the treatment of hirsutism caused by nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (18). Based on these findings, an 
alternative to dexamethasone treatment is to treat these 
patients with a combination of an oral contraceptive plus 
an antiandrogen, such as spironolactone. This combination 
can induce regular uterine withdrawal bleeding and 
reduce hirsutism in women with nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia. 

For women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia and 
infertility, conventional treatment is to use dexamethasone 
to reduce adrenal androgen secretion and induce 
ovulation. Because treatment is continued only until a 
pregnancy is achieved, the likelihood of developing iatrogenic 
Cushing’s syndrome is low. However, recent case 
reports also indicate that women with nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia can respond to treatment with clomiphene 
citrate used without corticosteroids. In a recent case 
report, a woman with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia was 
treated with clomiphene citrate (150 mg daily for cycle 
days 5–9). The patient ovulated, became pregnant, and 
delivered at term (19). There are no randomized prospective 
studies that directly compare the effectiveness of corticosteroids 
with clomiphene in the induction of 
ovulation in women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. 

Adrenal Androgen Deficiency 

In menopausal women, decreases in adrenal production 
of DHEAS and androstenedione, as well as decreases in 
ovarian production of androstenedione and testosterone, 
contribute to decreased androgen bioactivity. The 
adrenopause (decrease in adrenal DHEAS and 
androstenedione secretion) may contribute to symptoms 
of decreased sexual activity and orgasm reported by some 
menopausal women (20). This usually is not present until 
several years postmenopause. 

Adrenal Cortisol Excess 

The most common cause of corticosteroid excess is the 
use of potent corticosteroids for the treatment of nonendocrine 
disorders. The nonpharmacologic causes of 
Cushing’s syndrome are 1) Cushing’s disease (pituitary 
tumor secreting corticotropin, causing adrenal oversecretion 
of cortisol), 2) ectopic corticotropin syndrome (corticotropin 
secretion by nonpituitary tumors, such as a 
bronchial carcinoid tumor), and 3) adrenal tumors (adenoma 
or carcinoma). 

The clinical signs and symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome 
include central obesity with moon facies and a 
“buffalo hump,” facial plethora, violaceous striae (see 
Image 33), easy bruising, proximal muscle weakness, hirsutism, 
and menstrual disorders. Photographs from before 
the patient’s illness can help to establish a baseline. 

Corticosteroid excess can occur with both long- and 
short-term administration of steroids. An important clinical 
issue is how to best discontinue corticosteroid treat


ment. The HPA axis can be suppressed by dosages of 
prednisone of 7.5 mg daily or greater. Suppression can 
occur within 3 weeks, especially with doses of prednisone 
of 40 mg or greater (21). One standard tapering 
regimen is to reduce the corticosteroid dosage by the 
equivalent of 5 mg of prednisone every 2 weeks until a 
dosage of 5 mg daily is achieved. The treatment then can 
be discontinued (22). 

Cushing’s disease is 10 times more common in women 
than in men, and its incidence peaks between ages 20 and 
40 years. The evaluation of patients for Cushing’s disease 
continues to evolve. A current multistep diagnostic protocol 
begins with a measurement of 24-hour urinary free 
cortisol. If the 24-hour urinary free cortisol level is consistently 
greater than 250 m g, Cushing’s syndrome is present. 
Values between 100 m g and 250 m g can be caused by 
Cushing’s syndrome, depression, alcoholism, or stress. 

If the 24-hour urinary cortisol level is elevated, measurement 
of plasma corticotropin levels and assessment 
of corticotropin response to corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) usually can pinpoint the cause of the 
Cushing’s syndrome. The key concept, which is the foundation 
of this approach, is that if corticotropin is measurable 
in the circulation of a patient with elevated urinary 
cortisol levels, then the cortisol overproduction is due to 
corticotropin stimulation (pituitary or extrapituitary). If 
the corticotropin is undetectable, then the cause of the 
cortisol overproduction is an adrenal tumor that is secreting 
cortisol, independent of corticotropin. The CRH stimulation 
test (using an intravenous bolus of 1 m g/kg ovine 
CRH over 2 minutes) also can help differentiate pituitary 
versus ectopic sources of corticotropin secretion. In 90% 
of cases of corticotropin–secreting pituitary tumors, the 
administration of CRH results in a marked increase in 
plasma corticotropin levels. Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
will stimulate plasma corticotropin in only 10% of 
cases of ectopic corticotropin secretion (23). 

A test that helps to confirm the presence of a corticotropin-
secreting pituitary tumor, and also helps to 
determine the half of the pituitary containing the tumor, 
is the inferior petrosal sinus sampling test. In almost all 
patients with a corticotropin-secreting pituitary tumor, 
there is at least two times more corticotropin in the inferior 
petrosal sinus (because of secretion from the pituitary 
gland) than in the peripheral circulation. In almost all 
patients with an extrapituitary source of corticotropin, 
there is less than two times more corticotropin in the inferior 
petrosal sinus than in the peripheral circulation. The 
test has the added benefit of helping to localize the corticotropin-
secreting pituitary tumor to the right or left half 
of the pituitary, which can help the neurosurgeon localize 
and resect the tumor. Computed tomographic or magnetic 
resonance imaging of the adrenals and lung can help identify 
adrenal cancer, adrenal adenomas, and lung processes 
that are secreting corticotropin. In most cases, pituitary 
tumors that secrete corticotropin are too small to be 
detected reliably by available neuroimaging modalities. 


AB 

n FIG. 47. Diagrammatic depiction of hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)–pituitary corticotropin–adrenal axis in 
normal subjects (
((A) 
)) and in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency (
((B) 
)) in which inadequate secretion of corticosteroids, mineralocorticoids 
(ie, aldosterone, or ALDO), and androgens results in the disruption in negative feedback regulation with marked 
increase in CRF/arginine vasopressin and corticotropin (thick lines). The loss of aldosterone activates the renin-angiotensin system 
resulting in hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. (Yen SS. Chronic anovulation caused by peripheral endocrine 
disorders. In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 
4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:498) 
112 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Cushing’s disease is best treated with transsphenoidal 
surgery to resect the pituitary tumor (24, 25). When 
surgery is not possible, radiation therapy combined with 
the administration of mitotane can be effective (26). If 
neither approach is effective, bilateral adrenalectomy can 
be performed to control the excess cortisol secretion (27). 
The best approach to the treatment of an ectopic source of 
corticotropin oversecretion is to detect the tumor by 
imaging studies and resect it surgically. 

The primary treatment for adrenal adenoma is surgery, 
and it is usually curative. The primary treatment for 
adrenal carcinoma is surgery if resection or debulking is 
possible. Mitotane can be used for medical treatment of 
adrenal carcinoma that cannot be resected (28). 

Adrenal Cortisol Deficiency 

Adrenal insufficiency is caused by destruction of the 
adrenal cortex (Addison’s disease—primary adrenal 
insufficiency) or by corticotropin deficiency (secondary 
adrenal insufficiency). When corticotropin deficiency is 
present, mineralocorticoid secretion is preserved because 
the zona glomerulosa is predominantly stimulated by the 
renin–angiotensin system, not corticotropin (Fig. 47). 

More than 90% of the adrenal cortex must be 
destroyed before Addison’s disease is clinically manifested. 
The most common cause of Addison’s disease is 

autoimmune destruction of the adrenal gland, which can 
be associated with failure of the thyroid or endocrine pan-
creas. Nonautoimmune causes of Addison’s disease 
include granulomatous diseases (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, 
or histoplasmosis) or infiltrative diseases (lymphoma, 
hemochro- matosis, or metastatic cancer). Addison’s disease 
is present in some patients with advanced HIV disease. 


The symptoms of adrenal insufficiency include weakness, 
fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, vague abdominal 
pain, and vomiting. Signs include weight loss, 
hypotension, and hyperpigmentation. The increased pigmentation 
is caused by an increase in pituitary secretion 
of pro-opiomelanocortin and melanin. 

The diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency can be confirmed 
by administering synthetic corticotropin (cosyntropin, 
250 m g) as an intravenous bolus and measuring 
plasma cortisol levels 60 minutes later. A cortisol level 
higher than 20 m g/dL indicates that the adrenal gland is 
present and responsive to corticotropin. A cortisol level 
lower than 20 m g/dL suggests the presence of adrenal 
insufficiency (29). An elevated plasma corticotropin level 
is consistent with primary adrenal insufficiency (autoimmune 
destruction of the adrenal gland). A plasma corticotropin 
level that is undetectable is consistent with 
secondary adrenal insufficiency and indicates hypothalamic 
or pituitary disease (30). 


The treatment for adrenal crisis in patients with 
adrenal insufficiency who were previously treated with 
corticosteroids involves administering maximal stress 
dosages of cortisol in the range of 300–400 mg daily. A 
large-diameter intravenous tube should be used to 
administer 2 L of dextrose 5%–normal saline over 2 
hours. One hundred milligrams of hydrocortisone succinate 
is administered as an immediate intravenous bolus, 
and a continuous intravenous drip is initiated to provide 
100 mg every 6 hours. After the first 24 hours, if the 
patient is stable, the dose can be tapered by 50–100 mg 
each day. The administration of mineralocorticoids is not 
needed, because at a cortisol dosage of 150 mg daily or 
greater, sufficient mineralocorticoid activity is present in 
the cortisol to provide complete replacement. For 
patients with adrenal insufficiency or chronically suppressed 
adrenal function who require major surgery, a 
continuous intravenous drip of hydrocortisone succinate, 
administered at a dosage of 100 mg every 6 hours, 
provides complete corticosteroid and mineralocorticoid 
replacement. The dosage can be tapered rapidly after 
surgery when the patient can return to oral corticosteroid 
replacement. 

When a patient is in a nonstressed state, hydrocortisone 
typically is prescribed at a dosage of 20–30 mg 
daily, usually 20 mg in the morning (7–8 AM) and 10 mg 
in the early evening (4–6 PM). Fludrocortisone (0.1 mg 
daily) is prescribed as it is for patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency who need mineralocorticoid replacement. 

Adrenal Medulla Pheochromocytoma 

Pheochromocytomas produce excessive quantities of catecholamines. 
Pheochromocytoma is a rare disease, occurring 
in no more than 0.2% of hypertensive patients. The 
most common symptoms and signs associated with 
pheochromocytoma are headache, excessive perspiration, 
palpitations, nervousness, and hypertension. Paroxysmal 
episodes may be provoked by exercise or abdominal palpation. 
About 10% of pheochromocytomas are familial 
and occur as simple familial pheochromocytoma or as 
part of the multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 
IIa or IIb. Neurofibromatosis and café au lait spots can be 
associated with pheochromocytomas. Ninety-five percent 
of pheochromocytomas are in the abdomen, and 10% are 
malignant. 

The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma cannot be made 
clinically alone. The diagnosis requires biochemical evidence 
of catecholamine overproduction. A 24-hour urine 
analysis for catecholamines, metanephrine, and vanillylmandelic 
acid (a catecholamine metabolite) is the standard 
diagnostic test. Metanephrine measurements are the 
least likely to be falsely elevated because of diet or drugs. 
A metanephrine level higher than 1.2 mg/d strongly suggests 
pheochromocytoma. Biochemical confirmation 
should be followed by imaging studies to localize the 
tumor. The treatment of pheochromocytoma is surgical 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 113 

removal of the catecholamine-producing tumor after 
inducing catecholamine blockade (phenoxybenzamine) 
to prevent a hypertensive crisis during surgery. 

PROSTAGLANDINS AND 
DYSMENORRHEA 

Prostaglandins 

Prostaglandins are 20-carbon-atom fatty acids. They are 
intracellular mediators and are catabolized in the same 
cell. Occasionally, prostaglandins act as local hormones, 
but when secreted into the circulation, they are rapidly 
metabolized by the lung, kidney, and liver. There are at 
least 14 different types of naturally occurring prostaglandins, 
designated by the letters A through I. Each letter 
denotes the location of specific combinations of 
hydroxyl groups, ketone groups, and unsaturated carbon 
atoms on the cyclopentane ring of the molecule. The 
subscript 1, 2, or 3 after the alphabetic designation indicates 
the number of double bonds in the aliphatic side 
chains. Each of the more familiar types—PGE2 and 
PGF2a —has two double bonds (Fig. 48). 

Prostaglandins are synthesized from arachidonic 
acid. Hydrolysis of cell membrane phospholipids by the 

Prostanoic acid 
9 87 
65 
4 
3 
2 COOH 
1 
10 
CH3 
12 14 16 18 20 
11 13 15 17 19 

Prostaglandin E2 
O 
CO2H 

OH OH 

Prostaglandin F2a 
OH 

CO2H 

OH OH 

n FIG. 48. Structures of prostanoic acid, prostaglandin E2, 
and PGF2a . 

114 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

lysosomal enzyme phospholipase A2 generates arachidonic 
acid, which is then converted via the cyclooxygenase 
or the lipoxygenase pathway (Fig. 49). Through the 
cyclooxygenase pathway, arachidonic acid is converted 
into cyclic endoperoxides (prostaglandin G and prostaglandin 
H), and subsequently into PGE2 and PGF2a ,or 
prostacyclin or thromboxane A2. There are two isoforms 
of the cyclooxygenase gene. The Cox-1 gene is located on 
chromosome 9 and is constitutively expressed. Located 
on chromosome 1, Cox-2 is not constitutively expressed 
but is highly inducible by mitogenic factors and 
cytokines. Table 7 summarizes the similarities and differences 
between Cox-1 and Cox-2. 

Mechanism of Action 

Prostaglandins exert their action through specific receptors 
found in cell membranes. There are multiple subtypes 
of prostaglandin receptors; each differs in its 

potency toward prostaglandins and in its signal transduction 
pathway (Table 8). Therefore, prostaglandins may 
stimulate or inhibit adenylate cyclase or stimulate phospholipase 
C to generate inositol triphosphate. A single 
prostaglandin may have multiple effects on the same cell 
type, depending on PGE2 concentrations and the relative 
presence of the separate subtypes of prostaglandin E 
receptors. For example, PGF2a stimulates phospholipase 
C to generate inositol triphosphate and inhibits calcium 
binding to cytoplasmic membrane protein, leading to 
increased intracellular free calcium. Hence, the 
myometrium contracts in response to PGF2a . 

Some of the adverse effects of prostaglandins (uterine 
cramps, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) are due to the 
induced contraction or relaxation of the smooth muscle of 
different organ systems. Both PGF2a and PGE2 stimulate 
uterine actions. However, intrauterine administration of 
PGE2 during menstruation relaxes the uterus. 
Prostacyclin relaxes smooth muscle (including the 

PGI2 
TxA2

Cyclic 
endoperoxide PGF2a 

PGE2

Phospholipase 

Arachidonic

Phospholipids 

acid 

Leukotriene A 
5-HPETE Leukotriene B 
Leukotriene C 

n FIG. 49. Biosynthesis of prostaglandins (PGI2; thromboxane A2, or TxA2; PGF2a ; and PGE2) through the cyclooxygenase pathway 
and of leukotrienes through the lipoxygenase pathway. Abbreviation: 5-HPETE indicates 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid. 
n TABLE 7. Similarities and Differences Between Human Cox-1 and Cox-2 Genes 
Cox-1 Gene Cox-2 Gene 
Ubiquitous 
Constitutive 
Not ubiquitous 
Inducible 
On chromosome 9 On chromosome 1 
Gene, ~22 kilobases and 11 exons 
mRNA, 2.7 kilobases 
Many transcription start sites 
No TATA 
Gene,~8 kilobases and 10 exons 
mRNA, 4-0–4.5 kilobases 
Only one transcription start site identified 
Canonical TATA 

Abbreviation: mRNA indicates messenger RNA. 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 115 

n TABLE 8. Common Prostaglandins, Their Receptors, and Respective Signal Transduction 
Prostaglandins Receptor Type/Subtypes Signal Transduction 
PGE2 EP — 
EP1 
EP2 
EP3 
Phospholipase C 
cAMP ­ 
cAMP ¯ 
PGF2a 
PGI2 
FP 
IP 
Phospholipase C 
cAMP ­ 
TxA2 TP Phospholipase C 

Abbreviations: TxA2 indicates thromboxane A2; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate;­ = stimulates; ¯ = inhibits. 

uterus) to cause vasodilation, and is antiaggregatory to 
platelets, thus slowing down clotting and prolonging 
bleeding. Thromboxane A2 induces smooth muscle contraction, 
is vasoconstrictive, and is proaggregatory to 
platelets and thus clotting. Prostaglandins are involved in 
many aspects of human reproduction (see Box I). 

Dysmenorrhea 

The literal translation of dysmenorrhea is “difficult menstrual 
flow.” The pain usually begins at the start of menstruation 
and lasts for several days. It is a common cause 
of absenteeism from work or school and often interferes 
with quality of life and well-being (31). 

Dysmenorrhea is characterized as primary or secondary. 
Primary dysmenorrhea exists in the absence of 
known pelvic pathologic causes. Secondary dysmenorrhea 
is due to pelvic pathologic causes. Almost any condition 
that affects the pelvic viscera can cause cyclic 
pain. 

Secondary dysmenorrhea results from pelvic conditions 
such as endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, uterine 
leiomyomata, congenital müllerian anomalies, and 
intrauterine contraceptive devices (32). A thorough history 
should be obtained and a physical examination performed. 
Other helpful studies include cervical cultures, pelvic ultrasonography, 
sonohysterography, or hysterosalpingography. 
Laparoscopy may be the most helpful diagnostic test and 
should be considered when endometriosis is suspected. 
This is especially true in adolescents whose dysmenorrhea 
does not respond to treatment with oral contraceptives and 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. 

The cause of dysmenorrhea is believed to be hypercontractility 
of uterine smooth muscle. The evidence 
implicating arachidonic acid metabolites in the pathophysiology 
of primary dysmenorrhea is compelling. 
Menstrual fluid and endometrium of adolescents with 
dysmenorrhea have increased levels of PGE2 and PGF2a 
(33). Women with primary dysmenorrhea have elevated 
endometrial PGF2a /PGE ratios. Increased uterine contractility 
and dysmenorrhea-like pain is induced by intrauter-

BOX I 
Prostaglandin’s Role in Human 
Reproduction 


Mediation of the midcycle preovulatory luteinizing hor


mone surge at the hypothalamus 
Induction of ovarian muscle contractions, follicle rupture, 
and oocyte release 

Luteolysis 

Relaxation and contraction of the fallopian tube to promote 
synchronized tubal transport of the ovum to the uterus 
Implantation-related effects at multiple sites in both the 

embryo (hatching of blastocysts and fluid accumulation) 
and the endometrium (increase in capillary permeability 
and inflammatory changes) 

Fetal lung development 

Maintenance of ductus arteriosus patency in utero and 
subsequent postnatal changes by prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) 
Production and release of PGF2a and PGE2 by fetal mem


branes, the decidua, and the placenta to stimulate uterine 
contractions during spontaneous labor and parturition 

ine administration of PGF2a . Other possible related causes 
of dysmenorrhea include vasopressin, outflow tract 
obstruction, and psychologic factors. 

The incidence of primary dysmenorrhea ranges from 
8% to 90% (34, 35). The wide range probably is a result 
of differences in the method of pain assessment. 

A prospective 1-year study of college students in the 
United States aged 17–19 years found that 72% of the 
nearly 1,400 periods monitored were painful. At least one 
episode of “severe” pain occurred in 60% of women, and 
13% reported severe pain one half of the time (36). A 
Swedish study found a similar 72% incidence, and another 
study of adolescents found a 60% rate. In both studies, 


116 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

approximately 15% of the individuals limited their daily 
activity or missed school (37). 

Primary dysmenorrhea usually is described as midline 
cyclic pelvic cramping beginning with menstruation. Pain 
may begin prior to menstrual bleeding. Associated symptoms 
include headache, vertigo, nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhea, depression, irritability, and insomnia (38). Pain 
may be exacerbated by stress, caffeine, and loss of sleep. 
Risk factors include early menarche, long menstrual periods, 
smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The incidence is higher 
in nulliparous than in parous women. 

Patients with the symptoms just described should have 
a thorough history and physical examination, including a 
pelvic examination. Transvaginal ultrasonography is 
helpful to confirm pelvic pathologic conditions. Normal 
findings on pelvic examination and ultrasonography suggest 
a diagnosis of primary dysmenorrhea. 

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and oral contraceptives 
are the most commonly used treatments. Oral 
contraceptives reduce menstrual volume and suppress 
prostaglandin levels. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs relieve dysmenorrhea by suppressing menstrual 
fluid prostaglandin (39). Ibuprofen, mefenamic acid, 
ketoprofen, and aspirin have been shown to be superior to 
placebos for the treatment of dysmenorrhea (40, 41). A 
recent randomized controlled trial showed that administration 
of rofecoxib at a dose of 25 mg or 50 mg significantly 
relieved dysmenorrhea and the time to 
remedication compared with use of a placebo (42). 

Other interventions that may be helpful include transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimulation and heat therapy 
(43). A low-fat vegetarian diet increases sex hormone– 
binding globulin and reduces both body weight and the 
duration and intensity of dysmenorrhea (44). Most studies 
show that exercise decreases the incidence or severity 
of dysmenorrhea (45). 

Surgical procedures for dysmenorrhea include presacral 
neurectomy and uterosacral nerve ablation. Some evidence 
indicates that these procedures may be effective, but the 
evidence is insufficient to recommend the routine use of 
nerve interruption for the treatment of dysmenorrhea (46). 

ENDOMETRIOSIS 

Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial 
tissue, glands, and stroma outside the uterine cavity and 
musculature. It typically is found on dependent surfaces 
in the pelvis and most often affects the ovaries and posterior 
cul-de-sac. It can affect other sites as well, such as 
abdominal viscera, the urinary tract, and the lungs. The 
exact incidence of endometriosis in the general population 
is unknown. Pelvic endometriosis is present in 
6–43% of women undergoing sterilization, 12–32% of 
women undergoing laparoscopy for pelvic pain, and 
21–48% of women undergoing laparoscopy for infertility 
(47). Endometriosis usually occurs in women of reproductive 
age. 

Pathogenesis 

Several theories exist regarding the pathogenesis of 
endometriosis, including the implantation theory, theory 
of lymphatic and hematogenous spread, theory of direct 
implantation, and the coelomic metaplasia theory. The 
implantation theory proposes that endometrial tissue is 
regurgitated out of the fallopian tubes and then adheres to 
pelvic viscera, and evidence suggests that this mechanism 
is the most likely cause of pelvic endometriosis. 

Pathology 

Endometriotic implants have a variety of appearances. 
Superficial implants on the ovary or peritoneum may 
appear as reddish macules or nodules. The collection of 
hemosiderin gives implants a brown or black coloration. 
Endometriosis may be locally invasive and cause significant 
inflammation and adhesion formation. Endometriomas 
are cystic structures usually involving the ovary. 
These cysts vary from 1 cm to more than 10 cm in diameter 
and are dark red to blue (Image 34). The four major 
histologic components are endometrial gland, stroma, 
fibrosis, and hemorrhage. 

Signs and Symptoms 

The common signs and symptoms of endometriosis are 
pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility. 
The type and severity depend on the extent and location 
of the disease. However, even limited disease can cause 
significant symptoms. 

Pain in women with endometriosis ranges from 
increasing dysmenorrhea to chronic pelvic pain and dyspareunia. 
The mechanism of worsening dysmenorrhea is 
not known but may be related to increased prostaglandins 
and cytokines present in the peritoneal fluid of women 
with endometriosis. Pain due to peritoneal disease is 
mediated by somatic afferent fibers that sense stretching, 
irritation, or injury. Endometriosis-related pain also may 
be perceived by sympathetic or parasympathetic visceral 
nerves that innervate the pelvic organs and are sensitive 
to distention, distortion, or impression. Dyspareunia is 
more common in women with endometriosis and deep 
posterior cul-de-sac disease. 

An estimated 30–50% of women with endometriosis 
are infertile. Severe disease may cause infertility by distorting 
pelvic anatomy. Severe pelvic adhesions may 
impair egg release from the ovary, block sperm entry into 
the distal fallopian tube, and inhibit ovum pickup. In animal 
models of endometriosis, pelvic adhesions appear to 
contribute to the observed decreased fecundity noted in 
animals with advanced endometriosis. The cause in less 
severe cases is controversial. Many studies demonstrate 
that women with endometriosis have an increased volume 
of peritoneal fluid; increased macrophage concentration 
and function; and increased peritoneal fluid concentrations 
of prostaglandin, interleukin-l, tumor necrosis fac



OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 117 

tor, and proteases. These alterations may impair oocyte, 
sperm, embryo, and fallopian tube function (48). 
Peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis reportedly 
contains an ovum capture inhibitor that prevents normal 
cumulus-fimbria interaction (49). Ovum capture 
inhibitor, a protein with a molecular mass greater than 
100,000 daltons, remains to be purified. It also has been 
proposed that numerous endocrine and ovulatory disorders 
may be present in women with endometriosis, 
including luteinized unruptured follicle syndrome, luteal 
phase dysfunction, abnormal follicular growth, and premature 
or multiple LH surges. 

Levels of IgG and IgA antibodies and lymphocytes 
may be increased in the endometrium of women with 
endometriosis. These abnormalities may alter endometrial 
receptivity to embryo implantation. In women with 
endometriosis, it is not clear whether implantation failure 
contributes to decreased fecundity. Some women with 
endometriosis lack endometrial a v b 3 integrin expression 
(50). Decreased endometrial integrin production in the 
midluteal phase may cause infertility by impairing 
implantation. These observations support the concept that 
endometriosis may represent one component of a disease 
that is characterized by dysfunction in multiple components, 
including the ovary, endometrium, fallopian tubes, 
and peritoneum. 

Diagnosis 

Endometriosis should be suspected in patients with the 
previously described symptoms. Signs of endometriosis 
include pelvic tenderness with nodularity, particularly 
over the uterosacral ligaments; pain with uterine movement; 
uterine retroversion with decreased mobility; and 
adnexal enlargement with tenderness. Many symptomatic 
women will have normal findings on pelvic examination. 
No one constellation of signs or symptoms is pathognomonic 
of endometriosis (51). Serum antigen CA 125 
levels are helpful in detecting and monitoring more severe 
cases but are not specific to this condition. Transvaginal 
ultrasonography is helpful to confirm the presence of 
endometriomas. They appear as intraovarian cystic structures, 
usually unilocular with hazy borders and internal 
echoes (Image 35). The diagnosis can be substantiated 
only by laparoscopy or laparotomy. It is important to 
assess correctly the presence and extent of endometriosis. 
Peritoneal biopsy is desirable, though not necessary for 
diagnosis if recognizable lesions are present (Image 36). It 
is used for diagnostic confirmation in doubtful cases. 

Endometriosis should be documented carefully using 
the revised classification of endometriosis recommended 
by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (Fig. 
50). Although this classification scheme has not been 
prospectively validated and the scores assigned to various 
lesions and adhesions produced by endometriosis are 
arbitrary, it serves as a semiobjective means of determining 
the extent of the disease and provides a quantifiable 
basis for follow-up comparisons. 

Treatment 

Treatment of patients with endometriosis should be based 
on the extent of the disease, the severity of symptoms, the 
patient’s desire for childbearing, the patient’s age, and other 
coexisting medical and surgical factors. Available modalities 
of treatment are expectant, hormonal, surgical, and combination 
medical and surgical treatment. Expectant management 
of infertile women with mild endometriosis has been 
recommended, but recent data suggest that treatment at the 
time of laparoscopy improves pregnancy rates (52). 

MEDICAL THERAPY 

Endometriotic implant growth usually depends on ovarian 
steroids. Consequently, medications that suppress 
ovarian function are beneficial. Ovarian suppression has 
not been shown to improve pregnancy rates for infertile 
women with mild or moderate endometriosis. Medical 
therapy should not be used to enhance fertility. However, 
medical therapy has been shown to relieve pain and 
reduce the amount of endometriosis visible at laparoscopy. 
Thus, medical therapy may be indicated for women 
with pain. 

Oral contraceptives, progestins, danazol, and GnRH 
agonists all appear to be effective in reducing pelvic pain 

(53) (Table 9). Treatment also may be effective in reducing 
the progression of disease, but this benefit is not as 
well documented. Contraindications to medical therapy 
include hypersensitivity to any of the individual agents; 
undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding; and specific 
contraindications to taking oral contraceptives, such as 
being a smoker older than 35 years and having a history 
of thromboembolic disease. Specific contraindications to 
danazol include impaired hepatic, renal, or cardiac function. 
Hormonal therapy is ineffective in resolving 
endometriomas and has no effect on adhesion formation. 
Danazol, GnRH agonists (including leuprolide acetate, 
nafarelin acetate, and goserelin acetate), and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate appear to be comparably effective in 
relieving pain (54). Treatment usually is continued for 6 
months. Menses usually recur within 6 weeks of stopping 
danazol therapy but may take 8–10 weeks to be reestablished 
after GnRH agonist therapy. Danazol therapy is 
associated with deleterious alterations in lipoprotein fractions. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue therapy 
produces hypoestrogenism and modest loss of bone mineral 
density. This treatment usually is limited to one 6month 
course. Women who develop adverse effects while 
taking GnRH analogues, who require treatment for longer 
than 6 months, or who require repeated treatments may 
be candidates for “add-back” therapy. This therapy consists 
of combination low-dose estrogen and progestin (ie, 
0.3 mg conjugated estrogen, 5 mg medroxyprogesterone 
daily) (55). The regimen usually decreases adverse 
effects but may not prevent bone loss completely. 
Medical therapy has been employed both before and 
after conservative surgical treatment of endometriosis. 


118 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


American Society for Reproductive Medicine 
Revised Classification of Endometriosis 

Patient’s name Date 

Stage I (minimal) — 1–5 
Stage II (mild) — 6–15 
Stage III (moderate) — 16–40 Laparoscopy Laparotomy Photography 
Stage IV (severe) — >40 Recommended treatment 

Total 
Prognosis 

PeritoneumEndometriosis <1 cm 1–3 cm >3 cm 
Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 2 4 6 
Ovary 
R Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 4 16 20 
L Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 4 16 20 
Posterior 
cul-de-sac 
obliteration 
Partial Complete 
4 40 
OvaryAdhesions <1/3 Enclosure 1/3 – 2/3 Enclosure >2/3 Enclosure 
R Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4 8 16 
L Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4 8 16 
Tube 
R Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4* 8* 16 
L Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4* 8* 16 

*If the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube is completely enclosed, change the point assignment to 16. 
Denote appearance of superficial implant types as red [(R), red, red-pink, flamelike, vesicular blobs, 
clear vesicles], white [(W), opacifications, peritoneal defects, yellow-brown], or black [(B), black, 
hemosiderin deposits, blue]. Denote percent of total described as R %, W %, and B %. Total 
should equal 100%. 

Additional endometriosis: Associated pathology: 
L 
To be used with normal 
tubes and ovaries 
R L 
To be used with abnormal 
tubes and/or ovaries 
R 


n FIG. 50. Revised American Society for Reproductive Medicine classification of endometriosis: 1996. (Reprinted with permission 
from the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Fertility and Sterility 1997;67:817–821) 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 119 

Examples & Guidelines 

Stage I (minimal) 
Stage II (mild) Stage III (moderate) 


Peritoneum Peritoneum Peritoneum 
Superficial endo — 1–3 cm -2 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 

R. ovary 
R. ovary Cul-de-sac 
Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Partial obliteration -4 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 L. ovary 
Total points 
4 L. ovary Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Total points 26 
Total points 9 

Stage III (moderate) Stage IV (severe) 
Stage IV (severe) 


Peritoneum Peritoneum Peritoneum 
Superficial endo — >3 cm -4 Superficial endo — >3 cm -4 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 

R. tube 
L. ovary Cul-de-sac 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 Deep endo — 1–3 cm -32† Complete obliteration -40 
R. ovary 
Dense adhesions— <1/3 -8† R. ovary 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 L. tube Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
L. tube 
Dense adhesions— <1/3 -8† Dense adhesions— <1/3 -4 

Dense adhesions— <1/3 -16* 

Total points 
52 L. tube 

L. ovary 
>2/3
Dense adhesions— -16 

Deep endo — <1 cm -4 
L. ovary 

<1/3

Dense adhesions— -4 Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
Total points 30 *Point assignment changed to 16. Dense adhesions— >2/3 -16 

†Point assignment doubled. Total points 
114 
*Determination of the stage or degree of endometrial involvement 
is based on a weighted point system. Distribution of points 
has been arbitrarily determined and may require further revision 
or refinement as knowledge of the disease increases. 

To ensure complete evaluation, inspection of the pelvis in a 
clockwise or counterclockwise fashion is encouraged. Number, 
size, and location of endometrial implants, plaques, endometriomas, 
and/or adhesions are noted. For example, five separate 
0.5-cm superficial implants on the peritoneum (2.5 cm total) 
would be assigned 2 points. (The surface of the uterus should 
be considered peritoneum.) The severity of the endometriosis 
or adhesions should be assigned the highest score only for 
peritoneum, ovary, tube, or cul-de-sac. For example, a 4-cm 
superficial and a 2-cm deep implant of the peritoneum should 
be given a score of 6 (not 8). A 4-cm deep endometrioma of the 
ovary associated with more than 3 cm of superficial disease 
should be scored 20 (not 24). 

In those patients with only one adnexa, points applied to 
disease of the remaining tube and ovary should be multiplied by 
two. 

†Points assigned may be circled and totaled. Aggregation of 
points indicates stage of disease (minimal, mild, moderate, or 
severe). 
The presence of endometriosis of the bowel, urinary tract, 
fallopian tube, vagina, cervix, skin, etc., should be documented 
under “additional endometriosis.” Other pathology such as tubal 
occlusion, leiomyomata, uterine anomaly, etc, should be documented 
under “associated pathology.” All pathology should be 
depicted as specifically as possible on the sketch of pelvic 
organs, and means of observation (laparoscopy or laparotomy) 
should be noted. 


120 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 9. Medical Therapy for Women with Endometriosis 
Category Drug Dose Frequency 
GnRH agonist Leuprolide 3.75 mg IM 4 weeks 
Goserelin 3.6-mg implant 4 weeks 
Nafarelin 200–200 intranasally Twice daily 
Progestins Medroxyprogesterone acetate 10–50 mg Daily 
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg 90 days 
Megestrol acetate 20 mg Daily 
Norethindrone acetate 15 mg* Daily 
Oral contraceptives Ethinyl estradiol/desogestrel 0.02–0.03 mg/0.15 mg Daily 
Danazol Danocrine 200 ng 1–4 times daily 

Abbreviations: GnRH indicates gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IM, intramuscularly. 
*Start at 5 mg/d and increase by 2.5 mg every 2 weeks until a dosage of 15 mg/d is reached. 


There is no good evidence that preoperative treatment 
reduces operating time or bleeding. It has no benefit over 
surgery alone for endometriosis-associated pain or infertility. 
Postoperative treatment may be beneficial for 
delaying pain recurrence (56). 

SURGICAL TREATMENT 

Surgical treatment usually can be completed at the initial 
laparoscopy to diagnose the disease. Conservative or limited 
surgery is appropriate for women desiring future fertility 
and for women with pelvic pain. Conservative 
procedures include excision, vaporization, and coagulation 
of endometrial implants; excision of ovarian endometriomas; 
and lysis of adhesions (Video 4). These procedures 
can accompany laparoscopy using surgical excision, laser 
surgery (carbon dioxide, argon, potassium–titanyl–phosphate, 
or neodymium yttrium–aluminum–garnet [Nd-
YAG]), and monopolar or bipolar electrocautery. 
Conservative surgery most often is performed through the 
laparoscope (Video 5); in the case of extensive disease with 
cul-de-sac obliteration and dense scarring of the ovaries to 
the pelvic side walls, laparotomy may be necessary (57). 
Adjunct procedures, including presacral neurectomy and 
uterosacral nerve ablation, have been recommended for the 
relief of central pelvic pain. The long-term benefit of the 
aliquant procedures has not been demonstrated conclusively. 
Uterosacral plication, uterine suspension, and 
oophoropexy have even less clearly defined benefits (58). 
Patients with significant bowel involvement may require 
resection of the affected segment and anastomosis. 

Pregnancy rates after laparoscopic surgery for 
endometriosis are acceptable (59). Unfortunately, the two 
randomized controlled studies on the effectiveness of 
laparoscopic conservative surgery report conflicting 
results in women with less severe stages of endometriosis 
(52, 60). The Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis 
reported a randomized trial of laparoscopy 

without treatment in 341 women with minimal or mild 
disease. The fecundity rate was 4.7 per 100 person– 
months in treated patients versus 2.4 per 100 person– 
months in controls (95% confidence interval 1.2–3.1) 
(52). However, in a similar study by the Gruppo Italiano 
per lo Studio dell’Endometriosi of 111 patients with 
stage I or stage II endometriosis, the pregnancy rate 1 
year after surgery was 29% (13 of 45) in the no-treatment 
group and 24% (12 of 51) in the ablation–resection 
group (60). The results of these studies may 
conflict because of different patient populations or 
responses of individual patients to therapy. 

Overall, cumulative pregnancy rates have ranged 
from 34% to 75% when electrical energy or the argon 
laser was used for coagulation of endometriotic 
implants. In one study, a monthly fecundity rate of 2.5% 
after such treatment compared favorably with results 
after other forms of therapy (61). Pregnancy rates after 
carbon dioxide laser vaporization of endometriotic 
implants have ranged from 25% to 100% for mild disease, 
from 19% to 66% for moderate disease, and from 
25% to 50% for severe disease (62). Pregnancy rates 
after laser vaporization do not appear to be related to the 
stage of disease, an observation also found in studies of 
conservative laparotomy. 

Definitive therapy, total abdominal hysterectomy, and 
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy are indicated for patients 
who have completed childbearing or have significant persistent 
pelvic pain after conservative treatment. One or 
both ovaries may be spared if they are uninvolved and the 
endometriosis can be resected completely. Approximately 
one third of women treated conservatively will have recurrent 
endometriosis and require additional surgery within 
5 years (63). After bilateral oophorectomy, estrogen 
replacement therapy may be initiated with little risk of 
reactivating residual disease. There is no reason to delay 
replacement therapy after surgery. 


ASSISTED REPRODUCTION 

In patients with persistent infertility associated with 
endometriosis, controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (with 
and without intrauterine insemination [IUI]) and assisted 
reproductive technologies offer some promise. Monthly 
fecundity rates of 0.10% for stage I endometriosis (n = 
263), 0.09% for stage II (n = 146), 0.18% for stage III (n 
= 51), and 0% for stage IV (n = 14) are reported. A statistically 
significant increase in cycle fecundity was seen 
with four cycles of clomiphene citrate and IUI insemination 
compared with controls having intercourse (0.095 
versus 0.033, respectively). No difference was seen 
between patients with explained infertility and those with 
treated endometriosis. 

Another study randomized 40 women with stage I or 
stage II endometriosis and infertility to receive either 
three cycles of human menopausal gonadotropin 
(hMG)–IUI or no treatment (expectant management) 
(64). The cycle fecundity was 0.15 in the hMG–IUI group 
and 0.045 in the untreated group (P < 0.05). Another 
study reported on the effects of expectant management, 
clomiphene citrate, hMG, or in vitro fertilization and 
embryo transfer (IVF/ET) on cycle fecundity in women 
with infertility and minimal or mild endometriosis (65). 
The cycle fecundity rates were 0.028, 0.066, 0.114, and 
0.22, respectively. The improved fecundity with hMG 
and IVF/ET was statistically significant. 

The effect of endometriosis on the outcome of IVF is 
controversial. Overall, the diagnosis of endometriosis 
(especially previously treated disease) does not appear to 
decrease pregnancy rates in patients with less severe 
stages of disease. However, some have suggested that 
patients with endometriosis undergoing IVF have a 
reduced implantation rate, possibly secondary to 
endometrial dysfunction or an embryotoxic environment 
(66). Women with advanced endometriosis who have a 
history of a previous oophorectomy and a contralateral 
ovarian cystectomy appear to do very poorly in IVF/ET 
programs. It is possible that the previous ovarian surgery 
depleted the available oocyte pool, making the women 
perimenopausal. In addition, women with large endometriomas 
at the start of an IVF/ET cycle also may be at risk 
for a poor cycle outcome. It is recommended that women 
with an endometrioma have the ovarian mass resected 
before initiation of an IVF/ET cycle. 

References 

1. Burrow GN, Fisher DA, Larsen PR. Maternal and fetal thyroid 
function. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1072–1078 
( ) 
2. Mandel SJ, Brent GA, Larsen PR. Levothyroxine therapy in 
patients with thyroid disease. Ann Intern Med 1993;119: 
492–502 
( ) 
3. Mandel SJ, Larsen PR, Seely EW, Brent GA. Increased 
need for thyroxine during pregnancy in women with primary 
hypothyroidism. N Engl J Med 1990;323:91–96 
( ) 
OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 121 

4. Arafah BM. Increased need for thyroxine in women with 
hypothyroidism during estrogen therapy. N Engl J Med 
2001;344:1743–1749 
( ) 
5. Krassas GE, Pontikides N, Kaltsas T, 
Papadopoulou P, 
Batrinos M. Menstrual disturbances in thyrotoxicosis. Clin 
Endocrinol 1994;40:641–644 
( ) 
6. Franklyn JA. The management of hyperthyroidism. N Engl 
J Med 1994;330:1731–1738 
( ) 
7. Momotani N, Noh J, Oyanagi H, Ishikawa 
N, Ito K. 
Antithyroid drug therapy for Graves’ disease during pregnancy. 
Optimal regimen for fetal thyroid status. N Engl J 
Med 1986;315:24–28 
( ) 
8. Mandel SJ, Cooper DS. The use of antithyroid drugs in 
pregnancy and lactation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86: 
2354–2359 
( ) 
9. Goodwin TM, Montoro M, Mestman JH. Transient hyperthyroidism 
and hyperemesis gravidarum: clinical aspects. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:648–652 
( ) 
10. Browne-Martin K, Emerson CH. Postpartum thyroid dysfunction. 
Clin Obstet Gyncol 1997;40:90–101 
( ) 
11. Gerstein HC. Incidence of postpartum thyroid dysfunction 
in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Ann Intern Med 
1993;118:419–423 
( ) 
12. Carr BR, Parker CR Jr, Porter JC, MacDonald PC, Simpson 
ER. Regulation of steroid secretion by adrenal tissue of a 
human anencephalic fetus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1980;50:870–873 
( ) 
13. Coulter CL, Goldsmith PC, Mesiano S, Voytec CC, Martin 
MC, Han VK, et al. Functional maturation of the primate 
fetal adrenal in vivo: I. Role of insulin-like growth factors 
(IGFs) IGF-I receptor, and IGF binding proteins in growth 
regulation. Endocrinology 1996;137:4487–4498 
( ) 
14. Orentreich N, Brind JL, Rizer RL, Vogelman JH. Age 
changes and sex differences in serum dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate concentrations throughout adulthood. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1984;59:551–555 
( ) 
15. McKenzie R, Reynolds JC, O’Fallon A, Dale J, Deloria M, 
Blackwelder W, et al. Decreased bone mineral density during 
low dose glucocorticoid administration in a randomized, 
placebo controlled trial. J Rheumatol 2000;27: 
2222–2226 
( ) 
16. Saag KG, Emkey R, Schnitzer TJ, Brown JP, Hawkins F, 
Groemaere S, et al. Alendronate for the prevention and 
treatment of glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis. Glucocorticoid-
Induced Osteoporosis Study Group. N Engl J 
Med 1998;339:292–299 
( ) 
17. Azziz R, Zacur HA. 21-Hydroxylase deficiency in female 
hyperandrogenism: screening and diagnosis. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1989;69:577–584 
( ) 
18. Spritzer P, Billaud L, Thalabard JC, Birman P, Mowszowicz 
I, Raux-Demay MC, et al. Cyproterone acetate versus 
hydrocortisone treatment in late onset adrenal hyperplasia. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:642–646 
( ) 
19. Laohaprasitiporn C, Barbieri RL, Yeh J. Induction of ovulation 
with the sole use of clomiphene citrate in late-onset 21

122 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

hydroxylase deficiency. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1996;41: 
224–226 


( ) 
20. Shifren JL, Braunstein GD, Simon JA, Casson PR, Buster 
JE, Redmond GP, et al. Transdermal testosterone treatment 
in women with impaired sexual function after oophorectomy. 
N Engl J Med 2000;343:682–688 
( ) 
21. Spiegel RJ, Vigersky RA, Oliff AI, Echelberger CK, Bruton 
J, Poplack DG. Adrenal suppression after short-term corticosteroid 
therapy. Lancet 1979;1(8117):630–633 
( ) 
22. Nelson AM, Conn DL. Series on pharmacology in practice, 
9. Glucocorticoids in rheumatic disease. Mayo Clin Proc 
1980;55:758–769 
( ) 
23. Nieman LK, Chrousos GP, 
Oldfield EH, Avgerinos PC, 
Cutler GB Jr, Loriaux DL. The ovine corticotropin-releasing 
hormone stimulation test and the dexamethasone suppression 
test in the differential diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:862–867 
( ) 
24. Styne DM, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL, Wilson CB, Conte 
FA. Treatment of Cushing’s disease in childhood and adolescence 
by transsphenoidal microadenectomy. N Engl J 
Med 1984;310:889–893 
( ) 
25. Tyrrell JB, Brooks RM, Fitzgerald PA, Cofoid PB, Forsham 
PH, Wilson CB. Cushing’s disease. Selective trans-sphenoidal 
resection of pituitary microadenomas. N Engl J Med 
1978;298:753–758 
( ) 
26. Schteingart DE, Tsao HS, Taylor CI, McKenzie A, Victoria 
R, Therrien BA. Sustained remission of Cushing’s disease 
with mitotane and pituitary irradiation. Ann Intern Med 
1980;92:613–619 
( ) 
27. Scott HW Jr, 
Liddle GW, Mulherin JL, McKenna TJ, 
Stroup SL, Rhamy RK. Surgical experience with Cushing’s 
disease. Ann Surg 1977;185:524–534 
( ) 
28. Becker D, Schumacher OP. o,p’DDD therapy in invasive 
adrenocortical carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1975;82: 
677–679 
( ) 
29. Lindholm J, 
Kehlet H, Blichert-Toft M, Dinesen B, 
Riishede J. Reliability of the 30-minute ACTH test in 
assessing hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal function. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1978;47:272–274 
( ) 
30. Oelkers W, Diederich S, Bahr V. Diagnosis and therapy 
surveillance in Addison’s disease: rapid adrenocorticotropin 
(ACTH) test and measurement of plasma ACTH, renin 
activity, and aldosterone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;75: 
259–264 
( ) 
31. Zondervan KT, Yudkin PL, Vessey MP, Dawes MG, Barlow 
DH, Kennedy SH. The prevalence of chronic pelvic pain in 
women in the United Kingdom: a systematic review. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:93–99 
( ) 
32. Pescetto G, Pecorari D, De Cecco L, Ragni N. Manuale di 
Ginecologia ed Ostetricia. Edizone Seu. Roma, 1992: 
231–232 
33. Coll-Capdevila C. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding and dysmenorrhea. 
Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 1997; 
2:229–237 
( ) 
34. Svanberg L, Ulmsten U. The incidence of primary dysmenorrhea 
in teenagers. Arch Gynecol 1981;230:173–177 
( ) 
35. Jamieson DJ, Steege JF. The prevalence of dysmenorrhea, 
dyspareunia, pelvic pain, and irritable bowel syndrome in 
primary care practices. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:55–58 
( ) 
36. Klein JR, Litt IF. Epidemiology of adolescent dysmenorrhea. 
Pediatrics 1981;68:661–664 
( ) 
37. Andersch B, Milsom I. An epidemiologic study of young 
women with dysmenorrhea. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1982;144:655–660 
( ) 
38. Pedron-Nuevo N, Gonzales-Unzaga LN, de Celis-Carrillo 
R, Reynoso-Isla M, de la Torre-Romeral L. [Incidence of 
dysmenorrhea and associated symptoms in women aged 1224 
years.] [Spanish] Ginecol Obstet Mex 1998;66:492–494 
( ) 
39. Creatsas G, Goumalatsos N, Eleftheriou N, Loutradis D, 
Deligeo-Roglou E, Ambela C, eds. Dysfunctional uterine 
bleeding during adolescence. Proceedings of the IVth 
European Congress on Pediatric and Adolescent 
Gynecology. September 29–October 3, 1988, Rhodes, 
Greece. Athens: Hellenic Society of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Gynecology, 1988:324–326 
40. Zhang WY, Li Wan Po A. Efficacy of minor analgesics in 
primary dysmenorrhoea: a systematic review. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol 1998;105:780–789 
( ) 
41. Ezcurdia M, Cortejoso FJ, Lanzon R, Ugalde FJ, Herruzo 
A, Artigas R, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and tolerability 
of dexketoprofen and ketoprofen in the treatment of 
primary dysmenorrhea. J Clin Pharmacol 1998;38(Suppl 
12):65S–73S 
( ) 
42. Morrison BW, Daniels SE, Kotey P, Cantu N, Seidenberg B. 
Rofecoxib, a specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in primary 
dysmenorrhea: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;94:504–508 
( ) 
43. Akin MD, Weingand KW, Hengehold DA, Goodale MB, 
Hinkle RT, Smith RP. Continuous low-level topical heat in 
the treatment of dysmenorrhea. Obstet Gynecol 2001;97: 
343–349 
( ) 
44. Barnard ND, Scialli AR, Hurlock D, Bertron P. Diet and 
sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual 
symptoms. Obstet Gynecol 2000;95:245–250 
( ) 
45. Golomb LM, Solidum AA, Warren MP. Primary dysmenorrhea 
and physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30: 
906–909 
( ) 
46. Wilson ML, 
Farquhar CM, Sinclair OJ, Johnson NP. 
Surgical interruption of pelvic nerve pathways for primary 
and secondary dysmenorrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2000;(2):CD001896 
( ) 
47. Sangi-Haghpeykar H, Poindexter AN III. Epidemiology of 
endometriosis among parous women. Obstet Gynecol 1995; 
85:983–992 
( ) 
48. Lebovic DI, Mueller MD, Taylor RN. Immunobiology of 
endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2001;75:1–10 
( ) 
49. Suginami H, Yano K. An ovum capture inhibitor (OCI) in 
endometriosis peritoneal fluid: an OCI-related mechanism 

responsible for fimbrial failure of ovum capture. Fertil 
Steril 1988;50:648–653 


( ) 
50. Lessey BA, Castlebaum AJ, Sawin SW, Buck CA, Schinnar 
R, Bilker W, et al. Aberrant integrin expression in the endometrium 
of women with endometriosis. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1994;79:643–649 
( ) 
51. Vercellini P, Trespidi L, De Giorgi O,Cortesi I, Parazzini F, 
Crosignani PG. Endometriosis and pelvic pain: relation to 
disease stage and localization. Fertil Steril 1996;65: 
299–304 
( ) 
52. Marcoux S, Maheux R, Berube S. Laparoscopic surgery in 
infertile women with minimal or mild endometriosis. 
Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis. N Engl J 
Med 1997;337:217–222 
( ) 
53. Dawood MY, Ramos J, Khan-Dawood FS. Depot leuprolide 
acetate versus danazol for treatment of pelvic endometriosis: 
changes in vertebral bone mass and serum estradiol and 
calcitonin. Fertil Steril 1995;63:1177–1183 
( ) 
54. Minjarez D, Schlaff WD. Update on the medical treatment 
of endometriosis. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2000; 
27:641–651 
( ) 
55. Surrey ES. Add-back therapy and gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonists in the treatment of patients with 
endometriosis: can a consensus be reached? Add-Back 
Consensus Working Group. Fertil Steril 1999;71:420–424 
56. Vercellini P, Crosignani PG, Fadini R, Radici E, Belloni C, 
Sismondi P. A gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
compared with expectant management after conservative 
surgery for symptomatic endometriosis. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol 1999;106:672–677 
( ) 
57. Crosignani PG, Vercellini P, Biffignandi F, Constantini W, 
Cortesi I, Imparato E. Laparoscopy versus laparotomy in 
conservative surgical treatment for severe endometriosis. 
Fertil Steril 1996;66:706–711 
( ) 
58. Candiani GB, Fedele L, Vercellini P, Bianchi S, Di Nola G. 
Presacral neurectomy for the treatment of pelvic pain asso-
OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 123 

ciated with endometriosis: a controlled study. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1992;167:100–103 


( ) 
59. Olive DL. Medical treatment: alternatives to danazol. In: 
Schenken RS, ed. Endometriosis: contemporary concepts in 
clinical management. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989: 
189–211 
60. Parazzini F. Ablation of lesions or no treatment in minimalmild 
endometriosis in infertile women: a randomized trial. 
Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio dell’Endometriosi. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1332–1334 
( ) 
61. Keye WR, Jr, Hansen LW, Astin M, Poulson AM Jr. Argon 
laser therapy of endometriosis: a review of 92 consecutive 
patients. Fertil Steril 1987;47:208–212 
( ) 
62. Vancaillie 
T, Schenken RS. Endoscopic surgery. In: 
Schenken RS, ed. Endometriosis: contemporary concepts in 
clinical management. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989: 
249–266 
63. MacDonald SR, Klock SC, Milad MP. Long-term outcome 
of nonconservative surgery (hysterectomy) for endometriosis-
associated pain in women <30 years old. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;180:1360–1363 
( ) 
64. Fedele L, Bianchi S, Marchini M, Villa L, Brioschi D, 
Parazzini F. Superovulation with human menopausal 
gonadotropins in the treatment of infertility associated with 
minimal or mild endometriosis: a controlled randomized 
study. Fertil Steril 1992;58:28–31 
(button) 
( ) 
65. Kemmann E, Ghazi D, Corsan G, Bohrer MF. Does ovulation 
stimulation improve fertility in women with minimal/
mild endometriosis after laser laparoscopy? Int J Fertil 
Menopausal Stud 1993;38:16–21 
( ) 
66. Olivennes F, 
Feldberg D, Liu HC, Cohen J, Moy F, 
Rosewaks Z. Endometriosis: a stage by stage analysis—the 
role of in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1995;64:392–398 
( ) 

124 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Infertility 


EVALUATION OF INFERTILITY 

Infertility generally is defined as a couple’s failure to 
achieve pregnancy after 1 year of regular, unprotected 
intercourse. The definition is based on expected monthly 
conception rates of 20–25% among healthy young couples 
and studies demonstrating that 85% of normal couples 
conceive within 1 year. Therefore, in the United 
States, approximately 15% of couples are infertile. 

Although many think that infertility is epidemic, its 
incidence actually has changed little over the past three 
decades. The increasing numbers of couples seeking evaluation 
and treatment for infertility can be attributed to 
several factors. Recent demographic trends in the United 
States are largely responsible. The baby boom generation 
(born between 1946 and 1964) is aging, and its youngest 
women are now in their later reproductive years. 
Coincident trends, including a greater emphasis on higher 
education and careers among women, delayed marriage, 
and more frequent divorce, all tend to delay 
childbearing. Biologically, fertility declines with advancing 
age. The incidence of diseases that may adversely 
affect fertility (eg, leiomyomata and endometriosis) also 
increases with age. Together, the greater numbers of 
women at advanced reproductive age and the increasing 
tendency to postpone pregnancy have yielded a marked 
increase in the numbers of subfertile and infertile women. 
A pandemic in sexually transmitted infections is another 
probable contributor. At the same time, the availability of 
legal abortion and societal acceptance of single parenthood 
have greatly reduced the number of infants available 
for adoption. Couples who might otherwise have chosen 
to adopt now have few options but to seek formal evaluation 
and treatment for infertility. Finally, the advent of 
modern assisted reproductive technologies, as well as the 
associated controversies, has increased public awareness 
of infertility and stimulated open debate. As a result, 
infertile couples are now less reluctant to seek medical 
advice, evaluation, and treatment. 

The human reproductive process is complex. 
However, for evaluation, it can be broken down into its 
most important and basic component parts: 

• 
Adequate numbers of spermatozoa must be 
deposited at or near the cervix at or near the time 
of ovulation, ascend into the fallopian tubes, and 
fertilize an ovum (male factor). 
• 
A mature ovum must be released from the ovaries, 
ideally on a regular, predictable, cyclic basis 
(ovarian factor). 
• 
The cervix must capture, nurture, and release 
spermatozoa into the uterus and fallopian tubes 
(cervical factor). 
• 
The fallopian tubes must have a functional 
anatomic relationship to the adjacent ovaries to 
facilitate ovum capture (peritoneal factor). 
• 
The fallopian tubes must be patent and also capable 
of timely transport of an embryo to the uterine 
cavity (tubal factor). 
• 
The uterus must be receptive to embryo implantation 
and capable of supporting subsequent normal 
growth and development (uterine factor). 
Formal evaluation of infertility is designed to isolate 
each component of the reproductive process and to identify 
any abnormalities that may interfere with, or altogether 
prevent, conception. Evaluation generally is 
indicated in women who fail to conceive after a year or 
more of regular, unprotected intercourse. Earlier evaluation 
and treatment is not only appropriate but specifically 
indicated in women older than 35 years; with recent history 
of oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea; and with known 
or strongly suspected tubal disease, endometriosis, or 
male factor infertility (1). Initial consultation with the 
infertile couple should include obtaining complete medical 
histories and a menstrual history; a physical examination 
of the female partner; preconceptional counseling; 
and education on the reproductive process, including 
information regarding how coital frequency and timing 
affect fertility (2). Evaluation of both partners should 
begin at the same time. 

Practitioners should never overlook age as one of the 
more severe determinants of fertility in women. As such, 
it is prudent to expedite the evaluation of couples when 
the woman is older than 35 years. Furthermore, consideration 
should be given to a more aggressive or accelerated 
course of therapy in their treatment, including proceeding 
more rapidly to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with 
gonadotropins, laparoscopy, and in vitro fertilization. In 
general, practitioners should counsel patients that current 
infertility management has limited success in treating 
patients older than 40–42 years, with the exception of the 
use of in vitro fertilization with donor oocytes. All 
women should be counseled about the impact that age 
will have on their overall reproductive potential. 
Preconceptional counseling and testing are prudent mea-
sures. They should be recommended at the time of the initial 
infertility visit if they have not already been 
undertaken when the decision to attempt conception was 
made (see Boxes J and K). 


BOX J 
INFERTILITY 125 

Preconceptional Screening 

Immunization should be offered to women at risk, including 
rubella vaccination for susceptible women and hepatitis 
B virus vaccination for those at risk of acquiring this 
infection. Screening or diagnostic studies are recommended 
or offered during the preconceptional evaluation. 
Screening for human immunodeficiency virus infection 
should be recommended. A number of tests can be performed 
for specific indications: 

Screening for sexually transmitted disease, based on 
risk assessment 
Testing to assess recurrent pregnancy loss 
Testing for maternal diseases based on medical or 
reproductive history 
Mantoux skin test with purified protein derivative for 
tuberculosis 
Screening for genetic disorders based on racial and 
ethnic background: 
Sickle hemoglobinopathies: African-American, 
Southeast-Asian, or Mediterranean ancestry 
b -Thalassemia: Mediterranean descent 
a -Thalassemia: Southeast-Asian descent 
Tay-Sachs disease: Ashkenazi Jewish, Cajun, or 
French-Canadian descent 

Screening for cystic fibrosis on the basis of family his 
tory of the disease or Caucasian ancestry (including 
Ashkenazi Jews)* 

Screening for other genetic disorders on the basis of 
family history (eg, fragile X for family history of nonspecific 
mental retardation, Duchenne muscular dystrophy) 


*American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American 
College of Medical Genetics. Preconception and prenatal carrier 
screening for cystic fibrosis: clinical and laboratory guidelines. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Guidelines 
for perinatal care. 4th ed. Washington, DC: ACOG; Elk Grove 
Village, Illinois: American Academy of Pediatrics, 1997 

History and Physical Examination 

A careful history and physical examination can identify 
symptoms or signs suggesting a specific cause for infertility 
and thereby help to focus subsequent diagnostic evaluation 
on the factors most likely responsible. Relevant parts 
of the medical history and physical examination in infertile 
couples are listed in Boxes L and M, respectively. In 
the absence of any history of male genital abnormality, 
trauma, surgery, sexual dysfunction, or impotence, physi-

BOX K 
Indications for Genetic Counseling 

A family history of the following disorders: 

Thalassemia (Italian, Greek, Mediterranean, or Asian 

background): mean corpuscular volume greater 

than 80 

Neural tube defect (meningomyelocele, spina bifida, or 

anencephaly) 
Congenital heart defect 
Down syndrome 
Tay-Sachs disease (eg, Jewish, Cajun, French 


Canadian) 
Canavan disease 
Sickle cell disease or trait (African) 
Hemophilia or other blood disorders 
Muscular dystrophy 
Cystic fibrosis 
Huntington’s chorea 
Mental retardation/autism 
Other inherited genetic or chromosomal disorder 
Maternal metabolic disorder (eg, type 1 diabetes 

mellitus, phenylketonuria) 

Recurrent pregnancy loss, or a stillbirth 

Patient’s age at least 35 years as of estimated date of 

delivery 

Patient or baby’s father had a child with birth defects not 

listed above 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Antepartum 
record. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002 

cal examination of the male partner may be deferred pending 
the results of an initial semen analysis. Abnormal 
findings in the reproductive history or semen analysis 
indicate the need for a formal evaluation. This evaluation 
may be conducted by gynecologists who have the necessary 
training and experience, but most often it is performed 
by a urologist or other specialist in male reproduction (3). 

Diagnostic Evaluation—Infertility 
Factors 

Evaluation of the infertile couple should be directed 
toward identifying the cause or causes of infertility in a 
systematic, expeditious, and cost-effective manner so as 
to identify all relevant factors. Initial emphasis is appropriately 
focused on the least invasive methods for detection 
of the most common causes of infertility. The pace, 


126 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

sequence, and extent of evaluation should take into 
account the couple’s wishes, age of the patient, the duration 
of infertility, and unique features of the medical history 
and physical examination or features that suggest 
possible causes of the infertility. 

MALE FACTOR 

A male factor is solely responsible in approximately 20% 
of infertile couples and is an important contributing cause 
in another 30–40%. Semen analysis is the cornerstone of 
the laboratory evaluation of the infertile male and largely 
defines the severity of any male factor. Physicians should 
provide patients with standardized instructions for semen 

BOX L 
Medical History: The Infertile Couple 

Male partner 

Past reproductive performance 
Sexual dysfunction 
Past surgery and outcome 
Medications and allergies 
Serious illness or injury 
Sexually transmitted diseases 
Use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs 
Occupation 
Family history of birth defects or mental retardation 
Gonadal toxin exposures, including heat 

Female partner 

Past reproductive performance 
Sexual dysfunction 
Past surgery and outcome 
Medications and allergies 
Serious illness or injury 
Sexually transmitted diseases 
Use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs 
Occupation 
Family history of birth defects or mental retardation 
Onset and severity of dysmenorrhea 
Pelvic or abdominal pain, dyspareunia 
Symptoms of thyroid disease, galactorrhea, or hirsutism 

Couple 

Duration of infertility 
Methods of contraception 
Previous evaluation and treatment 

collection, including a recommended abstinence interval 
of 2–3 days. Semen is typically collected in masturbation, 
but intercourse using a specialized nontoxic semen collection 
condom provides an effective alternative when 
necessary. Specimens may be collected in the laboratory 
or in the home, should be maintained at room or body 
temperature, and should be examined within 1 hour of 
collection in a laboratory certified under the Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments. At least two 
semen analyses at least 2 weeks apart are recommended 
to define representative semen quality accurately. 

Semen analysis provides information on semen volume 
and sperm concentration, motility, and morphology, 
with normal reference values based on the clinical literature 
(Table 10). Abnormal values suggest a male factor 
and the need for additional evaluation. They may help to 
explain subfertility or reproductive inefficiency, but clearly 
they do not indicate absolute infertility. Conversely, 
men with normal semen parameters still may be infertile. 
Methods used in semen analysis have changed little over 
time, with the exception of the criteria used for judging 
sperm morphology. World Health Organization criteria 
for normal sperm morphology have been revised twice in 

BOX M 
Physical Examination of the 
Infertile Couple 


Male partner 

Signs of inadequate virilization or gynecomastia 
Signs of systemic illness 
Abnormalities of the penis or position of the urethral meatus 
Scrotal varicocele 
Absence or abnormality of the vasa deferentia or epi


didymides 
Testicular symmetry, size, and consistency 

Female partner 

Weight and body mass index 
Signs of systemic illness 
Thyroid enlargement, nodules, or tenderness 
Breast secretions and character 
Signs of androgen excess 
Pelvic or abdominal tenderness 
Vaginal or cervical abnormality or secretions 
Uterine size, shape, position, and mobility 
Adnexal mass or tenderness 
Cul-de-sac mass, tenderness, or nodularity 


recent years, most recently in 1999 (4). The standard in 
use may vary among laboratories. The current criteria are 
significantly more strict than in the past, and when they 
are applied, relatively few sperm will be classified as having 
normal morphology, even sperm in the semen of fertile 
men. The value of the new, stricter criteria is in their 
correlation with prognosis for successful fertilization of 
ova in vitro (5). Critical evaluation of sperm morphology, 
therefore, is crucial to planning an effective treatment 
strategy in couples pursuing IVF. It may also influence 
judgments regarding the relative utility of IUI as a means 
to overcome oligospermia (reduced sperm number), 
asthenospermia (reduced sperm motility), or otherwise 
unexplained infertility (see Table 10). 

Hormonal abnormalities adversely affecting male 
reproductive function are well recognized but generally 
uncommon causes of male factor infertility. They are 
extremely uncommon in men with normal semen parameters. 
Routine endocrine evaluation is therefore generally 
unnecessary, but evaluation should be performed if there 
is 1) an abnormal semen analysis (especially if sperm 
density is <10 million per milliliter), 2) sexual dysfunction, 
or 3) other clinical signs or symptoms of a specific 
endocrine disease (3). A basic initial endocrine evaluation 

n TABLE 10. Semen Analysis: Normal Reference 
Values 
Characteristic Value 
Volume 1.5–5.0 mL 
pH >7.2 
Viscosity <3 (scale: 0–4) 
Sperm agglutination <2 (scale: 0–3) 
Sperm concentration >20 million per milliliter 
Total sperm number >40 million per ejaculate 
Motility >50% 
Forward progression >2 (scale: 0–4) 
Sperm morphology >50% normal (WHO, 1987*) 
>30% normal (WHO, 1992†) 
>14% normal (WHO, 1999‡) 

*World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the 
examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 
2nd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987 

†World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the 
examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 
3rd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1992 
‡World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the examination 
of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 3rd 
ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1999. Based 
on Kruger criteria (Kruger TF, Acosta AA, Simmons KF, et al. 
Predictive value of abnormal sperm morphology in in vitro fertilization. 
Fertil Steril 1988;49:112–117 and Menkveld R, Stander FS, 
Kotze TJ, Kruger TF, van Zyl JA. The evaluation of morphological characteristics 
of human spermatozoa according to stricter criteria. Hum 
Reprod 1990;5:586–592) and applicable to in vitro fertilization. 
INFERTILITY 127 

includes measurements of serum FSH and total testosterone. 
Low initial testosterone concentrations should be 
confirmed and evaluation expanded to include measurements 
of serum free testosterone, LH, and prolactin. 
Many men with abnormal spermatogenesis have normal 
serum FSH levels, but elevated concentrations clearly 
indicate an abnormality. A basic endocrine evaluation 
prior to formal consultation with a urologist or other specialist 
in male reproduction will help ensure that evaluation 
continues in an efficient and productive manner. 

Additional evaluation of demonstrated or suspected 
male factor infertility requires careful physical examination 
and may involve any of a number of additional tests. 
Low-volume or absent ejaculates suggest retrograde ejaculation, 
lack of emission, ejaculatory duct obstruction, 
hypogonadism, or congenital bilateral absence of the vasa 
deferentia (CBAVD). Postejaculatory urinalysis in men 
with low ejaculate volumes (<1 mL) is indicated to exclude 
retrograde ejaculation, except in men with CBAVD or 
hypogonadism. Transrectal ultrasonography can demonstrate 
dilated seminal vesicles or ejaculatory ducts, which 
may be seen in men with complete or partial ejaculatory 
duct obstruction; this imaging test is indicated in men with 
azoospermia who have palpable vasa and low ejaculatory 
volumes (6). Most scrotal pathologic conditions, including 
varicoceles, spermatoceles, absent vasa, epididymal 
induration, and testicular masses, are palpable on physical 
examination. Scrotal ultrasonography is useful when findings 
are ambiguous or a testicular mass is suspected. 

More specialized tests are available but should be 
reserved only for cases in which results will direct treatment. 
Reports of elevated numbers of leukocytes or round 
cells (>5 million per milliliter) in the ejaculate require 
additional evaluation with cytologic staining or immunohistochemical 
techniques to reliably differentiate leukocytes 
from immature germ cells, which have a very 
similar appearance under wet-mount microscopy. True 
pyospermia (>1 million leukocytes per milliliter) necessitates 
evaluation for genital tract infection or inflammation. 
Tests to detect antisperm antibodies should be 
considered when semen analysis reveals isolated 
asthenospermia with normal sperm density or sperm 
agglutination, but these tests are unnecessary if plans are 
to pursue treatment with IVF and intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection (ICSI). Numerous other specialized tests 
(hypoosmotic swelling test, sperm binding and penetration 
assays, computer-aided sperm analysis, and acrosome 
reaction) are available but generally are not 
required for the diagnosis of male factor infertility. None 
has demonstrated the accuracy and reliability necessary 
to gain wide acceptance. 

Genetic abnormalities may cause infertility in the male. 
Cystic fibrosis gene mutations involving the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene 
are highly associated with CBAVD (7). Consequently, the 
male partner with CBAVD should be screened for CFTR 
gene mutations before undertaking treatments that will 


128 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

use his sperm after recovery from the epididymis (IVF 
with ICSI). Chromosomal abnormalities (aneuploidy, 
translocations, and inversions) are relatively common in 
infertile men (7% overall), their prevalence being inversely 
related to sperm density (8). Less obvious are the 
microdeletions of sections of the Y chromosome that may 
be found in 10–15% of men with azoospermia or severe 
oligospermia (9). Given the increased risks of miscarriage, 
chromosomal and congenital abnormalities, and birth of 
similarly infertile male offspring, men with nonobstructive 
azoospermia or severe oligospermia (sperm density 
<5–10 million per milliliter) must be informed and offered 
genetic counseling, karyotyping, and Y chromosome analysis 
if treatment with IVF and ICSI is being considered. 

OVARIAN FACTOR 

Ovulatory dysfunction will be identified in approximately 
15% of all infertile couples and accounts for up to 40% of 
infertility in women. Objective evaluation of ovulatory 
function is an important initial diagnostic step in any infertile 
couple. Whereas ovulatory dysfunction is often obvious, 
as in women with a history of oligomenorrhea, 
amenorrhea, or dysfunctional uterine bleeding, it can also 
be subtle and present only as polymenorrhea or a short or 
otherwise inadequate luteal phase. It may have a specific 
underlying cause, such as thyroid disease, PCOS, hyperandrogenism, 
pituitary tumor, an eating disorder, extremes of 
weight loss or exercise, hyperprolactinemia, or obesity. All 
these causes are important to identify, because correct 
diagnosis will allow the most specific and effective treatment 
and help to prevent the longer-term health consequences 
that often are associated with these disorders. 
However, despite thorough investigation, the exact cause of 
ovulatory dysfunction often remains obscure. Diagnostic 
evaluation may be accomplished using a variety of studies. 
The choice of particular tests depends on the history and 
physical manifestations of individual patients. 

Menstrual history may be all that is required. Patients 
with a well-documented history of dysfunctional bleeding, 
oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, or a combination do 
not require sophisticated diagnostic evaluation. Basal 
body temperature (BBT) recordings provide a simple and 
inexpensive method for evaluating ovulatory function. 
Whereas biphasic patterns are characteristic of ovulatory 
cycles, monophasic recordings or a grossly short interval 
of postovulatory temperature elevation (less than 11 
days) may identify patients with absent or poor-quality 
ovulatory function. It is also important to remember that 
ovulatory women occasionally may exhibit monophasic 
BBT patterns. In ovulatory cycles, the BBT typically 
rises 1–3 days after the midcycle LH surge, but the 
method cannot reliably define the time of ovulation. 

Serum progesterone determinations obtained during 
the luteal phase (3–10 days before the anticipated 
menses) are commonly used to document ovulation; values 
greater than 3.0 ng/mL provide presumptive evidence 
of ovulation. Midluteal phase determinations may offer 

additional information regarding luteal function, although 
concentrations may fluctuate widely, even in normal 
women. Urinary LH determinations using commercial 
“ovulation predictor kits” can identify the midcycle LH 
surge; provide reliable, albeit indirect, evidence of ovulatory 
function; and help to define the interval within which 
conception is most likely (the 3 days ending with the day 
of ovulation) (2). Results generally correlate well with 
the peak in serum LH level, although accuracy, reliability, 
and ease of use vary among available products. 

Endometrial biopsy and histologic evaluation can 
demonstrate secretory endometrial development that 
results from the action of progesterone and thus implies 
ovulation. Dating the endometrium using established histologic 
criteria and a demonstration of a consistent maturation 
delay (>2 days) (Video 1; Images 5–30) has hitherto 
been considered the traditional method for diagnosis of 
luteal phase defect, but the accuracy of these diagnostic criteria, 
the incidence of luteal phase defect, and its clinical 
relevance as a cause of infertility remain controversial 
issues (10). Serial transvaginal ultrasonographic examinations 
can reveal the size and number of developing follicles 
and provide presumptive evidence of ovulation by demonstrating 
progressive follicular growth, sudden collapse of 
the preovulatory follicle, a loss of clearly defined follicular 
margins, the appearance of internal echoes, and an increase 
in cul-de-sac fluid volume. However, because of the cost 
and logistical demands involved, this method generally is 
reserved for patients in whom less complicated methods 
failed to provide the necessary information. 

Additional evaluation aimed at defining the best choice 
of treatment is indicated in women found to have absent or 
poor ovulatory function. Serum TSH and prolactin determinations 
will identify thyroid disorders, hyperprolactinemia, 
or both. If the findings of these studies are abnormal, 
the patient may require additional specific evaluation and 
treatment. In amenorrheic women, obtaining a serum FSH 
level will differentiate patients with ovarian failure who 
may be candidates to be recipients of donor oocytes from 
those with hypothalamic dysfunction who will require 
treatment with pulsatile exogenous GnRH or exogenous 
gonadotropin stimulation to achieve ovulation. Evaluation 
of “ovarian reserve” using a cycle day 3 FSH or 
clomiphene citrate challenge test (the administration of 
100 mg of clomiphene citrate daily on cycle days 5–9, 
with FSH and estradiol determinations on cycle day 3 and 
FSH determination on cycle day 10) may provide additional 
important prognostic information (11). Threshold 
abnormal values vary with the specific assay systems used 
for the measurement of FSH and estradiol, so the results 
must be interpreted with caution. Ideally, however, ovarian 
reserve testing should be performed only when and 
where accurate threshold values have been firmly established. 
For most assays in widespread use in clinical laboratories, 
cycle day 3 FSH values above 10 IU/L and 
estradiol levels above 80 pg/mL are abnormal and associated 
with a poor prognosis for success (Fig. 51). Errors in 


Comparison of the cumulative probability of pregnancy curves with life table analyses in 589 couples from 
the general infertility population confirmed the predictive value of the clomiphene citrate (CC) challenge test (A).. An 
age-related decline in pregnancy rates was found among patients with normal CC challenge tests (B),, but not among 
the uniformly poor rates in patients with abnormal CC challenge test results (C).. (Reprinted from Fertility and Sterility, 
Vol. 63, pages 1–11, RT Scott Jr, GE Hofmann, Prognostic assessment of ovarian reserv. Copyright 1995, with permis-
sion of Elsevier Science) 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Months 
Months 
Normal Abnormal 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
Months 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
A 
B 
C 
Comparison of the cumulative probability of pregnancy curves with life table analyses in 589 couples from 
the general infertility population confirmed the predictive value of the clomiphene citrate (CC) challenge test (A).. An 
age-related decline in pregnancy rates was found among patients with normal CC challenge tests (B),, but not among 
the uniformly poor rates in patients with abnormal CC challenge test results (C).. (Reprinted from Fertility and Sterility, 
Vol. 63, pages 1–11, RT Scott Jr, GE Hofmann, Prognostic assessment of ovarian reserv. Copyright 1995, with permis-
sion of Elsevier Science) 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Months 
Months 
Normal Abnormal 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
Months 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
A 
B 
C 

130 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

interpretation of the test can easily encourage ineffective 
treatment or discourage effective treatment, both with 
devastating results. Where available, ovarian reserve testing 
should be considered in women with 1) age older than 
35 years, 2) a single ovary or a history of previous ovarian 
surgery, or 3) previously documented poor response to 
exogenous gonadotropin stimulation. 

CERVICAL FACTOR 

Abnormalities in the production of cervical mucus or in 
sperm–mucus interaction are rarely identified as the sole 
or principal cause of infertility. Speculum examination 
may reveal gross evidence of chronic cervicitis that 
deserves further evaluation and treatment. It also may 
demonstrate significant cervical stenosis, which may be 
the consequence of a previous conization or of extensive 
cauterization or laser ablation for cervical dysplasia. In 
either case, effective sperm–mucus interaction may be 
impaired. In the absence of such findings, deficient or 
otherwise abnormal cervical mucus production or function, 
although possible, is highly unlikely. 

Recent studies have exposed the limitations of the 
postcoital test. Results are subjective and highly variable. 
Its utility and predictive value have been questioned 
because it has not been shown that the test and treatments 
for cervical factor infertility have any significant impact 
on conception rates (12). Contemporary treatments for 
unexplained infertility now can be used to overcome or 
bypass any unrecognized cervical factor. Empiric exogenous 
gonadotropin stimulation, intended to induce ovulation 
of more than a single ovum (controlled ovarian 
hyperstimulation), is one common treatment strategy. The 
markedly elevated serum estrogen levels that accompany 
such treatment stimulate cervical mucus production. 
Moreover, controlled ovarian hyperstimulation therapy 
typically is combined with timely IUI to bring together 
more than the usual numbers of ova and sperm, and IUI 
is widely recognized as the single most effective form of 
treatment for cervical factor infertility. The postcoital test 
may be reserved for those patients in whom the history or 
physical examination findings clearly suggest a cervical 
factor; even then, it should be performed only when the 
result will influence treatment. 

UTERINE FACTOR 

Abnormalities of uterine anatomy or function are relatively 
uncommon causes of infertility in women, but they 
always should be considered. A variety of uterine conditions 
have been implicated as causes of infertility, including 
congenital malformations, leiomyomas, endometrial 
polyps, intrauterine synechiae, foreign bodies, and chronic 
endometritis (Images 37–39). The proposed responsible 
mechanism is implantation failure resulting from mechanical 
interference; functional impairment of normal 
endometrial growth, maturation, and vascularity; or both. 
However, there is little or no compelling direct evidence to 

support this hypothesis. There is no compelling evidence to 
indicate that myomas interfere with fertility unless their 
anatomic location is an obstacle to conception. 

Three basic methods may be used to identify abnormalities 
of the uterine cavity contours that may adversely 
affect fertility. The method chosen may vary and should 
be tailored to the needs of the individual patient. 
Hysterosalpingography defines the size and shape of the 
uterine cavity and will clearly reveal any significant 
developmental anomaly, such as a unicornuate, septate, 
bicornuate, or didelphic uterus, as well as variants 
(Fig. 52 and Images 37–44). It will also demonstrate most 
endometrial polyps, submucous myomas, or intrauterine 
synechiae that are significant enough to have important 
reproductive consequences (Figs. 53 and 54; Images 
45–47). Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasonography 
also can be used to diagnose uterine pathologic 
conditions, including myomas and polyps. Saline 
ultrasonography, also known as sonohysterography or 
hydrosonography, involves transvaginal ultrasonography 

A


B


n FIG. 52. Hysterosalpingography. (A) Normal uterus. 
(Courtesy of Ricardo Azziz, MD) (B) Didelphic uterus. 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

after the introduction of sterile water or saline. It provides 
accurate information regarding the size and shape of the 
uterine cavity and is perhaps the most sensitive method 
for identifying polyps, submucous myomas, and synechiae 
(13). Hysteroscopy is the definitive method for the 
evaluation of the uterine cavity and the diagnosis of associated 
abnormalities (Video 6). Because it is also the most 
costly and invasive method, it generally is reserved for 
further evaluation and treatment of abnormalities defined 
by less invasive methods (eg, hysterosalpingography or 
saline sonography). However, if patients have clear indications 
for laparoscopy, the addition of hysteroscopy is 
efficient and avoids redundancy. 

Chronic endometritis is an uncommon finding in the 
evaluation of the infertile couple. One exception is genital 
tuberculosis, an exceedingly rare infection in the 
United States, but one that deserves consideration in 
patients who are recent immigrants from regions where 
tuberculosis is endemic. Evidence of granulomas on 
endometrial biopsy is indication for specific culture for 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Endometrial hyperplasia, as 

n FIG. 53. Intrauterine submucosal myoma. (Courtesy of 
Ricardo Azziz, MD) 
n FIG. 54. Filling defect, synechiae. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
INFERTILITY 131 

may be seen in women with long-standing anovulation, 
may interfere with normal endometrial receptivity even 
after ovulation has been induced successfully. Endometrial 
biopsy should therefore be considered in patients 
with a history of dysfunctional uterine bleeding, 
oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, or a combination. 

TUBAL FACTOR 

Tubal occlusive disease is an important cause of infertility 
and should be identified or excluded during the evaluation 
of an infertile couple. Tubal obstruction is typically 
either proximal, at the level of the cornua or tubal isthmus, 
or distal, at the level of the fimbria. Distal obstructions are 
the most common; midsegment occlusion unrelated to a 
previous elective sterilization procedure is extremely rare. 
Proximal obstructions may result from salpingitis isthmica 
nodosa (Image 48) or intraluminal endometriosis, or 
they may be the presumed consequence of ascending 
pelvic inflammatory disease. Distal tubal occlusion is 
most often the result of previous ascending infection and 
is typically, but not always, bilateral. The probability of 
tubal infertility rises with the number of episodes of pelvic 
inflammatory disease: approximately 12% after one 
episode, 23% after two episodes, and 54% after three 
infectious insults (14). Distal tubal occlusion also may 
result from external insults such as endometriosis, appendicitis, 
chronic inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease 
or ulcerative colitis), or pelvic and abdominal surgery. 

The methods for evaluation of tubal patency are complementary 
and not mutually exclusive. Accurate diagnosis 
and effective treatment of tubal obstruction often 
require more than one technique. All available methods 
have technical limitations that must be considered when 
any one technique yields abnormal results. Further evaluation 
with a second method is prudent whenever a specific 
diagnosis or the best treatment strategy is uncertain. 

Hysterosalpingography, the traditional and standard 
method for evaluating tubal patency, is done by a gynecologist 
and uses fluoroscopy. It can document proximal 
or distal tubal occlusion, demonstrate salpingitis isthmica 
nodosa, reveal ampullary tubal architectural detail of 
potential prognostic value, and suggest the presence of 
fimbrial phimosis or peritubular adhesions when escape of 
contrast is delayed or becomes loculated. Findings suggesting 
proximal tubal obstruction require further evaluation 
to exclude transient occlusion resulting from the tubal 
and myometrial contractions that often accompany the 
injection of contrast, especially when the injection is rapid 
or at high pressure. Demonstration of distal tubal occlusion 
with hysterosalpingography is an indication for prophylactic 
treatment with a short course of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics. This approach minimizes the risk of postprocedure 
infection, a complication essentially limited to 
patients with distal obstructions (15). Iodine allergy must 
be excluded before using standard contrast media. 

Transvaginal ultrasonography can be used to evaluate 
tubal patency, but the technique generally has limited 


132 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

value. It will clearly reveal obvious hydrosalpinges, but 
lesser degrees of distal tubal occlusive disease generally 
will not be recognized. Saline ultrasonography has been 
advocated as an alternative to hysterosalpingography. It may 
demonstrate distal tubal obstructions when fluid accumulates 
in the fallopian tubes, or it may suggest patency when 
the volume of free fluid in the cul-de-sac clearly increases, 
but the technique is generally less informative than hysterosalpingography 
and has not gained wide acceptance. 

Laparoscopy and “chromotubation” with a dilute solution 
of methylene blue or indigo carmine introduced via 
the cervix can demonstrate tubal patency or document 
proximal or distal tubal occlusive disease. These procedures 
also can identify subtle tubal factors, such as fimbrial 
phimosis or peritubular adhesions, that may escape 
detection with less invasive methods. Fluoroscopic or hysteroscopic 
selective tubal cannulation will confirm or 
exclude proximal tubal occlusion suggested by hysterosalpingography 
or chromotubation while often also providing 
the means to reestablish patency via recanalization 
using specialized balloon or coaxial catheter systems (16). 

PERITONEAL FACTOR 

Peritoneal factors, including pelvic or adnexal adhesions 
and endometriosis, may cause or contribute to reproductive 
failure. History and physical examination findings may 
raise suspicion but are rarely sufficient for diagnosis. 
Peritoneal factors should be suspected if there is history of 
previous pelvic inflammatory disease, chronic inflammatory 
bowel disease, or pelvic surgery; there are signs or 
symptoms suspicious for endometriosis; and when an otherwise 
complete diagnostic evaluation reveals no abnormality 
to which infertility may be confidently attributed. 

Transvaginal ultrasonography may reveal otherwise 
unrecognized pelvic pathologic conditions that may have 
reproductive implications, such as an ovarian endometrioma 
(Image 34); however, laparoscopy with direct visual 
examination of the pelvic reproductive anatomy is the only 
method available for specific diagnosis of otherwise unrecognized 
peritoneal factors that may have an adverse effect 
on fertility (17). It is generally indicated in women with 
unexplained infertility or signs and symptoms of endometriosis 
and in women whose history, physical examination, 
or hysterosalpingography findings demonstrate or 
suggest tubal disease that may be amenable to repair. 

Diagnostic laparoscopy should include a systematic 
examination of the pelvic anatomy that notes any adhesions 
that restrict the freedom of the fallopian tubes and 
ovaries and the appearance of the fimbriae. All peritoneal 
surfaces should be inspected, with special attention given 
to any evidence of endometriosis. The appearance of 
endometriosis varies widely and includes not only the 
classic ovarian endometriomas, “mulberry” and “powder 
burn” lesions, but also the more subtle yellow, brown, 
erythematous, or colorless vesicular lesions that evidence 
suggests may be the most active areas of disease (Images 
35 and 36). Peritoneal biopsy is desirable, but not essen


tial, for diagnosis when characteristic lesions are 
observed (see “Endometriosis”). 

Whereas asymptomatic adhesions or endometriosis 
can be detected only by laparoscopy, surgical evaluation 
of the pelvic anatomy may not be required in all infertile 
women. Given the risks and costs associated with 
laparoscopy, surgery should be reserved for women in 
whom operative findings clearly may influence the 
choice of treatment. For example, identification of severe 
male factor infertility not amenable to any form of treatment 
other than IVF and ICSI renders moot almost any 
potential findings of laparoscopy, particularly when the 
history, physical examination, ultrasonography, and hysterosalpingography 
have revealed no evidence of disease 
or other abnormality. 

OVERVIEW OF MANAGEMENT 

Whenever possible, treatment for infertility should be 
specific to the causes identified after a careful and thorough 
evaluation. 

Treatment—Infertility Factors 

Treatment should be designed to overcome or optimize all 
identified infertility factors in a coordinated fashion. The 
treatment of one factor does little good if other important 
contributing factors go unrecognized or untreated. 

MALE FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Despite significant recent advances in reproductive 
medicine and in the treatment of infertility in general, less 
than 10% of male factor infertility can be effectively 
overcome with medical or surgical treatment. 
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be treated effectively 
with exogenous gonadotropins or pulsatile administration 
of GnRH. Genital tract infections or chronic 
inflammatory conditions may be eliminated with specific 
antibiotic therapy. Ejaculatory failure due to retrograde 
ejaculation may be improved or corrected with sympathomimetics 
or anticholinergic agents. Some forms of 
obstructive azoospermia may be amenable to specific surgical 
procedures to eliminate the obstruction. Oligospermia 
or asthenospermia associated with scrotal 
varicoceles may respond to spermatic vein ligation, 
although results are highly variable and generally unpredictable. 
With these notable exceptions, the cause of most 
male factor infertility remains obscure, and empirical 
forms of treatment, including clomiphene citrate therapy 
for idiopathic oligospermia, have no predictable effect. 
Consequently, contemporary treatment of most male factor 
infertility is focused on mechanical methods that are 
designed to compensate for inadequate sperm numbers or 
motility or both, or to overcome suspected abnormalities 
of sperm function that may prevent fertilization. 

When semen specimens contain reduced numbers of 
total motile sperm (less than 20 million), cycle fecundity 


may be increased by performing IUI, carefully timed to 
coincide with ovulation in the female partner. The uterus 
will tolerate the introduction of only very small volumes of 
unprocessed seminal plasma. To overcome this limitation 
and to maximize the number of motile sperm, semen samples 
are “washed” by serial dilution in a balanced salt solution 
and low-speed centrifugation, discarding the 
supernatants, and resuspending the final cell pellet in a 
small volume of media. Intrauterine insemination may be 
performed using any of a variety of specialized catheters. 
Best results are achieved when the final specimen contains 
more than 10 million total motile sperm, although IUI may 
still offer some improvement in cycle fecundity with more 
severe seminal abnormalities (5 million to 10 million total 
motile sperm) (18). Given the costs and logistics involved 
in IUI and evidence suggesting that sperm survival may be 
shorter after washing and IUI than after intercourse, it is 
crucially important to optimize the timing of IUI. This is 
best accomplished by performing IUI on the day after 
detection of the midcycle urinary LH surge in spontaneous 
or clomiphene-induced ovulatory cycles, or approximately 
36 hours after the administration of exogenous hCG in 
cycles stimulated with exogenous gonadotropins. 

Severe male factor infertility (total motile counts <5 
million or <5% normal morphology or both by strict criteria) 
and IUI treatment failures are best managed by IVF 
with ICSI (19). Treatment involves physical injection of 
individually selected morphologically normal sperm into 
ova collected by transvaginal ultrasonography–guided follicle 
aspiration after ovarian stimulation with exogenous 
gonadotropins. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection requires 
only a very few normal sperm, which may be isolated from 
the ejaculate or, in azoospermic men, may be obtained by 
epididymal aspiration (20) or testis biopsy (21). A single 
sperm is injected into each individual ovum, which has 
been retrieved through follicle aspiration. The technique 
requires highly specialized micromanipulation equipment, 
laboratory facilities, and personnel, but it is highly effective 
in experienced hands. Success achieved with ICSI in 
recent years has effectively redefined sterility in males. 
The technique now offers couples who in the past had few 
options other than insemination with donor sperm or adoption 
the hope and means to have a child who is biologically 
their own. Insemination with donor sperm remains a highly 
effective alternative for those couples who are unable or 
prefer not to use assisted reproductive technologies (22). 
When chosen, donor insemination must be performed using 
frozen thawed specimens acquired from accredited private 
or commercial sperm banks that comply fully with current 
standards for donor screening and quarantine of specimens 
before release (23). The use of fresh donor semen samples 
no longer can be justified under any circumstances. 

OVARIAN FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Anovulatory patients and patients in whom cycles exhibit 
varying characteristics and quality are candidates for 
treatment with ovulation-inducing agents. (For a thor-

INFERTILITY 133 

ough discussion of ovulation induction, therapeutic 
options and indications, monitoring requirements, risks, 
and results, see “Ovulation Induction.”) 

In most cases, clomiphene citrate is the most appropriate 
initial choice, but there are notable and specific 
exceptions. Amenorrheic patients with hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism are candidates for treatment with exogenous 
gonadotropins (24) or pulsatile administration of 
GnRH (25), because clomiphene citrate treatment is ineffective 
when the HPO feedback axis is dysfunctional. 
Patients with thyroid abnormalities first should receive 
appropriate treatment and then be reevaluated to determine 
whether treatment with ovulation-inducing drugs is 
also required. Administration of dopamine agonists 
(bromocriptine or cabergoline) is the treatment of choice 
in hyperprolactinemic anovulatory patients. Most hyperandrogenic 
anovulatory patients with PCOS respond to 
clomiphene citrate, but in patients with associated insulin 
resistance, primary or adjunctive treatment with metformin 
or other insulin-sensitizing agents merits serious 
consideration. Metformin therapy alone often restores 
ovulatory function in such patients (26), and patients who 
fail to respond to metformin or clomiphene treatment 
alone often ovulate when the two are used in combination 
(27). Corticosteroids represent another useful adjunct in 
selected clomiphene-resistant patients. More aggressive 
treatment regimens employing exogenous gonadotropins, 
alone or in sequence with clomiphene, may be used to 
induce ovulation when other methods and efforts fail. 

Surgical treatment for anovulatory infertility, commonly 
known as laparoscopic “ovarian drilling,” may be 
an appropriate choice in selected patients. Women with 
PCOS that is refractory to clomiphene treatment are the 
best candidates, particularly when they are unable or 
unwilling to accept the risks and costs of ovulation induction 
with exogenous gonadotropins. The technique, 
essentially a contemporary form of traditional ovarian 
wedge resection, involves penetrating the ovarian cortex 
at numerous sites using an electrosurgical needle or a 
laser with the intent of reducing the volume of ovarian 
stroma. Circulating androgen concentrations are typically 
reduced after ovarian drilling, at least for several months. 
Numerous recent series indicate that 50–90% of women 
will ovulate, and 30–60% may be expected to conceive 
after undergoing the procedure. The risk of postoperative 
adhesions is real and must be considered before selecting 
this form of treatment. 

Whatever the regimen used to improve or induce ovulation, 
treatment should be actively monitored, with any 
of the means previously described, to ensure that effective 
treatment is established in an efficient and cost-effective 
manner. In young anovulatory patients having no 
history or physical examination findings that suggest 
tubal or peritoneal infertility factors, it is reasonable to 
induce ovulation without first excluding these factors, 
provided that semen quality is clearly normal. However, 
subsequent failure to achieve pregnancy within three to six 


134 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

effective treatment cycles should be regarded as an indication 
to expand the diagnostic evaluation or, if evaluation 
is already complete, to change the treatment strategy. 

CERVICAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

When the physical examination reveals obvious mucopurulent 
cervical secretions, cultures and antibiotic treatment 
are indicated. Patients with severe cervical stenosis 
may be suspected of having a significant cervical factor. 
If suspicion is confirmed by findings of scant, absent, or 
clearly poor cervical mucus quality when evaluated by 
simple examination or with a postcoital test in the immediate 
periovulatory interval, it is reasonable to consider 
treatment. Low-dose exogenous estrogen supplementation 
often has been used, but there is no compelling evidence 
that such treatment improves cycle fecundity. In 
those uncommon patients with apparent isolated cervical 
factor infertility, the most logical, expedient, and proven 
effective treatment is to bypass the cervix by performing 
appropriately timed IUI. 

Clomiphene citrate is widely regarded as a cause of 
iatrogenic cervical factor infertility as a consequence of 
its intrinsic antiestrogenic actions. On careful scrutiny, 
however, the evidence in support of this contention is 
extremely weak. Although the possibility cannot simply 
be dismissed, it is also largely irrelevant. In practice, if 
pregnancy is not achieved in the anovulatory patient after 
three to six clomiphene-induced ovulatory cycles, alternative 
treatment is clearly indicated. When infertility is 
otherwise unexplained, the logical alternative treatment is 
exogenous gonadotropin therapy. Any presumed adverse 
effects of clomiphene are thus eliminated while the higher 
estrogen levels that typically accompany gonadotropin 
treatment also stimulate mucus production. Furthermore, 
if IUI is included in the treatment regimen in efforts to 
maximize cycle fecundity, any possibility of a past or persistent 
cervical factor is moot. 

UTERINE FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

There is insufficient evidence to indicate that leiomyomata, 
endometrial polyps, or minor intrauterine adhesions 
are a cause of infertility. Retrospective studies of 
outcomes following IVF in women with myomas suggest 
that submucous myomas may indeed have adverse effects 
on pregnancy maintenance and outcome, whereas subserosal 
or intramural fibroids have less, if any, importance 
(28). Given the risk that postoperative adhesions may 
compromise fertility and the high probability that cesarean 
delivery will be required in any subsequent pregnancy, 
abdominal myomectomy in the treatment of infertility is 
recommended only when myomas are otherwise symptomatic 
or when they are large and clearly impose on the 
uterine capacity. Small, asymptomatic endometrial 
polyps are relatively common, even in fertile women, and 
are an unlikely cause of infertility. However, endometrial 
polyps may act like intrauterine foreign bodies to inter


fere with conception. Hysteroscopic surgery is most 
clearly indicated when polyps are large or symptomatic. 

Intrauterine synechiae are of obvious importance 
when extensive or associated with amenorrhea. In such 
circumstances, hysteroscopic lysis is clearly indicated 
and best performed under laparoscopic guidance when 
dissection is difficult or intrauterine anatomy cannot be 
clearly defined, because uterine perforation is a common 
complication when adhesions are severe. Postoperative 
exogenous estrogen therapy to promote rapid reepithelialization 
is prudent following extensive intrauterine dissection 
(29). The insertion of a pediatric Foley catheter or 
a specially contoured intrauterine balloon catheter also 
may help to reduce the risk of adhesion reformation. 

In the absence of any other identified infertility factors 
or when treatment of other factors fails, hysteroscopic 
resection of small submucous myomas, endometrial 
polyps, or minor intrauterine adhesions is reasonable and 
recommended. An aggressive approach to such cavitary 
abnormalities is clearly warranted in infertile women of 
advanced reproductive age and in infertile women who 
otherwise would require more advanced forms of treatment 
involving significant costs or risks. 

Although developmental uterine anomalies clearly are 
associated with early pregnancy loss, preterm delivery, 
and fetal malpresentation, evidence that they are a cause 
of infertility is lacking. Surgical excision of a vaginal septum 
is clearly indicated when the vaginal septum prevents 
or interferes with intercourse, such as one that is associated 
with a uterus didelphys. Women with bicornuate or 
septate uteri typically have no difficulty achieving pregnancy 
in the absence of other infertility factors. Because 
surgical unification of a bicornuate uterus requires 
laparotomy, risks postoperative adhesions, and dictates 
subsequent cesarean delivery, it is rarely indicated in the 
treatment of infertility. Before the advent of modern hysteroscopic 
techniques, the same could be said regarding 
the surgical correction of septate uteri. However, given 
the relative ease and safety of hysteroscopic septum 
resection (Fig. 55) and the strong association between 
intrauterine septa and pregnancy wastage, septum resection 
is justified in the treatment of infertility, particularly 
when no other factors are identified, age is advanced, or 
more advanced forms of treatment are contemplated (30). 

When identified, chronic endometritis clearly deserves 
treatment. A 10–14-day course of broad-spectrum antibiotics 
is typically curative and best documented by 
repeated endometrial sampling. When chronic 
endometriosis is associated with a foreign body or residual 
products of conception, hysteroscopic surgery and 
curettage are indicated. The diagnosis of tuberculous 
endometritis necessitates prolonged treatment with a 
combination of drugs and careful long-term follow-up. 
Pregnancy rarely is possible after a patient has had tuberculous 
endometritis. 

Endometrial hyperplasia also demands treatment. 
Cyclic or continuous progestational therapy is highly 


n FIG. 55. Hysteroscopic resection of intrauterine septum.
(Baggish MS, Barbot J, Valle RF. Diagnostic and operativehysteroscopy. A text and atlas. Chicago: Mosby, 1999:283)
effective in all but rare instances; treatment failures are 
more common when cytologic atypia also is observed. 
Repeated sampling to demonstrate that treatment was 
effective is prudent. Ovulation induction in anovulatory 
infertile women with endometrial hyperplasia is best 
postponed until a normal endometrium has been restored. 

TUBAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Distal tubal occlusive disease may be amenable to surgical 
treatment when it is not severe. Fimbriolysis or fimbrioplasty 
may be performed to relieve phimosis when 
fimbrial architecture is otherwise normal. Neosalpingostomy 
merits consideration in patients with complete 
distal obstructions when hysterosalpingography reveals 
that ampullary tubal architecture is preserved and the 
obvious alternative of IVF is impractical or has been 
rejected. Results achieved with modern laparoscopic 
techniques are comparable to those reported for traditional 
microsurgery (31). Success rates of 50–70% may be 
expected after fimbriolysis or fimbrioplasty, but only 
5–30% of women conceive after surgery for moderate to 
severe disease, a prognosis significantly worse than with 
IVF. Consequently, tubal reconstructive surgery for 
severe distal tubal occlusive disease is rarely indicated 
and is now typically reserved for the few women who 
may have moral or ethical objections to IVF (32, 33). 

Surgery still may have a role in the management of 
distal tubal obstruction. The procedure of choice may be 
salpingectomy with IVF. Evidence derived from a number 
of retrospective studies strongly suggests that success 
rates with IVF are reduced by approximately one half in 
patients with hydrosalpinges (34). The mechanism 

INFERTILITY 135 

responsible is not entirely clear, but adverse effects of the 
chronic inflammatory tubal exudate on the endometrium 
or transferred embryos seem the most plausible explanation. 
Surgical occlusion of the proximal fallopian tubes 
with cautery or clips has been advocated as an alternative 
to salpingectomy prior to IVF in women with hydrosalpinges. 
Preliminary evidence suggests that this simpler 
procedure may be equally effective in maximizing the 
probabilities for success with IVF. However, given the 
possibility that bipolar occlusion may increase the risk of 
development of expanding symptomatic hydrosalpinges, 
salpingectomy may be the best choice when surgery 
before IVF is elected and it is technically feasible. 

Proximal tubal obstructions are encountered less frequently. 
Surgical options include segmental tubal resection 
and microsurgical reanastomosis, along with 
fluoroscopic or hysteroscopic proximal tubal recanalization. 
Tubal reimplantation procedures are no longer indicated, 
because results achieved with either of the 
alternative techniques are clearly superior. Success rates 
following the surgical correction of proximal tubal 
obstructions range between 20% and 50% (16). In vitro 
fertilization is the treatment of choice for patients with 
both proximal and distal tubal obstruction, as well as 
patients who decline surgery or have undergone unsuccessful 
procedures. 

Microsurgical sterilization reversal remains a highly 
successful option for patients who regret their earlier 
decision and again seek pregnancy; IVF is another obvious 
alternative. Success rates after tubal reanastomosis 
depend on the type of sterilization procedure that was 
performed, the site of the anastomosis, and the lengths of 
the remaining tubal segments (35). Procedures that 
remove or destroy the least amount of tissue have the best 
prognosis for successful reversal. Isthmic–isthmic anastomoses 
are more often successful than isthmic– 
ampullary, ampullo–ampullary, or cornual anastomoses. 
Prognosis is best when the final tubal lengths are 5 cm or 
longer. In vitro fertilization should be recommended for 
patients who have undergone fimbriectomy sterilization 
procedures, because its results are clearly superior to 
those achieved with surgery. Moreover, given its steady 
improvement in success rates overall, IVF deserves serious 
consideration for use after all types of sterilization 
procedures performed. It avoids a major surgical procedure, 
makes the best use of time, and may be a more costeffective 
choice when only a single additional child is 
desired, when age is relatively advanced, and when other 
infertility factors are identified. In contrast, microsurgical 
anastomosis allows for natural conception as often as the 
couple may desire, and it avoids the risks of gonadotropin 
stimulation and multiple pregnancy associated with IVF. 
After all relevant information has been obtained, patients 
should be counseled carefully on the advantages and disadvantages 
of both forms of treatment to ensure that the 
option that best meets the couple’s needs and goals is 
selected. 


136 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PERITONEAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Pelvic or adnexal adhesions may affect fertility adversely 
by distorting adnexal anatomy so that ovum capture after 
ovulation is inefficient or impossible. The diagnosis may 
be suspected on the basis of history or hysterosalpingography 
findings, but only laparoscopy can confirm or 
exclude the diagnosis while also providing the means and 
opportunity to restore functional anatomic relationships 
between the fallopian tubes and the adjacent ovaries. The 
prognosis for successful pregnancy after laparoscopic 
adhesiolysis depends on the extent of the disease, the 
effectiveness of lysis, and the existence of any other infertility 
factors. When the disease is mild or moderate and is 
the only finding after thorough evaluation, adhesiolysis 
generally is associated with an excellent prognosis. When 
the disease is severe or is associated with other infertility 
factors, IVF is the logical recommendation. 

A relationship between endometriosis and infertility has 
been documented repeatedly. A thorough discussion of the 
disease and its management has been provided, and only 
issues relating to the treatment of infertility are summarized 
here. Whereas severe or extensive disease that distorts 
anatomy or causes frank tubal occlusion obviously 
can interfere with reproduction, how—or even if—minimal 
or mild disease causes infertility remains unclear (see 
“Endometriosis”). When endometriosis is diagnosed at the 
time of laparoscopy, it is reasonable to attempt the excision 
or ablation of all visible disease when technically feasible. 
Recent evidence suggests that the excision of even minimal 
or mild disease at the time of diagnosis yields a better prognosis 
than does expectant management (36). Ovarian 
endometriomas should be enucleated when possible, or 
drained and ablated when it is not possible. Peritoneal 
implants should be excised or ablated; the method chosen 
may vary, and there is no evidence that one technique is 
clearly superior. Effective surgical treatment most often 
can be accomplished with laparoscopic techniques, given 
the expanded array of laparoscopic instruments now available 
(Video 5). When there is extensive disease involving 
cul-de-sac obliteration or dense adhesion of the ovaries to 
the pelvic side walls, laparotomy may be preferable, 
depending on the technical expertise of the surgeon. 

Medical treatment of endometriosis with progestins, 
oral contraceptives, danazol, or long-acting GnRH agonists 
has proven effectiveness in the management of pain 
associated with the disease, but ovarian suppression has 
not been shown to improve fertility. Postoperative medical 
treatment occasionally may be useful when there is 
known residual disease and infertility is associated with 
persistent or recurrent pain, but its contraceptive properties 
are clearly disadvantageous. 

Unexplained Infertility 

In up to 30% of infertile couples, a thorough evaluation 
will fail to identify any clear cause for reproductive failure. 
Under such circumstances, any treatment is necessar


ily empiric. Contemporary treatments for unexplained 
infertility range from conservative to aggressive, but all 
generally involve the use of ovulation-inducing drugs with 
the intent to cause controlled ovarian hyperstimulation of 
more than a single ovum, most often in conjunction with 
IUI. A thorough discussion of treatment regimens, monitoring 
requirements, prognosis, costs, and risks associated 
with each treatment appears elsewhere (see “Controlled 
Ovarian Hyperstimulation with Intrauterine Insemination”). 
In vitro fertilization is an even more effective 
alternative treatment for couples with unexplained infertility. 
It offers the potential advantage of greater control 
over the number of embryos that ultimately reach the 
uterus, although the costs involved are limiting and often 
prohibitive for many couples. Careful counseling is essential 
to determine which form of treatment will best meet 
the needs of the individual couple. 

OVULATION INDUCTION 
Ovulation Disorders 

The evaluation of the infertile woman for ovulation disorders 
relies on tests that provide presumptive evidence, 
rather than actual proof, of ovulation. Because of the 
small size of the oocyte, the only convincing in vivo 
demonstration of ovulation is pregnancy. Instead, physicians 
must resort to inference to determine whether a 
woman is normally ovulatory. The woman with cycle 
intervals of 24–34 days associated with moliminal symptoms 
and a biphasic basal body temperature pattern very 
likely, but not definitely, is normally ovulatory. So, too, is 
the woman with ultrasonographic patterns of ovarian follicle 
development and collapse, secretory endometrial 
histology findings in a biopsy obtained late in the menstrual 
cycle, or a serum progesterone level of at least 10 
ng/mL 1 week before the next menses. However, the 
physician should remember that these tests and features 
of the woman’s history are incompletely sensitive and 
specific for identifying the actual status of the ovulatory 
function. 

The World Health Organization has adopted a classification 
of ovulatory disorders that is useful for guiding the 
treatment of women so affected. Group 1 includes women 
with hypoestrogenic amenorrhea and ovaries replete with 
dormant follicles. Serum levels of FSH are in the normal 
range or low. Previously, women were labeled as having 
“hypothalamic amenorrhea,” “psychogenic amenorrhea,” 
and “stress-induced amenorrhea” (see “Hypothalamic 
Amenorrhea”). Women in group 2 are normally estrogenic 
and occasionally hyperandrogenic, have infrequent 
menstruation, and have normal serum levels of FSH. 
Conditions assigned to this group are termed ovulatory 
dysfunction or, in the presence of otherwise unexplained 
hyperandrogenism, PCOS (see “Polycystic Ovary 
Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other Androgen Excess 
Disorders”). Women in group 3 are usually amenorrheic 


and have few or no ovarian follicles. Serum levels of FSH 
are high. Premature ovarian failure and ovarian dysgenesis 
are the most commonly encountered conditions in this 
group (see the section on premature ovarian failure). 

Before inducing ovulation in the infertile couple, the 
contribution of other infertility factors should be defined 
and addressed (see the section on evaluation of infertility). 
The potential role of male factor infertility should be 
investigated with at least one semen analysis. The risk for 
adnexal and uterine factors of infertility should be 
assessed. If that risk is high, diagnostic procedures, such 
as laparoscopy, hysteroscopy, sonohysterography, or hysterosalpingography, 
are essential for predicting the efficiency 
of the contemplated course of treatment. However, 
in the anovulatory woman with a low risk for tubal or uterine 
infertility factors, investigations of these factors can be 
deferred until first-line therapy is proven unsuccessful. 

Agents Used for Ovulation Induction 

The process of inducing ovulation with medication in the 
anovulatory woman should begin with an understanding 
of the cause of her ovulatory dysfunction. A number of 
agents are available for ovulation induction, with 
clomiphene citrate the most widely used (Table 11). 
Ideally, the agent used for treatment would simply correct 
the underlying problem while leaving intact the remainder 
of the HPO axis, in part to avoid the unattractive consequences 
of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) 
(37). An overall goal is unifollicular recruitment; however, 
no product can guarantee that result. Because of cost 
and adverse effects, the use of gonadotropin should be 
reserved for situations when other agents have failed or 
when this approach is not applicable. 

CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 

Clomiphene citrate is a triphenylethylene derivative that, 
depending on the tissue type and hormonal context, possesses 
estrogen receptor agonist and antagonist properties. 
In the hypothalamus, its antiestrogenic effect results in an 

n TABLE 11. Agents Used for Ovulation Induction 
Preparation 
Trade Name 


Clomiphene citrate 
Clomid, Serophene 

GnRH agonist/antagonist 
Leuprolide acetate Lupron 
Ganirelix acetate Antagon 

Dopamine agonist 
Bromocriptine mesylate Parlodel 
Cabergoline Dostinex 

Human chorionic gonadotropin 
Novarel, Pregnyl, 
Profasi, A.P.L. 

Abbreviation: GnRH indicates gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 

INFERTILITY 137 

increase in GnRH pulse frequency. This, in turn, stimulates 
release of gonadotropins, yielding ovarian follicle development. 
An endogenous LH surge is evoked by rising 
estradiol. It has little beneficial effect in inducing ovulation 
in hypoestrogenic, hypogonadotropic women (group 1 
ovulation disorders) and no role in the treatment of women 
with group 3 ovulatory disorders. Clomiphene is contraindicated 
in the presence of pregnancy, liver disease, or 
history of visual changes with previous clomiphene use. 

Induction of ovulation with clomiphene is initiated 
early in the menstrual cycle or after progestogen-induced 
withdrawal bleeding, typically on cycle day 3, 4, or 5. 
The dosage usually chosen for the first cycle is 50 mg/d 
for 5 days. The response of the ovaries to clomiphene frequently 
is measured with midluteal serum progesterone 
levels or some other presumptive test for ovulation. If 
ovulation does not occur, a menstrual period is induced 
and the woman is treated in the next cycle with daily 
doses of 100 mg of clomiphene. If ovulation does not 
occur with a daily dose of 100 mg, the dose may be 
increased by another 50 mg. The use of daily doses 
greater than 150 mg or for longer than 5 days has limited 
benefit. If, at any dose, ovulation is detected but pregnancy 
fails to occur, the same dose is repeated during the 
next cycle. 

Adverse effects demonstrated by patients receiving 
clomiphene are vasomotor symptoms such as headaches 
and mood changes (approximately 10% of women) and, 
rarely, visual changes such as halos, streaks around lights, 
blurring, or scotoma (38). Adverse effects on cervical 
mucus or luteal phase function may explain why many 
ovulatory cycles stimulated with clomiphene do not result 
in conception. The addition of low-dose estrogen to 
clomiphene to improve cervical mucus does not appear to 
improve conception rates. 

Complications of clomiphene therapy include cystic 
ovarian enlargement; a mild, self-limited form of ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome occurring in less than 5% of 
cycles; and multifetal gestations (5–10% of pregnancies) 
(38). Screening for adverse effects and complications of 
clomiphene therapy commonly is limited to review of the 
patient’s history and a pelvic examination. However, this 
approach has low sensitivity for abnormal ovarian 
enlargement and cyst formation, particularly in obese 
patients. A more accurate assessment of ovarian size can 
be obtained with ultrasonography in the middle of the 
luteal phase or early in the follicular phase of the next 
cycle. 

The maximum number of treatment cycles that any 
patient should undergo depends on the estimate of the 
benefit achieved with additional cycles. If a woman does 
not consistently ovulate with clomiphene at daily doses 
of 150 mg, there is little point to additional treatment 
cycles. Similarly, the yield is small for continued ovulation 
induction with the same agent in the patient who has 
experienced 12 ovulatory cycles without a pregnancy, 
considering that most pregnancies occur early in the 


138 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

course of treatment. Concerns regarding the risk of ovarian 
cancer associated with the use of clomiphene have 
diminished recently (39), particularly when the total 
duration of therapy is less than 1 year (38). 

Ovulation is seen in 80% of women taking 
clomiphene, most requiring daily doses of 100 mg or less 
(40). Obesity and hyperandrogenemia are associated with 
a lower rate of ovulation with clomiphene (40). 
Approximately 40% of women achieve a pregnancy with 
the drug. Early in the course of therapy, cycle fecundity 
approaches that of the normally fertile population. Later, 
the likelihood of pregnancy diminishes, and alternative 
therapy should be considered. 

Improved ovulation and pregnancy rates in poorly 
responding women are occasionally achieved with 
adjunctive treatment. Such treatment includes the injection 
of hCG when there is a preovulatory-sized follicle 
seen on a pelvic sonogram, or the use of corticosteroids, 
particularly in women with serum levels of DHEAS higher 
than 200 m g/dL. 

EXOGENOUS GONADOTROPINS 

The development of safe, consistent, effective, and widely 
available preparations of gonadotropins over the past 
40 years has dramatically increased opportunities for 
treatment of the infertile couple, particularly the couple 
requiring ovulation induction. From the earliest availability 
of human menopausal gonadotropins to the development 
of urofollitropin to recombinant preparations of 
FSH (Table 12), the experienced clinician has been able 
to provide a powerful means of stimulating ovarian follicle 
development in women with group 1 ovulatory disorders 
or group 2 ovulatory disorders refractory to first-line 
therapy and in women undergoing assisted reproduction. 

Human menopausal gonadotropins consisting of 75 IU 
of FSH and 75 IU of LH were the first commercial formulation 
of exogenous gonadotropins for injection. 
Extracted from the urine of postmenopausal women, the 
product’s availability and consistency from one manufacturer’s 
lot to the next is imperfect. Urofollitropin, a more 
purified preparation of FSH from urine, has similar problems 
of consistency and availability without substantial 

n TABLE 12. Exogenous Gonadotropin Preparations 
improvement in clinical efficacy. The one advantage of 
highly purified FSH preparations achieved through 
immunochromatographic purification of human menopausal 
gonadotropins is the capacity for self-administered 
subcutaneous injections. Currently, the benefit of recombinant 
preparations of FSH, with or without recombinant 
LH, is largely in the virtually limitless availability of a 
consistent isoform of FSH. Other significant clinical 
advantages of recombinant preparations remain unproved. 

Injections of gonadotropin preparations promote ovarian 
follicle development in women by increasing the stimulation 
of the ovarian FSH receptors above that provided 
by endogenous FSH secretion. The process of selection of 
the dominant ovarian follicle is muted, to the advantage of 
women undergoing assisted reproductive technology 
(ART), through a superimposition of exogenous FSH on 
the efferent portion of the negative feedback relationship 
that exists in the HPO axis. This loss of internal control 
accounts for the two most significant complications of 
ovulation induction with exogenous gonadotropins: multifetal 
gestation as a result of ovulation of multiple follicles 
and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

In infertile women with anovulation as the sole infertility 
factor, the rate of ovulation with gonadotropins is 
80–90% of initiated cycles. The pregnancy rate is approximately 
20% per cycle (41). 

Approximately 15–25% of women with group 2 disorders 
will develop premature luteinization, manifested as 
an increase in the circulating LH concentration or a rising 
progesterone level prior to follicle maturity. This results 
in diminished cycle fecundity through premature ovulation, 
undesirable acceleration of endometrial development, 
or induction of follicle atresia. Treatment with 
GnRH agonists or antagonists can improve cycle fecundity 
by preventing the premature luteinization. 

Women with suboptimal follicle development despite 
large doses of gonadotropins have received adjunctive 
treatment with growth hormone. However, there is no 
convincing evidence to support its use. 

Complications of ovarian stimulation with exogenous 
gonadotropins stem from an exaggerated response of the 
ovaries to the stimulation. Ovarian hyperstimulation syn-

Composition 
Preparation FSH (IU) LH (IU) Trade Name 
hMG 75 75 Humegon, Pergonal, Repronex 
Pure FSH 75 <1 Metrodin 
Ultrapure FSH 75 <0.1 Fertinex 
Recombinant FSH 75 0 Follistim, Gonal-F 
Recombinant LH 0 75 Not yet available 

Abbreviations: FSH indicates follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; hMG, human menopausal gonadotropins. 


drome, which is characterized by ovarian enlargement and 
increased capillary permeability (42), is more commonly 
encountered in women who become pregnant; are young; 
are of low weight; and have high estradiol levels, a large 
number of ovarian follicles, or PCOS. When severe— 
usually early in pregnancy—ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome is associated with sudden and rapid weight 
gain, ascites, pleural and pericardial effusions, oliguria, 
and vascular hyperviscosity. Thromboembolic disease, 
adult respiratory distress syndrome, and death can follow. 
Vascular endothelial growth factor, produced by the ovary 
in response to stimulation with LH or hCG, is the most 
likely mediator of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
(43). Multifetal gestation, occurring in approximately 
20–30% of deliveries (41), usually results from concurrent 
ovulation of multiple follicles. Both ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and multiple gestation represent incomplete 
control of follicle development. Prevention of these 
complications is preferable to treatment. Treatment 
depends on the severity of the condition (Table 13). 
Patients with more severe symptoms should be monitored 
closely (Box N).The risks of multifetal gestation and ovarian 
hyperstimulation increase with the number of follicles 
and serum levels of estradiol on the day of hCG injection. 
Initial reports of an increased risk of ovarian cancer and 
borderline ovarian tumors associated with gonadotropin 
use have not been substantiated (38, 39, 44). 

PULSATILE GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 

The administration of GnRH intravenously or subcutaneously 
in a pulsatile manner stimulates the release of LH 
and FSH from the pituitary gland and stimulates ovarian 
follicle growth. Exogenous pulsatile GnRH was used 
primarily to induce ovulation in women with group 1 

n TABLE 13. Classification of Ovarian 
Hyperstimulation Syndrome 
Grade Definition 
1 Mild: abdominal distention/discomfort 
2 Mild: features of grade 1 plus nausea, vomiting, 
or diarrhea or both; ovaries enlarged to 
5–12 cm 
3 Moderate: features of mild OHSS plus ultrasonographic 
evidence of ascites 
4 Severe: features of moderate OHSS plus 
clinical evidence of ascites, hydrothorax, or 
difficulty breathing 
5 Severe: all of the above plus change in blood 
volume, increased blood viscosity due to 
hemoconcentration, coagulation abnormalties, 
and decreased renal perfusion and function 


Abbreviation: OHSS indicates ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

INFERTILITY 139 

ovulatory dysfunction. Pregnancy rates were in excess of 
20% per cycle, and complication rates were low and limited 
to malfunction of the infusion pump (45). In contrast, 
the rates of ovulation and pregnancy in women with 
PCOS were poor, largely because of a dysfunctional 

BOX N 
Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation 
Syndrome 

Outpatient management 

Grade 1 
Counsel patient to avoid strenuous activity. 
Administer analgesics for relief of pelvic discomfort. 
Counsel the patient to watch for the symptoms of pro 

gressive ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

Grades 2 and 3 
Perform a physical examination. 
Measure serum electrolytes and hematocrit. 
Recommend abdominal ultrasonography to diagnose 

ascites. 
Counsel the patient to minimize physical activity. 
Recommend an oral fluid intake greater than 1,000 

mL/day. 
Tabulate daily intake and output. 
Measure weight daily. 


Inpatient management 

Grades 4 and 5 
Measure intake and output at 4-hour intervals. 
Every day, measure weight, conduct a physical exami 

nation, and measure abdominal girth. 
Determine serum electrolyte levels and obtain a com 
plete blood count on a daily basis. 

Determine baseline liver function, prothrombin time, 
and partial thromboplastin time. 
Determine serial hematocrit levels at 4–8-hour 


intervals. 
Obtain a radiograph of the chest and pulse oximetry 

results to check for respiratory symptoms. 
Have the patient undergo abdominal ultrasonography. 
Order paracentesis if required for ascites. 
Administer intravenous fluids (crystalloid and albumin 

if urinary output is diminished). 
Administer thrombosis prophylaxis (vascular support 
stockings and heparin in patients at high risk for 
thromboembolic events). 


140 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

response to the stimulation. The medication is no longer 
available in the United States. 

DOPAMINE AGONISTS 

Women with hyperprolactinemic anovulation rarely enter 
the medical system seeking treatment of infertility. 
Instead, the reason they seek consultation is usually 
amenorrhea or galactorrhea, or both. Ovulation develops 
as a consequence of successful treatment of hyperprolactinemia. 
Anovulation associated with hyperprolactinemia, 
which is usually hypoestrogenic, can be idiopathic 
or can arise from a pituitary microadenoma (<10 mm) or 
macroadenoma. 

Treatment with any form of dopamine agonist to 
induce ovulation is guided by several critical principles. 
The first principle is to use the minimum dose effective for 
inducing ovulation, which may occur even before normal 
serum levels of prolactin are achieved (46). The second 
principle is to monitor the drug requirement by measuring 
serum levels of prolactin. Dose increases, which often 
precipitate an exacerbation of gastrointestinal side 
effects, lead to a reduction of prolactin levels within 1 
month. The medication should be discontinued when 
pregnancy is detected except, possibly, in pregnant 
women with expanding macroadenomas (see “Hyperprolactinemia 
and Other Pituitary Disorders”). 

Restoration of menstrual cycles heralds the possibility 
of normal ovulation, which should be confirmed with the 
measurement of midluteal serum progesterone. With this 
approach, 80–90% of hyperprolactinemic patients ovulate 
(46, 47). Resistance to dopamine agonists occurs in 5–18% 
as a result of poor compliance or receptor defects (48). 

Using the minimum effective dosage limits the severity 
of adverse effects, including headache, nausea, and 
vomiting. Once normal levels of prolactin are attained, 
many patients can maintain normal levels despite dose 
reduction. Using a vaginal route of administration of 
bromocriptine also may diminish the frequency and intensity 
of gastrointestinal side effects while lowering the total 
dose required for suppression of prolactin levels (48). 
Orthostatic hypotension is usually transient. Cabergoline 
is associated with a substantially reduced frequency of 
adverse effects compared with bromocriptine. 

INSULIN-SENSITIZING AGENTS 

Women with hyperandrogenic oligo-ovulation and 
anovulation—PCOS—commonly have hyperinsulinemia 
and insulin resistance, occasionally to the point of glucose 
intolerance or diabetes mellitus. The use of insulinsensitizing 
drugs, such as metformin, has been shown to 
ameliorate some of the manifestations of PCOS, especially 
in obese women, inducing less ovarian androgen 
production, more frequent ovulation with or without 
clomiphene (49), and pregnancy (50, 51). 

Metformin, which decreases hepatic gluconeogenesis 
and increases peripheral sensitivity to insulin, is started at 

an initial dosage of 500 mg/d. Because of commonly 
encountered gastrointestinal side effects, the dose is 
increased slowly, at weekly intervals, to a maximum 
dosage of 2,000 mg/d. In PCOS patients who fail to ovulate 
on standard doses of clomiphene citrate, the addition 
of metformin may be considered. 

Adverse effects are minor and primarily gastrointestinal. 
Although lactic acidosis can be induced with metformin, 
it is unlikely to occur in women who do not have 
diabetes mellitus or in women with normal renal function. 
More commonly, patients report abdominal bloating, 
diarrhea, and nausea. 

Other insulin-sensitizing drugs, such as thiazolidinediones 
(rosiglitazone and pioglitazone) and D-chiro-inositol 
(52), also may prove useful for ovulation induction. 

Controlled Ovarian Hyperstimulation 
with Intrauterine Insemination 

If infertility persists despite identification and correction 
of etiologic factors, COH with intrauterine insemination 
(COH–IUI) has been shown to be an effective alternative 
to expectant management. The rationale for this approach 
is that it provides for an increase in the number of oocytes 
and sperm in the reproductive tract and, theoretically, an 
increased probability of conception. 

Infertile couples who would benefit from treatment 
with COH–IUI have no significant anatomic abnormality 
of the adnexa or uterus, have ovaries responsive to 
gonadotropin stimulation, and can reliably produce an 
ejaculate providing at least 500,000 motile sperm after 
processing for IUI. Consequently, COH–IUI should not 
be recommended to women with severe bilateral distortion 
of the oviducts, tubal occlusion, severe oligospermia, 
or ovaries unresponsive to gonadotropin stimulation. 

Infertility evaluation for couples undergoing COH– 
IUI should include at least two semen analyses and hysterosalpingography 
or laparoscopy and hysteroscopy. 
Additionally, in ovulatory women undergoing IUI, a midluteal 
serum progesterone assay or endometrial biopsy is 
required. Older women would benefit from the prognostic 
information provided by early follicular serum FSH 
and estradiol assays, a clomiphene citrate challenge test, 
or the determination of early follicular-phase inhibin levels. 
If the estimated number of motile sperm recovered 
after processing for IUI is less than 500,000 or if the concentration, 
motility, and morphology findings of the 
semen analysis are all abnormal, the couple has a poor 
prognosis for success with COH–IUI. 

Although the cycle fecundity for COH–IUI is less than 
that for ART, the direct costs of ART are much greater 
than those of COH–IUI and are proportionally greater 
than the increase in cycle fecundity (53). Because the 
probability of pregnancy diminishes with repeated 
attempts, couples should be advised to undertake no more 
than three to six cycles of COH–IUI before moving on to 
ART for further treatment. The couples should be reas



INFERTILITY 141 

sured that there is no apparent drop in success rates with 
ART after failure to conceive with COH–IUI. 

SUCCESS RATES 

Properly designed studies comparing COH–IUI with 
ART are rare. Conclusions regarding the relative merits 
of each method of treatment have been sought through 
meta-analysis of a few randomized controlled trials and 
of nonrandomized studies or retrospective cohort 
reviews. One such study indicated that the cost-effectiveness 
of COH–IUI exceeded that of IVF for couples with 
mild male factor or unexplained infertility (54) . 

COMPLICATIONS 

The most frequent complication of COH–IUI is multifetal 
gestation, which occurs in 15–40% of clinical pregnancies 
(55). High-order multifetal gestation occurs in 
5–7% of pregnancies. Attempts to increase the cycle 
fecundity through aggressive stimulation of multiple-follicle 
development (Fig. 56) yield rates of multifetal gestation 
comparable to those seen with ART. If high-order 
multiple gestation is deemed likely on the basis of recruitment 
of large numbers of 15–20-mm follicles, abandonment 
of the cycle or conversion to IVF in that cycle may 
be contemplated. 

Although mildly symptomatic OHSS is common in 
ovulatory women undergoing COH–IUI, severe OHHS is 
rare, occurring in less than 1% of normally ovulatory 
women. Approximately 4–8% of reported clinical pregnancies 
are ectopic, which is similar to rates of ectopic 
pregnancies in couples undergoing ART. Even higher 
rates (18%) have been noted in women with peritubal and 
periovarian adhesions who were treated with COH–IUI. 

ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE 
TECHNOLOGIES 

Assisted reproductive technologies are a group of procedures 
that have in common the handling of oocytes and 
embryos outside the body, with gametes or embryos 
replaced into the body to establish pregnancy (56). The 
initial—and still most commonly used—procedure is 
IVF, which involves the extraction of oocytes, fertilization 
in the laboratory, and transfer of embryos across the 
cervix into the uterine cavity. After the first successful 
birth from IVF (57), numerous variations have been 
described and brought into practice. This section 
describes each procedure and offers a perspective to 
understand the choice among them. 

Assisted reproductive technologies make up a complex 
discipline requiring a team of individuals with train


n FIG. 56. Multiple ovarian follicle development, as shown on this sonogram, is essential to the success of controlled ovarian 
hyperstimulation and intrauterine insemination, but it can result in multiple gestations. (Dodson WC, Haney AF. Superovulation 
and intrauterine insemination. In: Adashi EY, Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery, and technology. 
Vol 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:2233) 

142 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ing and expertise in reproductive surgery, pelvic ultrasonography, 
reproductive endocrinology, embryology, 
and andrology. Therefore, discrete programs usually are 
organized to provide this service; a director has overall 
responsibility, and each function is provided by various 
members of the team. Standards have been established by 
the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (23). 

Because of the complexity of these procedures and 
because relatively few aspects of the technique have been 
defined and universally accepted, each program varies in 
a multitude of aspects throughout each part of the process. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that success rates also 
vary widely. It is the responsibility of the referring physician 
to be aware of the results of various programs (which 
are published annually by the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine [ASRM] and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention), as well as the difficulties 
inherent in assessing quality of care. 

Before considering ART, office visits are essential to 
ensure that the couple has had a full evaluation of their 
infertility (Box O) and that all reasonable alternative 
treatments have been tried or at least offered. These visits 
also offer an opportunity for counseling about the risks of 
conception and pregnancy (Box P). 

In Vitro Fertilization–Embryo Transfer 

Infertility resulting from abnormal fallopian tubes or 
endometriosis, idiopathic infertility, male infertility, and 
immunologic infertility all respond well to IVF. Women 
who have failed to conceive with donor insemination or 
ovulation induction are also excellent candidates. Rough 
guidelines as to when ART may be considered are after 2 
years of unexplained infertility, 1 year after treatment of 
a particular defect, or after 1 year of donor insemination 
or ovulation induction. These guidelines may be modified, 
depending on factors such as age, presence of severe 
defects, or multiple infertility factors. 

PRECYCLE TESTS 

Levels of FSH and estradiol can be used to identify 
women with abnormal ovarian function and a reduced 
prognosis. When the FSH level is consistently elevated on 
day 3 of menses (>10–12 mIU/mL in most current 
assays), successful birth rarely is achieved with IVF (58). 
When the day 3 estradiol level exceeds 80 pg/mL, the rate 
of cycle cancellation is increased (59). Age alone predicts 
prognosis, with successful birth occurring in about one 
third as many women older than 40 years as those 
younger than 40 years. There is no clear upper age 
regarding successful IVF with donor eggs, although 
ASRM does not recommend pregnancy after the normal 
age of menopause. Egg donation recipients with Turner’s 
syndrome must have careful assessment of their aorta, 
because death has occurred during pregnancy in such 
women. Testing for chlamydia should be performed or 

BOX O 
General Infertility Workup 

Semen analysis with quantification of leukocytes. 
Documentation of ovulation with luteinizing hormone 


surge monitoring and a serum progesterone measurement 
8 days after the surge. 
Postcoital testing on the day following the luteinizing hor


mone surge (selected patients). 
Hysterosalpingography: With tubal patency and no distal 


occlusion, the injection of Ethiodol enhances fertility in the 
months following the test.* 
Laparoscopy in selected patients with a history or exami


nation suggesting tubal disease or endometriosis; positive 
chlamydia antibodies may help identify women with occult 
tubal disease. 


Many programs routinely test both partners for hepatitis B 
and C, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus infection. 
Some states require these tests on the male partner; 
some also require testing for human T-cell lymphoma 
virus (HTLV-1). 


Couples at higher risk for cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease, 
thalassemia, Tay-Sachs disease, or Canavan disease 
may be offered prenatal screening. Rubella screening will 
identify patients at risk who can be offered vaccination. 


*See Watson A, Vandekerckhove P, Lilford R, Vail A, Brosens I, 
Hughes E. A meta-analysis of the therapeutic role of oil soluble 
contrast media at hystersalpingography: a surprising result? Fertil 
Steril 1994;61:470–477 

empiric treatment given, because serologic evidence of 
infection has been associated with a reduced birth rate 
and increased fetal loss (60). 

The uterine cavity should be assessed with hysterography, 
transvaginal ultrasonography, or hysteroscopy to 
ensure the absence of any significant uterine defects. The 
presence of a hydrosalpinx decreases the IVF pregnancy 
rate by approximately 50% (61). Tubal interruption by 
cautery or salpingectomy appears to be equally effective 
in improving pregnancy rates (62). Because of the 
adverse effect of a hydrosalpinx on implantation, any 
patient undergoing surgery (such as laparoscopy) who 
has a hydrosalpinx should be offered the option of salpingectomy. 
If the opposite tube is normal, conception 
may occur even without IVF. 

A complete semen analysis should be obtained close 
to the time of the cycle of treatment; attempts should be 
made to resolve pyospermia, which can reduce sperm 
function. A trial of the embryo transfer has been shown 
to increase the rate of pregnancy significantly by avoiding 
difficult or traumatic embryo transfers (63). 


BOX P 
Components of Preconceptional Care 
and Counseling 

Systematic identification of preconceptional risks through 
the assessment of medical, social, reproductive, and family 
histories, including genetic risk, drugs, and medication 
history 

Discussion of possible effects of pregnancy on medical 
conditions for both the prospective mother and the fetus, 
along with an introduction of interventions, if appropriate 
and desired 

Determination of risk of infection and, if indicated, testing 

and vaccination (if available) 
Nutrition counseling regarding appropriate weight for 
height, sources and importance of folic acid, and avoidance 
of vitamin oversupplementation (especially vitamin 
A); referral for in-depth nutrition counseling, if appropriate 
and desired 

Discussion of social, financial, and psychologic issues in 
preparation for pregnancy, including lifestyle habits, alcohol 
use, recreational drug use, and domestic violence 
screening 

Review of alternative and complementary practices 
Provision of education based on risks 
Discussion of real and perceived barriers to achieving 


desires, including problems with contraceptive use 
Recommendation to keep a menstrual calendar 
Emphasis on the importance of early and continuous pre


natal care and discussion of how care will be structured 
based on the woman’s risks and concerns 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Precis: 
obstetrics. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2000;3 

OVARIAN STIMULATION AND MONITORING 

Most IVF cycles are conducted with ovarian stimulation, 
because the pregnancy rate increases with the number of 
embryos available for transfer and the number of 
embryos transferred. A meta-analysis of randomized trials 
has shown a twofold odds ratio for pregnancy with 
administration of a combination of a GnRH agonist and 
gonadotropins compared with other stimulation regimens 
(64). This method reduces cancellations for poor responses 
and premature LH surges, yields more extra embryos 
for cryopreservation, and gives patients and the medical 
staff more flexibility in scheduling by varying the duration 
of ovarian suppression before stimulation. The use of 
an oral contraceptive during the cycle in which the GnRH 
agonist is started will help to prevent cyst formation from 
the agonist phase of the medication. 

INFERTILITY 143 

It is also possible to retrieve the single mature oocyte 
from the natural menstrual cycle, although approximately 
three such cycles are necessary to achieve a cumulative 
pregnancy rate comparable to that of one stimulated 
cycle. However, retrieving the oocyte from the natural 
menstrual cycle avoids any risk of stimulation and multiple 
pregnancy. Recently, two GnRH antagonists have 
become available and are used to prevent an endogenous 
LH surge during the stimulation process. They can be 
given during the latter part of follicle maturation, because 
there is an immediate suppression of gonadotropins. They 
also can be used in clomiphene citrate cycles. Issues as to 
when the antagonist should be started, whether some LH 
should be added, and whether success rates are equal to 
GnRH agonist cycles remain to be resolved. 

Both transvaginal ultrasonography and serum estradiol 
are used to determine when hCG should be injected to 
initiate resumption of meiosis. With the natural cycle, 
serum or urinary LH levels must be monitored either to 
ensure that the LH surge has not begun or to time retrieval 
according to the onset of the LH surge. The ultrasonographic 
appearance and thickness of the endometrium 
have been found to be prognostic for successful pregnancy; 
a sonolucent superficial layer and a thickness of at 
least 8–9 mm are ideal. 

OOCYTE RETRIEVAL 

Follicle aspiration is scheduled for 34–36 hours after 
hCG injection. With the administration of GnRH agonist 
and human menopausal gonadotropin, the timing of this 
step can be extended to as late as 38 hours with minimal 
risk of ovulation. Prophylactic antibiotics are commonly 
given. Retrieval almost always is performed by transvaginal 
aspiration under ultrasonographic guidance (Fig. 57), 
even if it is necessary to traverse the uterus when an ovary 
is adherent to the uterine fundus. In most cases, intravenously 
administered sedation is sufficient for analgesia, 
making it an outpatient or office-based procedure. 
Preparation of the vagina with povidone-iodine to prevent 
pelvic infection is wise, but the povidone-iodine must be 
thoroughly removed before the procedure. 

INSEMINATION 

Washed sperm are added to the eggs after 2–8 hours of 
preincubation to allow further oocyte maturation. The 
oocytes are stripped of their surrounding cells and examined 
12–20 hours after insemination. Visualization of two 
pronuclei confirms normal fertilization. Conceptuses 
with three or more pronuclei are discarded. 

EMBRYO CULTURE AND QUALITY CONTROL 

A variety of media have been used with success for 
embryo culture. Electrolyte concentrations often are 
adjusted to simulate the levels in a normal human fallopian 
tube. Serum from the patient, umbilical cord blood, 
or designated donors generally has been added to media 


144 
144144 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 57. Oocyte retrieval using the transvaginal route 
under ultrasonographic guidance. Using a sterile needle 
attached to the vaginal ultrasonographic transducer and a 
needle path on the monitor screen, a 16–17-gauge needle is 
advanced through the vagina and the abdominal cavity into 
the ovary. This ultrasonogram guides aspiration of a follicle 
with the bevel of the needle between the 2-cm and 3-cm 
mark. (Chang PL, Sauer MV. Assisted reproductive techniques. 
In: Mishell DR Jr. Atlas of clinical gynecology. III. 
Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: Current 
Medicine, 1999:13.8 with permission) 
to provide protein and growth factors. Preparations of 
serum proteins also have been used successfully. 
Bioassays have been used for quality control of the media 
(eg, mouse embryos, human sperm, or hamster sperm) to 
detect toxicity. Various methods are used to control the 
culture environment, such as the use of heating blocks, a 
layer of oil over the medium, or carbon dioxide and temperature-
controlled mobile chambers that keep temperature, 
pH, and osmolarity within narrow limits. 

EMBRYO TRANSFER 

Embryos most often are replaced 3 days after oocyte 
retrieval. More recently, media have been developed that 
are more closely matched to the metabolic requirements 
of the embryo on the fourth and fifth day of development, 
making it possible to transfer embryos at the blastocyst 
stage (65). The theoretical rationale for transfer at the 
blastocyst stage is to improve embryo selection, maintain 
pregnancy rates, and reduce the risk of high-order multiple 
gestations (three or more). Transfer of blastocyststage 
embryos can be limited to two embryos, yielding a 
reduced risk of twins. However, an increased incidence of 
monozygotic twins recently has been recognized as a 
drawback of blastocyst culture. 

Embryos are graded, and those chosen for transfer are 
loaded in a minute volume of medium into a transfer 
catheter. The catheter tip is advanced into the uterine fun


dus to approximately 1–1.5 cm from the top, and the 
embryos are expelled (Fig. 58). The catheter is checked 
for retained embryos, and the patient rests for a period 
(30 minutes is adequate) before returning home. 

The frequency of implantation is higher when the 
transfer is easy and atraumatic. As noted, the performance 
of a trial transfer in a prior cycle reduces the incidence 
of difficult transfers. If cervical dilation is required, 
it should be done before the cycle of embryo transfer. 
Recent studies have suggested that ultrasonographic 
guidance may enhance transfer outcome. Any techniques 
that promote a smooth transfer, without touching the top 
of the fundus or causing contractions or irritation of the 
endometrium, will maximize uterine implantation rates 
and reduce the chances of tubal implantation. 

LUTEAL-PHASE SUPPLEMENTATION 

With GnRH agonist and human menopausal gonadotropin 
cycles, it is necessary to support the luteal phase 
with hCG or progesterone supplementation. The latter is 
probably as effective and carries less risk of ovarian 
hyperstimulation. Progesterone supplementation generally 
is continued until 10 weeks of gestation, although 
recent studies suggest that it may be possible to discontinue 
it earlier. 

EARLY PREGNANCY 

Pregnancy is diagnosed by rising levels of hCG. Clinical 
pregnancy is confirmed by the presence of a gestational 
sac. It is inappropriate for a program to count biochemical 
pregnancies (rising hCG levels only) in their pregnancy 
rate. Because about 2% of clinical pregnancies are 
ectopic, transvaginal ultrasonography should be undertaken 
carefully at 4 weeks and 6 weeks after transfer. 
Cornual pregnancies can occur and are easily visualized. 
Cervical and even ovarian pregnancies occur in rare 
instances. A tubal pregnancy usually can be detected by 
ultrasonography, but the patient with an intrauterine 
pregnancy should be cautioned not to ignore significant 
pain. If both ectopic and intrauterine pregnancies are 
found, the ectopic gestation usually can be excised 
laparoscopically without disturbing the intrauterine gestation. 
Elevated hCG levels with no sign of an intrauterine 
sac by 4 weeks from transfer should raise suspicion 
of an ectopic pregnancy. 

COMPLICATIONS 

The incidence of pelvic infection after follicle aspiration 
has been very low. The incidence can be further minimized 
by using prophylactic antibiotics and preparing the 
vagina with povidone-iodine. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
occurs in about 0.2% of stimulated cycles; it is more 
common in anovulatory women. Multiple pregnancy 
occurs in approximately one third of pregnancies. It is 
more common in programs with higher success rates, in 


INFERTILITY 145 


n FIG. 58. Embryo transfer. Embryos in 10–50 mL of media are placed through the catheter at 0.5 cm from the upper fundus. 
The catheter is then checked for the absence of embryos. (Chang PL, Sauer MV. Assisted reproductive techniques. In: Mishell DR Jr. 
Atlas of clinical gynecology. III. Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: Current Medicine, 1999:13.13 with permission) 
younger women, when many embryos are transferred, 
and when the embryos are of superior quality. The 
Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology has circulated 
guidelines (66) on the number of embryos to transfer 
depending on factors such as age, embryo quality, and 
whether extra embryos are available for freezing (as an 
index of ovarian response). These guidelines should dramatically 
reduce the incidence of high-order multiple 
pregnancy with ART. 

Tubal pregnancy occurs almost exclusively in women 
with tubal disease and has the highest incidence in 
women who have had tubal surgery. Cornual pregnancy 
primarily occurs when the tube has been removed previously. 
Although rare, bleeding may occur following 
retrieval or rupture of an endometrioma and may require 
surgical intervention. Ureteral injury also is rarely 
encountered. 

CRYOPRESERVED EMBRYOS 

Extra embryos may be cryopreserved at the pronuclear 
stage, cleavage stage, or blastocyst stage. There is no 
known limit on the duration of embryo storage. Women 
who experience success with fresh embryos are more 
likely to do so with frozen embryos from the same cycle. 
About two thirds of embryos survive the freezing process, 
but results vary with each woman, just as there are some 
men with high-quality sperm whose germ cells do not 
freeze well. The embryos can be transferred during a natural 
cycle or a hormonally controlled cycle. It has not yet 
been confirmed whether the latter yields superior pregnancy 
rates. In 1997 the delivery rate per frozen embryo 
transfer was 18.8% (67). 

There is a minor trend toward preterm labor in single-
ton pregnancies. The rate of spontaneous abortion is similar 
to normal (18.2% in 1997). The rate of congenital 
anomalies is not increased. In one report, the rate of 
abnormalities was lower after embryo freezing. 

MICROMANIPULATION OF OOCYTES AND EMBRYOS 

Micromanipulation of oocytes and embryos has added 
another dimension to ART. By using high-power magnification 
and micromanipulators to translate hand movements 
into extremely fine and controlled motions of 
holding and manipulating pipettes, it is possible to 
accomplish the following: 

• 
Make an opening in the zona pellucida to aid in 
the hatching process (assisted hatching) 
• 
Insert a single sperm into the oocyte (intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection) 
• 
Remove one of the cells of the embryo for the 
purpose of genetic analysis (preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis) 
Assisted Hatching. One of the factors most predictive of 
embryo implantation is areas of thinning of the zona pellucida. 
Out of this observation, a technique, termed 
assisted hatching, was developed to create an artificial 
opening in the zona (68). Assisted hatching has been 
shown to lead to an overall increase in embryo implantation. 
This effect increases with a woman’s age, probably 
because older embryos appear to have lower metabolism. 
Women with an elevated day 3 level of FSH also have 


146 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

improved implantation with assisted hatching, probably 
analogous to increased chronologic age. Data also suggest 
that embryos with a lower morphologic score and 
embryos with a thicker zona implant better after assisted 
hatching. Couples who have had multiple unsuccessful 
cycles of ART also appear to benefit. 

The procedure usually is done on the day of embryo 
transfer, using an acidic Tyrode’s solution. A steroid and 
an antibiotic generally are given for 4 days, starting on 
the evening of egg retrieval, to reduce damage to the 
embryo by inflammatory cells. There may be an increase 
of identical twinning with assisted hatching due to pinching 
of the embryo during hatching, although this increase 
could depend on technique, and the magnitude of any 
such effect probably has been overestimated because of 
publication bias. 

Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection. One of the most dramatic 
advances in ART has been the ability to treat any 
male with even a few moving sperm by the injection of a 
single sperm into each oocyte (69) (Fig. 59). The sperm 
may be ejaculated or surgically retrieved from the epididymis 
or testis. Thawed frozen sperm appear to work 
equally well, as long as sperm viability can be confirmed 
by some degree of motility. 

The rate of fetal abnormalities does not appear to be 
increased because of the procedure, although men with very 
low sperm counts may transmit inherent sperm defects to 
their offspring. The sperm of these men may have a higher 
incidence of sex chromosome abnormalities, or the men may 
have deletions of Y chromosome material or karyotypic 
abnormalities as a cause of their impaired sperm production. 
A recent report also found a slight increase of autosomal 
chromosome anomalies (70). Men with congenital bilateral 
absence of the vas deferens have an increased incidence of 
mutations for cystic fibrosis. Men with very low sperm 
counts also may have an increased chance of being a carrier 
for cystic fibrosis. Because not all cystic fibrosis mutations 
may have been identified in these men, it has been suggested 
that the female partner be tested instead (71). Although testing 
for Y chromosome deletions should be offered,these couples 
usually will not be deterred by the possibility that the 
offspring also may be infertile and ultimately may need ICSI 
to achieve fertility. A karyotype should be determined in men 
with very low numbers of sperm or no sperm unless there is 
a well-defined cause. Genetic counseling may be considered 
for certain couples requiring ICSI. The pregnancy rate is the 
same for ICSI and non-ICSI cycles. 

USE OF DONOR GAMETES 

The fertilization rate is normal with donor-quality frozen 
sperm. The pregnancy rate with donated oocytes is almost 
1.5-fold higher than with routine IVF because donors are 
generally young or fertile or both. Both known and 
anonymous oocyte donors are used. This has allowed 
women who have experienced failure on multiple IVF 
attempts, who have abnormal ovarian function (eg, ele-

A


B


n FIG. 59. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection. (A) Oocyte 
being held by a holding pipette. The injection pipette contains 
a single sperm. (B) The injection pipette has penetrated 
the zona pellucida and plasma membrane of the oocyte, 
and the sperm has been microinjected into the oocyte. 
(Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
vated FSH or poor response to stimulation), or who are 
advanced in age to have a greater chance of pregnancy. 
Other advantages of egg donation are that amniocentesis 
is not required (provided the donor is young) and the rate 
of spontaneous abortion is low. 

CHOOSING AN IN VITRO FERTILIZATION PROGRAM 
FOR REFERRAL 

Success rates of IVF programs generally are reported as 
clinical pregnancies and deliveries per retrieval. For 
1998, the average delivery rate per retrieval was 28.9%. 
Rates for women under age 35, 35–37, 38–40, and 41 
years and older were 32%, 26%, 18%, and 8%, respectively. 
Individual rates vary considerably, but many programs 
consistently achieve a rate higher than 30% 
delivery per retrieval in women younger than 40 years. 
Many factors can influence these rates. With many pro



grams reporting relatively small numbers of cases, rates 
will vary widely based on chance alone. Ideally, rates 
should be based on at least 100–200 retrievals per year. 

Success rates also can be enhanced by transferring 
more embryos, but at the cost of increased multiple pregnancy, 
with its attendant medical risks and costs. The 
ASRM has published guidelines on the number of 
embryos that it is appropriate to transfer based on patient 
age and other factors (23). Referrals should be directed to 
programs that achieve high rates of pregnancy with fewer 
embryos transferred and high-order multiple pregnancy 
(triplets or more) of 5% or less. 

GAMETE INTRAFALLOPIAN TRANSFER 

Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) is the placement of 
sperm and eggs into the fallopian tube. This generally has 
been done by laparoscopy. The average delivery rate per 
retrieval for GIFT in 1997 was 30%, compared with 
27.9% for IVF (67). Because IVF is less invasive, programs 
with IVF rates close to or exceeding the national 
average for GIFT are likely to do relatively little GIFT, 
both by their recommendation and by patient choice. 

Women with significant abnormalities of the fallopian 
tubes should not undergo GIFT, because in such women 
the success rate is no higher than the success rate with 
IVF, whereas the rate of tubal pregnancy is increased. 
Couples with significant male factor infertility also do 
less well with GIFT, and fertilization is better documented 
with IVF. The rate of tubal pregnancy may be higher 
with GIFT, although it may be decreasing as fewer 
women with tubal disease undergo the procedure (5% 
ectopic pregnancy rate in 1988, 3.2% in 1994, and 2.6% 
in 1998). Gamete intrafallopian transfer has been performed 
in combination with IVF. In these cases, fewer 
oocytes are placed into the fallopian tubes, leaving more 
for IVF; a transcervical transfer of embryos also is performed. 
This method allows better documentation of fertilization 
but to some extent compromises the objective of 
the GIFT procedure. 

ZYGOTE OR TUBAL EMBRYO TRANSFER 

The placement of fertilized oocytes into the fallopian 
tubes (zygote intrafallopian transfer, or ZIFT) or the 
placement of cleaving embryos into the fallopian tubes 
(tubal embryo transfer, or TET) allows fertilization to be 
confirmed while taking advantage of the tubal environment 
for part of the early development of the embryo. 
The success rates for these two procedures theoretically 
should be higher than that of IVF, but the rate was the 
same as the rate for IVF in 1997 (28% for ZIFT and TET 
versus 27.9% for IVF). Two randomized studies in programs 
with good IVF success rates failed to find a difference 
in outcome with the tubal procedures. Transfer 
efficiency may be a factor with ZIFT and TET; probably, 
a small transfer volume and accurate placement are critical. 
Whether the increased cost and a second surgical pro-

INFERTILITY 147 

cedure are worthwhile depends on each program’s individual 
experience with these procedures. In one randomized 
study, TET achieved significantly better results with 
thawed frozen embryos. 

Over the past few years, attempts have been made to 
cannulate the tubes transcervically to deposit gametes or 
embryos into the fallopian tubes to avoid the need for 
laparoscopy and anesthesia. This procedure has had irregular 
and generally inferior results compared with standard 
GIFT or TET. 

OVUM DONATION 

Guidelines for women who should receive oocyte 
gametes include premature menopause attributable to 
ovarian failure (72), surgical removal of the ovaries, and 
gonadal dysgenesis (66). Other accepted indications 
include the need to avoid transmission of a genetic defect 
and the desire to increase the chance of establishing a 
pregnancy in women with poor oocyte quality because of 
advanced maternal age, among other factors. 

PATIENT SELECTION AND PREPARATION OF THE 
DONOR AND RECIPIENT 

The ideal donor is 32 years of age or younger, because 
outcomes are reduced after that age (73). Proven fertility 
is also a favorable factor in donors. The donor should 
undergo a general medical history and a physical examination, 
including a gynecologic examination, cervical 
cytology studies, pelvic ultrasonography, and testing for 
cystic fibrosis, to rule out underlying pathologic conditions 
of the reproductive system. Infectious disease 
screening to rule out hepatitis B and hepatitis C, HIV 
infection, and syphilis also is required. Donors, whether 
anonymous or known, also must undergo a careful 
psychologic evaluation and legal counseling to make 
them fully aware of the legal situation in their jurisdiction. 
They essentially abdicate any and all rights over their 
gametes. Donors may be compensated for their time and 
effort but may not be paid for their oocytes. They should 
be informed of the risks of medications and of the 
oocyte retrieval process, and this discussion should be 
documented. 

Medical preparation of the patient for the procedure 
should include a standard COH regimen in preparation 
for ART, which may include therapy with a GnRH agonist 
to institute pituitary down-regulation, followed by 
gonadotropin therapy, ultrasonography, and endocrine 
monitoring of follicular development. Oocyte aspiration 
guided by transvaginal ultrasonography is performed 
approximately 34–36 hours after hCG administration. As 
in customary IVF protocols, a GnRH antagonist may be 
used. 

The recipient and partner should undergo psychologic 
and legal counseling. Preparation of the recipient may 
include down-regulation with GnRH agonist therapy to 
prevent spontaneous ovarian activity from interfering 


148 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

with timely endometrial maturation, as well as to aid in 
synchronization with the donor (74), unless ovarian failure 
with no spontaneous ovarian activity has been clearly 
documented. The endometrium is stimulated with oral or 
transdermal estrogen in graduated doses and monitored 
with transvaginal ultrasonography to ensure an adequate 
response. Progesterone supplementation is started before 
embryo replacement, usually on the day after the donor 
receives hCG. Some investigators perform endometrial 
biopsies in a “mock” cycle to ensure an adequate 
endometrial response before the actual cycle of replacement. 
A natural cycle may be used, and embryos obtained 
from the donated oocytes and partner’s sperm may be 
transferred fresh or after cryopreservation. 

EMBRYO REPLACEMENT 

Embryo replacement is performed 2–5 days after oocyte 
insemination. The number of embryos replaced should be 
contingent on the donor’s age. Because donors are usually 
young and fertile, most often only two embryos are 
replaced. Gametes or embryos also can be placed into the 
fallopian tube. Remaining gametes can be fertilized, and 
embryos can be cryopreserved. The average delivery rate 
in patients who received donated eggs in 1997 was 40%. 

CARE OF THE DONOR AFTER EMBRYO TRANSFER 

Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is a potential risk 
after embryo transfer that must not be overlooked. 
Donors at particularly increased risk include those with a 
maximal estradiol level greater than 3,000 pg/mL with a 
rapid rate of rising during COH associated with more 
than 30 aspirated ova. 

CARE OF THE RECIPIENT AFTER EMBRYO TRANSFER 

The recipient should continue exogenous estrogen and 
progesterone replacement therapy until pregnancy is confirmed; 
this replacement therapy then should be continued 
until placental hormone production is ensured. 
Estrogen therapy usually is discontinued at about 8 weeks 
of gestation, and progesterone therapy at about 12 weeks 
of gestation. Some pregnancies may be considered high 
risk on the basis of the recipient’s age rather than the 
mode of conception. If the donor is young, prenatal 
genetic testing is not necessary, although it still may be a 
consideration if ICSI was used. 

FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN 
INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

The dominant arena for major future developments in the 
treatment of infertility most likely will continue to be 
ART and its ancillary procedures and techniques. The 
ensuing discussion focuses on three major areas of IVF 
investigation: preimplantation genetic diagnosis, extended 
embryo culture, and oocyte and ovarian tissue cryopreservation. 


Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis 

A single cell can be removed from the embryo and analyzed 
by various genetic techniques such as PCR or fluorescent 
in situ hybridization (75). These procedures allow 
the identification of genetically abnormal embryos. 
Couples with various genetic abnormalities thus can 
avoid their genetic transmission by ensuring the transfer 
of only genetically normal embryos (76). The removal of 
a single cell from a day 3 embryo does not appear to 
compromise its development. Preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis also has been used in older women to screen for 
aneuploid embryos. Although there is a possibility of discarding 
a genetically normal mosaic embryo that would 
have relegated that particular cell to the placenta, the 
technique has been shown to reduce the chance of 
miscarriage in these older women and may increase the 
ongoing pregnancy rate (77). Preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis is performed in relatively few programs and 
requires meticulous technique and experienced geneticists. 


Extended Embryo Culture 

The introduction of physiologically based sequential culture 
media has enhanced the in vitro development of 
human embryos to the blastocyst stage, permitting excellent 
pregnancy rates following the replacement of fewer 
conceptuses (65). Future research should further improve 
embryo growth; eventually, all embryos may be transferred 
at the blastocyst stage. Refinement of cryopreservation 
techniques will be required so that the cumulative 
pregnancy rate with fresh and frozen embryos can be 
superior to transfer and freezing on day 3. Improvements 
of culture conditions, such as the use of 5% oxygen, may 
improve the integrity of the inner-cell mass so that the 
risk of monozygotic twinning will no longer be increased. 

Oocyte and Ovarian Tissue 
Cryopreservation 

The cryopreservation of human sperm and embryos 
(zygote through blastocyst stages) is a standard adjunctive 
technique in the treatment of infertility. Pretreatment 
cryobanking of sperm has permitted the preservation of 
reproductive potential for men with diagnosed malignancies 
requiring gonadotoxic therapy, particularly therapy 
with alkylating agents or irradiation. Additionally, semen 
cryopreservation has facilitated treatment with donor 
inseminations and has enhanced the safety of this procedure 
through the ability to quarantine sperm. The cryopreservation 
of embryos following IVF has enhanced the 
efficiency of the procedure by allowing the storage of 
potentially viable supernumerary embryos for future 
embryo transfer procedures after the initial treatment 
cycle. 

Unfortunately, cryopreservation of human oocytes has 
been far less successful. For more than two decades, 


investigators have been exploring the effects of various 
freezing and thawing protocols on oocyte cryopreservation 
with only minimal improvement in survival and subsequent 
rates of development. The first human birth 
resulting from a cryopreserved oocyte was reported in 
1986 (78). To date, however, fewer than 30 pregnancies 
have been reported using cryopreserved oocytes, with 
very limited efficiency (on the order of a few percent). 
Current research efforts are focusing on the comparative 
efficacy of techniques such as slow freezing versus vitrification 
(rapid freezing after exposure of the oocyte to 
high concentrations of cryoprotectants, which reduce 
intracellular ice formation) and optimization of solute 
concentrations. Potential applications for oocyte cryopreservation 
include the preservation of future fertility in 
women requiring antineoplastic therapy (eg, bone marrow 
transplantation), banking of oocytes in an effort to 
offset the consequences of future reproductive aging, and 
enhanced efficiency and safety for oocyte donation. 

Ovarian tissue storage is an alternative approach that 
may confer particular advantages, especially for women 
or girls at risk for sterilization following chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy. This procedure could allow the preservation 
of a large number of oocytes that potentially could 
be grown to maturity and result in future pregnancies. 
Success in this area will require the development of reliable 
techniques for effecting in vitro maturation of 
oocytes from cryopreserved ovarian tissue; alternatively, 
xenografting of human ovarian tissue might prove effective 
in maintaining fertility potential. Laparoscopic transplantation 
of frozen, banked autologous ovarian tissue 
was recently described (79). In this case, successful ovulation 
from the transplanted tissue was documented following 
stimulation with gonadotropins. 

Ovarian tissue cryopreservation has the potential to 
extend a woman’s optimal fertility. Ultimately, the most 
common reason for ovarian tissue cryopreservation might 
be to preserve options for procreation while pursuing a 
career or until a life partner has been found. 

ETHICAL ISSUES 

Advances in technology have prompted most of the public’s 
ethical concerns about infertility treatment over the 
past 25 years. The most dramatic advance was the successful 
introduction of human IVF in 1978. Since then, a 
host of new technologies for assisting or modifying 
human reproduction have been introduced. 

Physicians, ethicists, and the public have raised many 
ethical questions in considering which procedures generally 
should be acceptable for couples and individuals. 
Any procedure or therapy should satisfy concerns about 
safety, efficacy, interests of the infertile couple or individual, 
interests of the children produced, interests of 
donors or surrogates, and social values. In general, a procedure 
is ethical if it is safe, effective, and nonexploitative 
and if the infertile individuals desire a child and can pro-

INFERTILITY 149 

vide a good and loving home (80). However, the complexity 
of ethical issues has increased with the use of 
third parties for assisted reproduction. Recently, the 
emergence of different techniques, such as somatic cell 
nuclear transfer to clone individuals, has raised new ethical 
concerns. 

The principles of biomedical ethics that are applied to 
all of medicine apply also to discussions of ethical issues 
in assisted reproduction (81). Respect for autonomy has 
become a central principle in the form of procreative liberty. 
It should be considered with other principles such as 
beneficence (ie, doing good, or balancing benefits and 
drawbacks to do the most overall good) and nonmaleficence 
(ie, doing no harm). Respecting the principle of 
justice may mean treating all patients fairly, but it also 
means acknowledging the inequities in access to reproductive 
technologies (Box Q). 

Ethical Issues Related to Procreative 
Liberty 

In the United States, there is a strong presumptive right to 
reproductive freedom. It has been argued that a couple’s 
or an individual’s choice to use technology to achieve 
reproductive goals should be respected, except when 
there is evidence of specific harm (82). 

Respect for procreative liberty suggests that requested 
services should be denied only after careful consideration. 
The physician or fertility practice, personal finances, 
and insurers now determine any limitations imposed on 
procreative liberty. In some cases, a physician’s duty to a 

BOX Q 
Ethical Principles 

Conflicting obligations in health care often can be clarified 
when the principles underlying them are identified and 
understood. The principles most often referred to in discussions 
about ethics include the following: 

Autonomy: Respect for the right of individual patients to 

make their own choices about their health care. 
Beneficence: The obligation to promote the well-being of 
others, balancing benefits and harms; the source of a 
physician’s obligation to act with due care. 

Justice: The right of individuals to claim what is due them 
based on certain personal properties or characteristics; 
justice requires strict avoidance of discrimination on the 
basis of race, color, religion, or national origin or any other 
basis that would constitute illegal discrimination. 

Nonmaleficence: The obligation to do no harm or injury; 
best known in the maxim Primum non nocere: “First, do 
no harm.” 


150 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

third party or to the welfare of potential offspring may 
prompt the physician to limit individual reproductive 
choice. Currently, the major reason to limit access is 
financial, with many patients unable to pay for assisted 
reproduction. 

Ethical Issues Related to Manipulation 
of Embryos 

MORAL STATUS OF THE EMBRYO 

Our society accepts a strong moral responsibility for the 
welfare of children after they are born. There are major 
differences expressed in our society, however, regarding 
abortion and the extent of our moral responsibilities to the 
embryo and the fetus as opposed to the needs of the pregnant 
woman who wants to terminate her pregnancy. With 
assisted reproduction, the moral status of the embryo is at 
the core of many ethical controversies (83). To some, the 
fertilized egg, from the moment of fertilization, has a 
strong moral claim to all the rights and protections of an 
infant after birth; these individuals object to reproductive 
technologies that involve the destruction or discarding of 
embryos. To others, the early embryo should have no 
moral status in view of the extreme waste that occurs in 
natural reproduction. Many others believe that the preimplantation 
embryo deserves special respect because it is a 
potential human, but not to the extent of a more fully 
developed fetus or child (84). 

DISCARDING OF “ABANDONED” EMBRYOS 

Although cryopreservation provides an effective mechanism 
for preserving excess embryos so that they can be 
used in other cycles, excess embryos ultimately are 
donated or discarded, in accord with the wishes of the 
couple. When a fertility program cannot contact a couple 
with stored embryos for 5 years, the ethics committee of 
the ASRM considers the embryos to be “abandoned” and 
supports their discard (85). However, many programs still 
hesitate to discard embryos, and large numbers of excess 
frozen embryos remain in storage. Each program must 
maintain an inventory of its patients’ cryopreserved 
embryos and be able to provide detailed information to 
each couple regarding their embryos. 

EMBRYO RESEARCH 

The use of human embryos in research has been controversial 
in the United States, and current law prohibits the 
use of federal funds for such research. In general, the 
arguments for and against the use of human embryos for 
research center on the moral status of the human embryo. 
Some argue that only embryos destined to be discarded 
should be used for research, whereas others feel that in 
select circumstances, the creation of new embryos for 
research purposes also should be allowed. 

RESEARCH WITH HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS 

The discovery in 1998 of methods to isolate and culture 
pluripotent stem cells from human preimplantation blastocysts 
and aborted fetuses has re-ignited the controversy 
concerning embryo research in general. Stem cells in 
culture have the ability to develop into many specialized 
cells and tissues, which could provide new therapeutic 
options for a variety of nonreproductive disorders, as 
well as new methods to test drugs. The extent to which 
this debate continues may depend on political issues 
and on the availability of alternative sources for stem 
cells (86). 

Ethical Issues Related to Consent for 
Reproductive Technologies 

INFORMED CONSENT 

An informed consent discussion is essential for in vitro 
fertilization, as it is for other procedures in obstetrics and 
gynecology. Both partners should be counseled and 
should consent to the procedures. Expected success rates 
should not be overstated. The risks of the procedure, 
including the risk of multiple gestations, should be stated 
accurately. 

SUCCESS RATE REPORTING 

Effectiveness and competency always have been ethically 
required in the practice of medicine, but with IVF these 
issues have become public. In response to concerns about 
the inflated portrayal of success rates, federal law now 
requires that clinics report their success rates through the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

RISKS OF REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES 

Adequate informed consent from the infertile couple concerning 
known and unknown risks has been considered 
essential. Unfortunately, the risks of reproductive technologies 
cannot be known until the techniques have been 
used clinically, and federally funded research on these 
procedures has been blocked since the initial development 
of IVF. Current techniques in assisted reproduction 
appear to be safer than initially anticipated. The major 
recognized risks are associated with OHSS and multiple 
gestations. However, with the introduction of each new 
technology—whether it is cryopreservation, ICSI, preimplantation 
embryo biopsy for diagnosis of genetic 
defects, or cloning—similar issues of safety and risk 
apply. How much work should precede a trial in humans 
remains an ethical, as well as a scientific, question. 

MULTIPLE GESTATIONS 

Multiple gestations have become one of the most troubling 
issues in the field of infertility, for their complica



INFERTILITY 151 

tions may jeopardize an infertile couple’s goal of having 
a healthy child. Because of fertility treatments, in the past 
20 years there have been dramatic increases in the numbers 
of twins, triplets, and higher-order multiple gestations. 
High-order multiple gestations seem to be an 
unavoidable risk of gonadotropin use for ovulation induction, 
but many couples choose this treatment instead of 
IVF because of its lower cost. In IVF, multiple pregnancies 
can be limited by reducing the numbers of embryos 
transferred in a given cycle. However, multiple embryos 
are transferred to enhance the success of the process; 
when current guidelines are followed, the number of 
fetuses usually should not exceed two. Some couples who 
are desperate to conceive request the transfer of larger 
numbers of embryos than are recommended by guidelines 
or by their physicians, even when they would not 
consent to selective termination under any circumstances. 
In this situation, the physician should ensure that the 
patient truly understands the consequences of a multiple 
gestation. The physician may sometimes feel compelled 
to respect the choices of an informed patient, even when 
limiting the number of embryos to be transferred could 
have benefited the unborn children. 

The introduction of blastocyst culture techniques 
sometimes allows the transfer of fewer, but highly selected, 
embryos. The ultimate goal is to transfer one highly 
selected blastocyst in order to maintain acceptable pregnancy 
rates while virtually eliminating IVF-related multiple 
gestations. The ACOG Committee on Ethics has 
emphasized the importance of prevention of multiple 
pregnancies, but it also states that physicians should 
counsel patients on the availability of nonselective 
embryo reduction when choosing a fertility procedure or 
when a multiple gestation does occur (87). 

Ethical Issues Concerning the Role of 
the Health Care Provider 

Health care providers have a duty to care for their own 
patients and to respect their autonomy in reproductive 
decisions. The extent to which providers also have a duty 
to care for other parties involved in reproduction— 
including partners, potential offspring, donors, and surrogates—
remains controversial. 

Providers of fertility services may be asked to provide 
services that involve the creation of a family but that are not 
considered treatment of infertility. Sperm selection or even 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis for sex selection for couples 
with gender preference is one example (88). Donor 
insemination of single or lesbian women and surrogacy for 
gay couples are other such services. Although the ethics 
committee of the ASRM has accepted that nontraditional 
arrangements are compatible with the right to reproduce 
(83), it has provided little guidance on how to deal with the 
complex ethical ramifications of such arrangements. In general, 
physicians address these issues on an ad hoc basis. 

Ethical Issues Involving Third-Party 
Reproduction 

With the use of reproductive technologies now generally 
accepted, the simplest case that raises few ethical problems 
would be providing services for a married heterosexual 
couple to overcome infertility without the need for 
donation of gametes. The introduction of a third party 
into reproduction, as occurs in sperm, egg, or embryo 
donation or in surrogate relationships, has increased the 
number and complexity of ethical issues. 

RISKS TO DONORS OR SURROGATES 

Oocyte donation requires ovarian stimulation with 
gonadotropins, sedation, and a surgical procedure, so the 
question of medical risks to the donor arises. A surrogate 
assumes the risks of pregnancy. In both circumstances, 
the short- and long-term health risks must be balanced 
against the benefit to another party. Accurate informed 
consent obtained by the physician of the mother and 
avoidance of exploitation are essential. 

COMPENSATION TO DONORS OR SURROGATES 

An argument has been made for not allowing any payments 
to donors under the assumption that human tissues 
should not be sold; this is the case in organ donation. 
Payments for time and inconvenience are considered 
appropriate, but there is often disagreement over an 
appropriate payment. In the past, large sums of money 
have been offered to oocyte donors thought to have desirable 
characteristics. Ethical issues include concerns for 
exploitation and devaluation of human life by treating 
eggs as commodities. In 2000, the ethics committee of the 
ASRM recommended that a limit of $5,000 be placed on 
compensation to ovum donors (89). No similar guidelines 
are available for surrogates, but some states currently outlaw 
any payment to them. 

DISCLOSURE VERSUS PRIVACY IN GAMETE DONATION 

The ethical and practice guidelines in the United States 
have favored anonymous gamete donation, because it 
respects the infertile couple’s right to privacy while limiting 
the obligations of the donor (83). The issue of disclosure—
what the resulting children should know or not 
know about their genetic history and the details of their 
conception—remains controversial. Some believe that 
nondisclosure protects the child from psychologic harm 
and from the frustration of wanting additional unobtainable 
information, such as the identity of the donor. Proponents 
of disclosure believe that all children have a right to know 
their genetic history. Currently, there are no outcome data 
to suggest that either disclosure or nondisclosure would be 
harmful to the children resulting from gamete donation. 


152 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

SURROGACY 

Surrogacy arrangements are available when an individual 
who desires children has no uterus, has an uncorrectable 
uterine disorder, or cannot carry a child for health reasons. 
The surrogate may donate her egg or eggs to establish 
the pregnancy, or she may carry a pregnancy created 
in vitro with gametes from the infertile couple (gestational 
surrogacy). In some instances, mothers, sisters, or 
friends have volunteered to carry children. 

Some states have made payment to surrogates illegal 
in order to avoid concerns about exploitation. Some 
prominent cases reported in the press have involved surrogates 
who refused to surrender the children. Ethics 
committees have recognized the complex and controversial 
nature of surrogate arrangements and have provided 
guidelines for physicians faced with requests for surrogacy 
(83, 90). In the United States, there remain legal and 
ethical questions about whether contracts for surrogacy 
can or should be enforced. 

Ethical Issues Related to New 
Definitions of Reproduction 

Some reproductive technologies are troubling to a wide 
segment of society because of concerns about human dignity 
and about what is natural. In fact, one of the major initial 
concerns about IVF was that conception outside the 
body is not natural. What is natural and accepted in society 
seems to be based on balancing considerations of the 
health and social benefits of new technologies with social 
costs and cultural attitudes. These considerations evolve 
with time. Gradually, the notions of conception outside the 
body (IVF), then conception separated in time from pregnancy 
(cryopreservation), and then the involvement of 
third parties have become generally accepted in the United 
States. Some newer procedures, such as postmenopausal 
reproduction, posthumous reproduction, and germline 
manipulation and cloning, are more troubling because 
they challenge society’s definition of reproduction. 

POSTMENOPAUSAL REPRODUCTION 

With women in their 50s and 60s reporting successful 
pregnancies through oocyte donation, arguments about 
nature, health risk, and life expectancy have arisen. The 
ethics committee of the ASRM has discouraged reproduction 
after the natural age of menopause, arguing that infertility 
should be the natural characteristic of the menopause 
and that the risks of pregnancy in the postmenopausal 
woman are uncertain (85). However, with men able to 
reproduce well into their 60s, 70s, and beyond, it has been 
argued that denying ovum donation to postmenopausal 
women constitutes gender discrimination. 

POSTHUMOUS REPRODUCTION 

Procreative rights generally are thought to apply to living 
human beings. However, with the advent of artificial 

insemination, a dying man’s sperm can be stored and 
used to impregnate his wife after his death. Sperm (and in 
the near future, ova as well) can be retrieved and frozen 
immediately after a person’s death for later use by a 
spouse or family member. Such requests often are cast as 
attempts to memorialize a loved one. 

The ethical issues include whether preterminal consent 
should be required and what the possible impact of 
posthumous reproduction on the resulting child is. The 
ethics committee of the ASRM supports posthumous 
reproduction in some circumstances and holds the physician 
responsible to ensure that involved parties are 
informed and counseled and that the appropriate consent 
has been obtained (85). In general, courts have held that 
consent by both parties is required for reproduction. 
When consent prior to death is not recorded, cases have 
been judged on individual circumstances. 

ENHANCEMENT OF GENETIC ATTRIBUTES 

Positive “eugenics” is the use of techniques to select for 
or modify traits that are thought to be desirable. Current 
examples of this practice are cryobanks providing the 
sperm of Nobel Prize winners, as well as sperm or 
embryo selection to conceive a child of a desired gender. 
In the future, gene manipulation might produce desirable 
traits or eliminate undesirable traits. 

The conflict in this situation involves honoring the 
rights of the individual to choose or manipulate the traits 
of offspring while considering the extent to which society 
wishes to limit these practices. The ethics committee of 
the ASRM has opposed sex selection for nonmedical reasons, 
arguing that these techniques have the potential to 
undermine equality between the sexes (90). The committee 
recently has given cautious support to the nonmedical 
use of sperm sorting for sex selection, but only to increase 
the chances of having a child of the gender opposite that 
of an existing child, and only after the techniques for gender 
selection have been proven to be safe and effective 
(88, 92). Currently, there are no laws in the United States 
that limit an individual’s choice to use such technology. It 
is the physician or clinic that supports or declines a 
request for services. 

CLONING 

Ever since success in cloning sheep was reported in 1997, 
concerns about the application of this technology to 
humans has prompted a moratorium on federal funding of 
research on cloning and a request for a voluntary ban on 
human cloning in the private sector. The position of the 
ASRM is that reproductive cloning of humans by somatic 
cell nuclear transfer is unethical because there is an 
insufficient scientific basis to support it, and it is unlikely 
to be safe (93). 

Opponents of reproductive cloning also have argued 
that the replication of a person does not show adequate 
respect for the individual. Supporters of reproductive 


INFERTILITY 153 

cloning argue that the right to procreate extends to 13. Schwarzler P, Concin H, Bosch H, Berlinger A, 

cloning, and that cloning is not unethical per se because 
Wohlgenannt K, Collins WP, et al. An evaluation of sonohysterography 
and diagnostic hysteroscopy for the assess


there is a model for cloning in nature (ie, identical twins). 
ment of intrauterine pathology. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 

Furthermore, it is well established that each identical twin 

1998;11:337–342

has a unique identity. However, many supporters and 


( ) 
opponents of reproductive cloning agree that human non-14. Westrom L. Incidence, prevalence, and trends of acute 
pelvic inflammatory disease and its consequences in indus


reproductive cloning should be allowed because of the 
trialized countries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:

potential benefits to society. 

880–892 


( ) 
15. Pittaway DE, Winfield AC, Maxson W, Daniell J, Herbert 
References 
C, Wentz AC. Prevention of acute pelvic inflammatory disease 
after hysterosalpingography: efficacy of doxycycline 

1. American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Optimal 
prophylaxis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;147:623–626 

evaluation of the infertile female. ASRM Practice 
( ) 
Committee Report: A Committee Opinion. Birmingham, 16. Valle RF. Tubal cannulation. Obstet Gynecol Clin North 
Alabama: ASRM, 2000. Available at http://www.asrm.org/ Am 1995;22:519–540 
( ) 
Medical Practice/eval_infertile_female.pdf. Retrieved 


17. Ubaldi F, Wisanto A, Camus M, Tournaye H, Clasen K, 
October 10, 2001 
Devroey P. The role of transvaginal ultrasonography in the 

2. Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Baird DD. Timing of sexual detection of pelvic pathologies in the infertility workup. 
intercourse in relation to ovulation. Effects on the probabil-Hum Reprod 1998;13:330–333 
( ) 
ity of conception, survival of the pregnancy, and sex of the 


18. Van Voorhis BJ, Sparks AE, Allen BD, Stovall DW, Syrop 
baby. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1517–1521 
CH, Chapler FK. Cost-effectiveness of infertility treat( 
) 
ments: a cohort study. Fertil Steril 1997;67:830–836 

3. American Society for Reproductive Medicine, American 
Urological Association. Report on optimal evaluation of the 
( ) 
19. Palermo GD, Cohen J, Rosenwaks Z. Intracytoplasmic 
infertile male. An AUA Best Practice Policy and ASRM 
sperm injection: a powerful tool to overcome fertilization 
Practice Committee Report. Committee Opinion. Birming


failure. Fertil Steril 1996;65:899–908 
( ) 
ham, Alabama: ASRM; Baltimore: AUA, 2001 


20. Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Alikani M, Adler A, Reing AM, 
4. World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for 
Cohen J, et al. Micropuncture retrieval of epididymal sperm 
the examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus 


with in vitro fertilization: importance of in vitro microinteraction. 
4th ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge manipulation techniques. Urology 1995;46:238–241 
( ) 
University Press, 1999 


21. Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Goldstein M, Menendez S, 
5. Pisarska MD, Casson PR, Cisneros PL, Lamb DJ, Lipshultz 
Zaninovic N, Veeck LL, et al. Testicular sperm extraction 
LI, Buster JE, et al. Fertilization after standard in vitro fer-with intracytoplasmic sperm injection for nonobstructive 
tilization versus intracytoplasmic sperm injection in subfer-azoospermia. Urology 1997;49:435–440 
tile males using sibling oocytes. Fertil Steril 1999;71: 
( ) 
22. Shenfield F, Doyle P, Valentine A, Steele SJ, Tan SL. Effects 
627–632 

of age, gravidity and male infertility status on cumulative 


( ) 
6. Jarow JP. 
Transrectal ultrasonography of infertile men. conception rates following artificial insemination with 
Fertil Steril 1993;60:1035–1039 
cryopreserved donor semen: analysis of 2998 cycles of 
( ) 
treatment in one centre over 10 years. Hum Reprod 1993; 

7. Anguiano A, Oates RD, Amos JA, Dean M, Gerrard B, 
8:60–64

Stewart C, et al. Congenital bilateral absence of the vas def( 
) 
erens. A primarily genital form of cystic fibrosis. JAMA 23. Revised minimum standards for in vitro fertilization, 
1992;267:1794–1797 


gamete intrafallopian transfer, and related procedures. The 
( ) 
American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Fertil Steril 

8. De Braekeleer M, Dao TN. Cytogenetic studies in male 
1998;70 (Suppl 2):1S–5S

infertility: a review. Hum Reprod 1991;6:245–250 


( ) 
( ) 
24. Sagle MA, Hamilton-Fairley D, Kiddy DS, Franks S. A 
9. Pryor JL, Kent-First M, Muallem A, Van Bergen AH, 
comparative, randomized study of low-dose human 

Nolten WE, Meisner L, et al. Microdeletions in the Y chro


menopausal gonadotropin and follicle-stimulating hormone

mosome of infertile men. N Engl J Med 1997;336:534–539 

in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Fertil Steril 


(button) 
10. Batista MC, Cartledge TP, Merino MJ, Axiotis C, Platia 
1991;55: 56–60 
MP, Merriam GR, et al. Midluteal phase endometrial biop( 
) 
25. Filicori M, Flamigni C, Meriggiola MC, Cognigni G, 
sy does not accurately predict luteal function. Fertil Steril 

Valdiserri A, Ferrari P, et al. Ovulation induction with pul


1993;59:294–300 

satile gonadotropin-releasing hormone: technical modali


( ) 
11. Sharara FI, Scott RT Jr, Seifer DB. The detection of dimin- 
ties and clinical perspectives. Fertil Steril 1991;56:1–13 
ished ovarian reserve in infertile women. Am J Obstet 
( ) 
26. Velazquez EM, Mendoza S, Hamer T, Sosa F, Glueck CJ. 
Gynecol 1998;179:804–812 

Metformin therapy in polycystic ovary syndrome reduces 


( ) 
12. Oei SG, Helmerhorst FM, Bloemenkamp KW, Hollants FA, 
hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance, hyperandrogenemia, 
Meerpoel DE, Keirse MJ. Effectiveness of the postcoital and systolic blood pressure, while facilitating normal 
test: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 1998;317:502–505 
(button) 
( ) 
menses and pregnancy. Metabolism 1994;43:647–654 


154 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

27. Vandermolen DT, Ratts VS, Evans WS, Stovall DW, Kauma 
SW, Nestler JE. Metformin increases the ovulatory rate and 
pregnancy rate from clomiphene citrate in patients with 
polycystic ovary syndrome who are resistant to clomiphene 
citrate alone. Fertil Steril 2001;75:310–315 
( ) 
28. Eldar-Geva 
T, Meagher S, Healy DL, MacLachlan V, 
Breheny S, Wood C. Effect of intramural, subserosal, and 
submucosal uterine fibroids on the outcome of assisted 
reproductive technology treatment. Fertil Steril 1998;70: 
687–691 
( ) 
29. March CM. Intrauterine adhesions. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am 1995;22:491–505 
( ) 
30. Goldenberg M, Sivan E, Sharabi Z, Mashiach S, Lipitz S, 
Seidman DS. Reproductive outcome following hysteroscopic 
management of intrauterine septum and adhesions. 
Hum Reprod 1995;10:2663–2665 
( ) 
31. Schlaff WD, Hassiakos DK, Damewood MD, Rock JA. 
Neosalpingostomy for distal tubal obstruction: prognostic 
factors and impact of surgical technique. Fertil Steril 
1990;54:984–990 
( ) 
32. Benadiva CA, Kligman I, Davis O, Rosenwaks Z. In vitro 
fertilization versus tubal surgery: is pelvic reconstructive 
surgery obsolete? Fertil Steril 1995;64:1051–1061 
( ) 
33. Penzias AS, DeCherney AH. Is there ever a role for tubal 
surgery? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1218–1221; discussion 
1221–1223 
( ) 
34. Zeyneloglu HB, Arici A, Olive 
DL. Adverse effects of 
hydrosalpinx on pregnancy rates after in vitro fertilizationembryo 
transfer. Fertil Steril 1998;70:492–499 
( ) 
35. Dubuisson JB, Chapron C, Nos C, Morice P, Aubriot FX, 
Garnier P. Sterilization reversal: fertility results. Hum 
Reprod 1995;10:1145–1151 
( ) 
36. Marcoux S, Maheux R, Berube S. Laparoscopic surgery in 
infertile women with minimal or mild endometriosis. 
Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis. N Engl J 
Med 1997;337:217–222 
( ) 
37. Multiple gestation pregnancy. The ESHRE Capri Workshop 
Group. Hum Reprod 2000;15:1856–1864 
( ) 
38. Vollenhoven BJ, Healy DL. Short- and long-term effects of 
ovulation induction. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 
1998;27:903–914 
( ) 
39. Modan B, Ron E, Lerner-Geva L, Blumstein T, Menczer J, 
Rabinovici J, et al. Cancer incidence in a cohort of infertile 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;147:1038–1042 
( ) 
40. Imani B, Eijkemans MJ, teVelde ER, Habbema JD, Fauser 
BC. Predictors of patients remaining anovulatory during 
clomiphene citrate induction of ovulation in normogonadotropic 
oligoamenorrheic infertility. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1998;83:2361–2365 
( ) 
41. Tadokoro N, Vollenhoven B, Clark S, Baker G, Kovacs G, 
Burger H, et al. Cumulative pregnancy rates in couples with 
anovulatory infertility compared with unexplained infertility 
in an ovulation induction programme. Hum Reprod 
1997;12:1939–1944 
( ) 
42. Whelan JG III, Vlahos NF. The ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2000;73:883–896 
( ) 
43. Geva E, Jaffe RB. Role of vascular endothelial growth factor 
in ovarian physiology and pathology. Fertil Steril 
2000;74:429–438 
( ) 
44. Mosgaard BJ, Lidegaard O, Kjaer SK, Schou G, Andersen 
AN. Ovarian stimulation and borderline ovarian tumors: a 
case-control study. Fertil Steril 1998;70:1049–1055 
( ) 
45. Schoemaker J, Braat DDM. Pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone therapy. In: Adashi EY, Rock JA, Rosenwaks 
Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery, and technology. 
Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:1093– 
1106 
46. Molitch ME. Medical treatment of prolactinomas. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1999;28:143–169, vii 
( ) 
47. Verhelst J, Abs R, Maiter D, van den Bruel A, Vandeweghe 
M, Velkeniers B, et al. Cabergoline in the treatment of 
hyperprolactinemia: a study in 455 patients. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:2518–2522 
( ) 
48. Conner P, Fried G. Hyperprolactinemia; etiology, diagnosis 
and treatment alternatives. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 
1998;77:249–262 
( ) 
49. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Evans WS, Pasquali R. Effects 
of metformin on spontaneous and clomiphene-induced ovulation 
in the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1998;338:1876–1880 
( ) 
50. Vandermolen DT, Ratts VS, Evans WS, Stovall DW, Kauma 
SW, Nestler JE. Metformin increases the ovulatory rate and 
pregnancy rate from clomiphene citrate in patients with 
polycystic ovary syndrome who are resistant to clomiphene 
citrate alone. Fertil Steril 2001;75:310–315 
( ) 
51. Velazquez E, Acosta A, Mendoza SG. Menstrual cyclicity 
after metformin therapy in polycystic ovary syndrome. 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:392–395 
( ) 
52. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Reamer P, Gunn RD, Allan G. 
Ovulatory and metabolic effects of D-chiro-inositol in the 
polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
1314–1320 
( ) 
53. Van Voorhis BJ, Sparks AE, Allen BD, Stovall DW, Syrop 
CH, Chapler FK. Cost-effectiveness of infertility treatments: 
a cohort study. Fertil Steril 1997;67:830–836 
( ) 
54. Zayed F, Lenton EA, Cooke ID. Comparison between stimulated 
in-vitro fertilization and stimulated intrauterine 
insemination for the treatment of unexplained and mild 
male factor infertility. Hum Reprod 1997;12:2408–2413 
( ) 
55. Gleicher N, Oleske DM, Tur-Kaspa I, Vidali A, Karande V. 
Reducing the risk of high-order multiple pregnancy after 
ovarian stimulation with gonadotropins. N Engl J Med 
2000;343:2–7 
( ) 
56. Meldrum DR. In vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. In: 
Sciarra JJ, ed. Gynecology and obstetrics. Vol 5. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:1–16 
57. Steptoe PC, Edwards RG. Birth after reimplantation of a 
human embryo. Lancet 1978;2(8085):366 
( ) 
58. Toner JP, Philput CB, Jones, GS, Muasher SJ. Basal follicle-
stimulating hormone level is a better predictor of in 

vitro fertilization performance than age. Fertil Steril 
1991; 55:784–791 


( ) 
59. Frattarelli JL, Bergh PA, Drews MR, Sharara FI, Scott RT. 
Evaluation of basal estradiol levels in assisted reproductive 
technology cycles. Fertil Steril 2000;74:518–524 
( ) 
60. Licciardi F, 
Grifo JA, Rosenwaks Z, Witkin SS. 
Relationship between antibodies to Chlamydia trachomatis 
and spontaneous abortion following in vitro fertilization. J 
Assist Reprod Genet 1992;9:207–210 
( ) 
61. Camus E, Poncelet C, Goffinet F, Wainer B, Merlet F, 
Nisand I, et al. Pregnancy rates after in-vitro fertilization in 
cases of tubal infertility with and without hydrosalpinx: a 
meta-analysis of published comparative studies. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1243–1249 
( ) 
62. Surrey ES, Schoolcraft WB. Laparoscopic management of 
hydrosalpinges before in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer: 
salpingectomy versus proximal tubal occlusion. Fertil Steril 
2001;75: 612–617 
( ) 
63. Mansour R, Aboulghar M, Serour G. Dummy embryo transfer: 
a technique that minimizes the problems of embryo 
transfer and improves the pregnancy rate in human in vitro 
fertilization. Fertil Steril 1990;54:678–681 
( ) 
64. Hughes EG, Fedorkow DM, Daya S, Sagle MA, Van de 
Koppel P, Collins JA. The routine use of gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonists prior to in vitro fertilization and 
gamete intrafallopian transfer: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Fertil Steril 1992;58:888–896 
( ) 
65. Gardner DK, Schoolcraft WB, Wagley L, Schlenker 
T, 
Stevens J, Hesla J. A prospective randomized trial of blastocyst 
culture and transfer in in-vitro fertilization. Hum 
Reprod 1998;13:3434–3440 
( ) 
66. American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Guidelines 
on number of embryos transferred. Birmingham, Alabama: 
ASRM, 1999. Available at http://www.asrm.org/Media/ 
Practice/No Embryos Transferred.pdf. Retrieved October 
10, 2001 
67. Assisted reproductive technology in the United States: 1998 
results generated from the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine/Society for Assisted Reproductive 
Technology Registry. Fertil Steril 2002;77:18–31 
( ) 
68. Cohen J, 
Alikani M, Trowbridge J, Rosenwaks Z. 
Implantation enhancement by selective assisted hatching 
using zona drilling of human embryos with poor prognosis. 
Hum Reprod 1992;7:685–691 
( ) 
69. Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, 
Van Steirteghem AC. 
Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon 
into an oocyte. Lancet 1992;340:17–18 
( ) 
70. Aboulghar H, Aboulghar M, Mansour R, Serour G, Amin Y, 
Al-Inany H. A prospective controlled study of karyotyping 
for 430 consecutive babies conceived through intracyto-
INFERTILITY 155 

72. Sauer MV, Paulson RJ, Macaso TM, Francis MM, Lobo 
RA. Oocyte and pre-embryo donation to women with ovarian 
failure: an extended clinical trial. Fertil Steril 
1991;55:39–43 
( ) 
73. Faber BM, Mercan R, Hamacher P, Muasher SJ, Toner JP. 
The impact of an egg donor’s age and her prior fertility on 
recipient pregnancy outcome. Fertil Steril 1997;68:370–372 
74. Navot D, 
Scott RT, Droesch K, Veeck LL, Liu HC, 
Rosenwaks Z. The window of embryo transfer and the efficiency 
of human conception in vitro. Fertil Steril 1991; 
55:114–118 
( ) 
75. 
Handyside AH, Kontogianni EH, Hardy K, Winston RM. Pregnancies 
from biopsied human preimplantation embryos sexed 
( ) 
by Y-specific DNA amplification. Nature 1990;344:768–770 


( ) 
76. Geraedts J, Handyside A, Harper J, Liebaers J, Sermon K, 
Staessen C, et al. ESHRE preimplantation genetic diagnosis 
(PGD) consortium: data collection II (May 2000). Hum 
Reprod 2000;15:2673–2683 
( ) 
77. Munne S, Magli C, Cohen J, 
Morton P, Sadowy S, 
Gianaroli L, et al. Positive outcome after preimplantation 
diagnosis of aneuploidy in human embryos. Hum Reprod 
1999;14:2191–2199 
( ) 
78. Chen C. Pregnancy after human oocyte cryopreservation. 
Lancet 1986;1(8486):884–886 
( ) 
79. Oktay K, Karlikaya G. Ovarian function after transplantation 
of frozen, banked autologous ovarian tissue. N Engl J 
Med 2000;342:1919 
( ) 
80. Ryan KJ. Ethical and legal implications. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rozenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:1942–1951 
81. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of biomedical 
ethics. 5th ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001 
82. Robertson JA. Children of choice: freedom and the new 
reproductive technologies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 1994 
83. Ethical considerations of assisted reproductive technologies. 
By the Ethics Committee of the American Fertility 
Society. Fertil Steril 1994;62:1S–125S 
( ) 
84. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Preembryo research: history, scientific background, and 
ethical considerations. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:69–78 
85. Ethical considerations of assisted reproductive technologies. 
The Ethics Committee of the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine. Fertil Steril 1997;67(5 Suppl 1): 
i–iii, 1S–9S 
( ) 
86. Edwards BE, Gearhart JD, Wallach EE. The human pluripotent 
stem cell: impact on medicine and society. Fertil Steril 
plasmic sperm injection. Fertil Steril 2001;76:249–253 


( ) 
2000;74(1):1–7 


( ) 
71. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
87. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Preconception and prenatal carrier screening for cystic Nonselective embryo reduction: ethical guidance for the 
fibrosis: clinical and laboratory guidelines. Washington, obstetrician–gynecologist. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gyne-
DC: ACOG, 2001 cology. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:53–56 

156 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

88. Sex selection and preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 1999;72:595–598 
( ) 
89. Financial incentives in recruitment of oocyte donors. Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2000;74:216–220 
( ) 
90. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Responsibilities of physicians regarding surrogate motherhood. 
In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. Washington, 
DC: ACOG, 2002:79–84 
91. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Sex 
selection. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:85–88 
92. Preconception gender selection for nonmedical reasons. 
Ethics Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2001;75:861–864 
( ) 
93. Human somatic cell nuclear transfer (cloning). Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2000;74:873–876 
( ) 
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 


Recurrent pregnancy loss is a profound personal tragedy 
to couples seeking parenthood and a formidable clinical 
challenge to their physicians. Whereas spontaneous abortion 
occurs in approximately 15% of clinically diagnosed 
pregnancies of women of reproductive age, recurrent 
pregnancy loss occurs in approximately 1–2% of this 
same population (1). Great strides have been made in 
characterizing the incidence and diversity of this heterogeneous 
disorder. A definite cause of pregnancy loss can 
be established in approximately 60% of couples after a 
thorough evaluation (2). A complete evaluation includes 
investigations into genetic, endocrinologic, anatomic, 
immunologic, microbiologic, and iatrogenic causes. In 
cases of idiopathic recurrent miscarriage, intense supportive 
care is indicated; successful outcomes will occur 
in more than two thirds of all couples (3). 

DEFINITION OF PREGNANCY LOSS 

The traditional definition of the term recurrent pregnancy 
loss included couples with three or more consecutive spontaneous 
pregnancy losses. However, several recent studies 
have indicated that the risk of recurrent miscarriage after 
two successive losses is similar to the risk of miscarriage in 
women after three successive losses; thus, couples with 
two or more consecutive spontaneous miscarriages warrant 
an evaluation to determine the etiology of their pregnancy 
losses (4, 5). The term miscarriage applies to any loss 
before 20 weeks of gestation; it can be divided further into 
embryonic losses that occur before the ninth week of gestation 
and fetal losses that occur between week 9 and week 

20. Couples with primary recurrent loss have never had a 
previous viable infant, whereas those with secondary 
recurrent loss have previously delivered a pregnancy 
beyond 20 weeks and then had subsequent losses. 
RECURRENCE RISK 

The risk of recurrence of pregnancy loss depends on several 
factors, including maternal age, the number of previous 
miscarriages, and the history of previous term 
deliveries. Recent studies evaluating the frequency of 
pregnancy loss, based on highly sensitive tests for quantitative 
hCG, indicate that the total clinical and preclinical 
losses in women aged 20–30 years represent 
approximately 25%; the loss rate in women 40 years or 
older is at least double that figure (6, 7). Similarly, having 
a greater number of prior losses is associated with an 
increased risk of recurrence in most studies. A patient 
with two prior losses has a recurrence risk of at least 
25%. After four losses, that figure at least doubles. Most 
studies have indicated a more favorable prognosis in 
women with secondary recurrent pregnancy loss. 

ETIOLOGY OF RECURRENT 
PREGNANCY LOSS 

Genetic Causes 

Structural abnormalities in parental chromosomes occur 
in 3–5% of couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. The 
most common chromosomal abnormality is a balanced 
translocation, an event that occurs at meiosis with an 
abnormal genetic complement in the germ cells. In recurrent 
pregnancy loss, this abnormality is found more frequently 
in the female partner, at a ratio of 2:1 up to 3:1 
(female:male). Other parental chromosomal abnormalities, 
such as robertsonian translocations, inversions, sex 
chromosome aneuploidies, and supernumerary chromosomes, 
occur less frequently. Management includes 
genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis 


or chorionic villus sampling, the use of donor gametes, or 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis. 

Endocrinologic Causes 

LUTEAL PHASE DEFICIENCY 

Progesterone produced from the corpus luteum is necessary 
for successful implantation and maintenance of early 
pregnancy until progesterone production by the placenta 
takes over. Luteal phase deficiency has been described as 
a cause of recurrent pregnancy loss, although evidence is 
lacking to document this association. Classically, diagnosis 
was obtained after an endometrial biopsy on day 26 or 
day 27 of a cycle that was more than 2 days out of phase. 
More recently, a midluteal progesterone concentration of 
<10 ng/mL has been suggested to be diagnostic. Women 
with endometrial biopsies that show they are out of phase 
are unable to maintain endometrial progesterone receptors 
and have abnormal expression of the a Vb 3 integrin, a 
biomarker of uterine receptivity (8). The a Vb 3 integrin 
normally appears in the endometrial glands on cycle days 
20–21 during the “window of implantation.” The majority 
of these patients, when treated with supplemental progesterone 
or low-dose clomiphene citrate, will have restoration 
of normal histologic endometrium (Images 5–30; 
Video 1) and normal a Vb 3 expression. Late implantation 
of the embryo also has been associated with an increased 
miscarriage rate (9). 

UNTREATED HYPOTHYROIDISM 

Untreated hypothyroidism may increase the risk of miscarriage. 
A recent study of more than 700 patients with 
recurrent pregnancy loss identified 7.6% with hypothyroidism 
(10). Hypothyroidism is diagnosed easily with a 
sensitive TSH test, and patients should be treated to 
become euthyroid before attempting another pregnancy. 

INSULIN RESISTANCE 

Patients with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus are 
known to have an increased rate of spontaneous miscarriage. 
The spontaneous loss rate is reduced to normal 
when women are euglycemic preconceptually (6). It is 
known that women with PCOS have an increased risk of 
miscarriage. The high prevalence of insulin resistance in 
women with PCOS may account for the increased risk of 
miscarriage in this group (11). Testing of fasting insulin 
and glucose levels is simple, and treatment with insulinsensitizing 
agents can reduce the risk of recurrent miscarriage. 


ELEVATED DAY 3 FOLLICLE-STIMULATING 
HORMONE LEVEL 

An elevated serum FSH level on cycle day 3 correlates 
with diminished ovarian reserve. Elevated serum FSH 
levels on day 3 have been associated with decreased 
pregnancy rates in women undergoing IVF. Although the 

INFERTILITY 157 

frequency of elevated FSH levels on day 3 in women with 
recurrent miscarriage is similar to the frequency in the 
infertile population, the likelihood of recurrent miscarriage 
is increased with increased day 3 levels of FSH (12). 
Although no treatment is available, testing should be performed 
in women older than 35 years who have recurrent 
pregnancy loss, and appropriate counseling should follow. 

Congenital Uterine Abnormalities 

Congenital uterine anomalies associated with müllerian 
fusion defects have been associated with an increased risk 
of pregnancy loss. The most common abnormality associated 
with pregnancy loss is a septate uterus (Fig. 60). 
Uncontrolled studies suggest that resection of the uterine 
septum results in higher delivery rates than in women 
without treatment. Other congenital abnormalities, such 
as bicornuate uterus and unicornuate uterus, are more frequently 
associated with second-trimester losses or 
preterm delivery. 

A


B


n FIG. 60. (
((A) Uterine septum of a patient who was gravida 
3, para 0, abortus 3. (B) Deep uterine septum of a patient 
who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 

158 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Acquired Abnormalities 

Intrauterine synechiae (Asherman’s syndrome) (Fig. 61; 
Image 49) have been associated with recurrent miscarriage. 
The most common cause of intrauterine adhesions is 
postabortion or postpartum curettage. The adhesions are 
thought to interfere with normal placentation and are treated 
with hysteroscopic resection. Intrauterine cavity abnormalities, 
such as leiomyomas and polyps (Figs. 62 and 63), 
can contribute to pregnancy loss by interfering with 
implantation. Such space-occupying lesions should be 
removed before another pregnancy is attempted. Until 
recently, it was felt that only submucous leiomyomas 
should be removed surgically prior to subsequent attempts 
at pregnancy. However, several recent studies investigating 
the implantation rate in women undergoing IVF have 
clearly demonstrated decreased implantation with intramural 
myomas in the range of 20–30 mm (13). It is uncertain 
if surgical intervention is beneficial (14). 

Autoimmune Causes 

Autoantibodies to phospholipids, thyroid antigens, nuclear 
antigens, and others have been investigated as possible 
causes for pregnancy loss (10). Antiphospholipid antibodies 
include both lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin 
antibodies. The occurrence of recurrent pregnancy 
loss, fetal death, thrombosis, or a combination in conjunction 
with antiphospholipid antibodies is termed the 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (15) (Table 14). 
There is still controversy concerning testing for the presence 
of other phospholipids, but an increasing number of 
studies suggest that antibodies to phosphatidyl serine also 
are associated with pregnancy loss. In the past, treatment 
with low-dose steroids was advocated; however, recent 
studies indicate that this treatment significantly increases 
maternal and fetal complications without enhancing livebirth 
rates (16, 17). Independent prospective investigations 
have indicated the efficacy of the administration of 
subcutaneous heparin and aspirin in the treatment of 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (18, 19). 

n FIG. 61. Asherman’s syndrome (intrauterine synechiae) of 
a patient who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 
An increased frequency of antithyroid antibodies 
(antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin) has been 
reported in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. 
However, if the patient is euthyroid, the presence of 
antithyroid antibodies does not affect the pregnancy 
outcome (20). Euthyroid women who have positive 
antithyroid antibodies are at an increased risk for 
hypothyroidism during and after pregnancy. These 
women should have serum TSH levels determined during 
each trimester and postpartum to detect thyroiditis (21). 

Approximately 10–15% of all women will have 
detectable antinuclear antibodies regardless of their history 
of pregnancy loss. Their chance of successful pregnancy 
outcome does not depend on the presence or 
absence of antinuclear antibodies. Treatments such as 
steroids have been shown to increase the maternal and 
fetal complications without yielding an improved rate of 
livebirths (17); thus, testing and treatment for antinuclear 
antibodies are not indicated. 

n FIG. 62. An anterior fundal polyp in a patient who was 
gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 
n FIG. 63. A large intrauterine fibroid (upper right) and a 
small polyp (lower left) seen on sonohysterography in a 
patient who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 

INFERTILITY 159 

n TABLE 14. Clinical and Laboratory Characteristics 
of Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome 
Clinical Laboratory 


Pregnancy morbidity IgG a CL (³ 20 GPL) 
³ 1 unexplained death at IgM a CL (³ 20 MPL) 
³ 10 weeks or delivery at Positive lupus 
£ 34 weeks with severe anticoagulant test 
pregnancy-induced 
hypertension or three or 
more losses before 10 weeks 

Thrombosis 
Venous 
Arterial, including stroke 

Note: Patients should have at least one clinical and one laboratory 
feature at some time in the course of their disease. Laboratory test 
results should be positive on at least two occasions more than 6 
weeks apart. Abbreviations: IgG indicates immunoglobulin G; IgM, 
immunoglobulin M; a CL, anticardiolipin; GPL, IgG phospholipid 
units; MPL, IgM phospholipid units. 

Wilson WA, Gharavi AK, Koike T, Lockshin ND, Branch DW, Piette 
JC, et al. International concensus statement on preliminary classification 
criteria for definite antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. 
Arthritis Rheum 1999;42:1309–1311. Copyright © 1999 American 
College of Rheumatology. Reproduced with permission of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Alloimmune Abnormalities 

Alloimmune factors have been suggested to be associated 
with recurrent pregnancy loss. Human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) sharing was thought to be associated with recurrent 
pregnancy loss based on a decreased maternal 
immune response and thus a decreased production of 
blocking antibodies. Recent large studies, however, 
reveal no association between HLA (and HLA-DQa ), 
homozygosity, and recurrent pregnancy loss (22). Other 
investigators have implicated certain embryotoxic factors, 
such as tumor necrosis factor-a and interferon-d , 
identified in the supernatants of peripheral blood lymphocytes 
from women with a history of pregnancy loss; 
however, this association has not been confirmed by 
independent studies. Immunophenotypes of endometrial 
cells from women with recurrent pregnancy loss demonstrate 
altered natural killer cell (CD56+) populations. 
Some researchers have suggested that increased numbers 
of natural killer cells are associated with pregnancy loss, 
whereas others have indicated that decreased numbers of 
natural killer cells are associated with pregnancy loss. 
None of these tests has been clearly associated with pregnancy 
loss; thus, there are no recommended tests or treatments 
at this time (23). Therapies such as leukocyte 
immunotherapy and the intravenous administration of 
immunoglobulin have not been shown to be efficacious 
(22, 24). 

Microbiologic Causes 

Certain infectious agents have been identified more frequently 
in cultures from women who have had spontaneous 
pregnancy losses. These agents include 
Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis, chlamydia, 
and other, less commonly encountered pathogens. 
Although no studies have associated any infectious agent 
with recurrent pregnancy loss, it is unthinkable that a 
clinician would leave a patient untreated to determine this 
association. Because of the clear association with sporadic 
pregnancy losses and the ease of diagnosis, women 
with recurrent pregnancy loss should be tested for these 
organisms. If the cultures are positive, both partners 
should be treated. 

Iatrogenic Causes 

Smoking more than 15 cigarettes a day has been associated 
with an increased risk of pregnancy loss by 
1.5–2-fold, as has alcohol consumption of more than four 
drinks per week. When a woman has both personal 
habits, the risk of pregnancy loss may increase fourfold. 
Couples should be counseled concerning these habits and 
strongly encouraged to discontinue them prior to attempting 
conception (25). 

Thrombophilic Problems 

Recent attention has focused on certain inherited disorders 
that may predispose women to arterial thrombosis or 
venous thrombosis or both (26). These disorders include 
the group of mutations leading to a hypercoagulable state, 
such as factor V Leiden (G1691A), factor II–prothrombin 
mutation (G20210A), and hyperhomocysteinemia (thermolabile 
MTHFR C677T). Another group of deficiencies 
leading to hypercoagulable states includes the antithrombin 
III deficiency, protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, 
and fibrinogen deficiency. Studies are not in 
agreement at this time, but it appears that some of these 
hypercoagulable states are found more commonly in 
late-trimester pregnancy losses than early losses. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia has been reported in early pregnancy 
losses and can be treated with folic acid supplementation 
(27). 

EVALUATION FOR PREGNANCY 
LOSS 

When the clinician decides to initiate an evaluation for 
recurrent pregnancy loss, complete diagnostic testing 
should be performed. This testing includes a complete 
history, including documentation of prior pregnancies, 
any pathologic tests that were performed on prior miscarriages, 
any evidence of chronic or acute infections or diseases, 
any recent physical or emotional trauma, any 
family history of pregnancy loss, and any previous gynecologic 
surgery or complicating factor. A summary of the 


160 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

diagnosis and management of recurrent pregnancy loss 
includes an investigation of genetic, endocrinologic, 
anatomic, immunologic, microbiologic, psychologic, 
iatrogenic, and possible thrombophilic causes (Table 15). 

FOLLOW-UP 

In approximately 60% of all cases of recurrent pregnancy 
loss, a complete evaluation will reveal a possible etiology 
(2). If no cause can be found, the majority of couples will 
eventually have a successful pregnancy outcome with 
supportive therapy alone (3). Couples who have experienced 
recurrent pregnancy loss want to know what 
caused the miscarriages. Unexplained reproductive failure 
can lead to anger, guilt, and depression. Anger may be 
directed toward the responsible physician for not being 
able to solve their reproductive problems. Feelings of 

grief and guilt following an early loss are often as intense 
as those following a stillbirth, and parents experience a 
grief reaction similar to the grief associated with the 
death of an adult. The couple should be assured that exercise, 
intercourse, and dietary indiscretions do not cause 
miscarriage. Any questions or concerns that the couple 
may have about personal habits should be discussed. 

Women with recurrent pregnancy loss have begun to 
prepare for their baby, both emotionally and physically, 
unlike couples with infertility who have never conceived. 
When a miscarriage occurs, a couple may have great difficulty 
informing friends or family about the loss. 
Feelings of hopelessness may continue long after the 
loss. Patients may continue to grieve and have episodes 
of depression on the expected due date or the date of the 
pregnancy loss. Participation in support groups or grief 
counseling may be beneficial in many cases. 

n TABLE 15. Diagnosis and Management of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 
Abnormal 
Etiology Diagnostic Evaluation Result Therapy 
Genetic Karyotype partners 3–5% Genetic counseling 
Donor gametes 
Anatomic Hysterosalpingogram 15–20% Septum transection 
Hysteroscopy Myomectomy 
Sonohysterography Lysis of Adhesions 
Endocrinologic Midluteal progesterone 8–12% Progesterone 
TSH Levothyroxine 
Prolactin Bromocriptine, 
Dostinex 
Fasting insulin:glucose Metformin 
Day 3 FSH, estradiol Counseling 
Immunologic Lupus anticoagulant 15–25% Aspirin 
Antiphospholipid antibodies Heparin + Aspirin 
Embryotoxicity assay* IV gamma globulin* 
Immunophenotypes* 
Microbiologic Cervical cultures 5–10% Antibiotics 
Thrombophilic Antithrombin III* 5%* Aspirin 
Protein C, Protein S deficiency* Heparin + Aspirin 
Factor V Leiden mutation* Low-molecular-weight 
heparin 
Dysfibrinogenemia* 
Hyperhomocysteinemia* Folic acid 
Psychologic Interview Varies Support groups 
Questionnaire Counseling 
Iatrogenic Tobacco, alcohol use 5% Eliminate consumption 
Exposure to toxins, chemicals Eliminate exposure 

Abbreviations: FSH indicates follicle stimulating hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. 
*Current data inconclusive. 


References 

1. 
Kutteh WH. Recurrent pregnancy loss. In: Carr BR, 
Blackwell RE, eds. Textbook of reproductive medicine. 2nd 
ed. Stamford, Connecticut: Appleton & Lange, 1998: 
679–692 
2. Stephenson MD. Frequency of factors associated with habit-
INFERTILITY 161 

15. Wilson WA, Ghavari AE, Koike T, Lockshin MD, Branch 
DW, Piette JC, et al. International consensus statement on 
preliminary classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid 
syndrome. Report of an international workshop. 
Arthritis Rheum 1999;42:1309–1311 
( ) 
16. Cowchock FS, Reece EA, Balaban D, Branch DW, Plouffe 
L. Repeated fetal losses associated with antiphospholipid 
ual abortion in 197 couples. Fertil Steril 1996;66:24–29 


( ) 
antibodies: a collaborative randomized trial comparing 

3. Brigham SA, Conlon C, Farquharson RG. A longitudinal 
study of pregnancy outcome following idiopathic recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1999;14:2868–2871 
( ) 
4. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Antiphospholipid syndrome. ACOG Educational Bulletin 
244. Washington, DC: ACOG, 1998 
5. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Management of recurrent early pregnancy loss. ACOG 
Practice Bulletin 24. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
6. Mills JL, Simpson JL, Driscoll SG, Jovanovic-Peterson L, 
Van Allen M, Aarons JH, et al. Incidence of spontaneous 
abortion among normal women and insulin-dependent diabetic 
women whose pregnancies were identified within 21 
days of conception. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1617–1623 
(button) 
7. Clifford K, Rai R, Regan L. Future pregnancy outcome in 
unexplained recurrent first trimester miscarriage. Hum 
Reprod 1997;12:387–389 
( ) 
8. Castelbaum AJ, Lessey BA. Infertility and implantation 
defects. Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 2001;12: 
427–446 
9. Wilcox AJ, Baird DD, Weinberg CR. Time of implantation 
of the conceptus and loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 
1999;340:1796–1799 
( ) 
10. Ghazeeri GS, Clark DA, Kutteh WH. Immunologic factors 
in implantation. Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 
2001;12:315–337 
11. Sills ES, Perloe M, Palermo GD. Correction of hyperinsulinemia 
in oligoovulatory women with clomiphene-resistant 
polycystic ovary syndrome: a review of therapeutic rationale 
and reproductive outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2000;91:135–141 
( ) 
12. Hofmann GE, Khoury J, Thie J. Recurrent pregnancy loss 
and diminished ovarian reserve. Fertil Steril 2000;74: 
1192–1195 
( ) 
13. Stovall DW, Parrish SB, Van Voorhis BJ, Hahn SJ, Sparks 
AE, Syrop CH. Uterine leiomyomas reduce the efficacy of 
assisted reproduction cycles: results of a matched follow-up 
study. Hum Reprod 1998;13:192–197 
( ) 
14. Surrey ES, Lietz AK, Schoolcraft WB. Impact of intramural 
leiomyomata in patients with a normal endometrial cavity 
on in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer cycle outcome. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:405–410 
( ) 
prednisone with low-dose aspirin treatment. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1992;166:1318–1323 



( ) 
17. Laskin CA, Bombardier C, Hannah ME, 
Mandel FP, 
Ritchie JW, Farewell V, et al. Prednisone and aspirin in 
women with autoantibodies and unexplained recurrent fetal 
loss. N Engl J Med 1997;337:148–153 
( ) 
18. Kutteh WH. Antiphospholipid antibody-associated recurrent 
pregnancy loss: treatment with heparin and low dose 
aspirin is superior to low dose aspirin alone. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1996;174:1584–1589 
( ) 
19. Rai R, Cohen H, Dave M, Regan L. Randomised controlled 
trial of aspirin and aspirin plus heparin in pregnant women 
with recurrent miscarriage associated with phospholipid 
antibodies (or antiphospholipid antibodies). BMJ 1997;314: 
253–257 
( ) 
20. Rushworth FH, Backos M, Rai R, Chilcott IT, Baxter N, 
Regan L. Prospective pregnancy outcome in untreated 
recurrent miscarriers with thyroid antibodies. Hum Reprod 
2000;15:1637–1639 
( ) 
21. Esplin MS, 
Branch DW, Silver R, Stagnaro-Green A. 
Thyroid antibodies are not associated with recurrent pregnancy 
loss. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:1583–1586 
( ) 
22. Ober C, Karrison T, Odem RR, Barnes RB, Branch DW, 
Stephenson MD, et al. Mononuclear-cell immunisation in 
prevention of recurrent miscarriages: a randomised trial. 
Lancet 1999;354(9176):365–369 
( ) 
23. Kutteh WH, Stovall DW, Scott JR. The immunologic diagnosis 
and treatment of recurrent pregnancy loss. Infertil 
Reprod Med Clin North Am 1997;8:267–287 
24. Daya S, Gunby J, Porter F, Scott J, Clark DA. Critical analysis 
of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod Update 1999;5:475–482 
( ) 
25. Ness RB, Grisso JA, Hirschinger N, Markovic N, Shaw 
LM, Day NL, et al. Cocaine and tobacco use and the risk of 
spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med 1999;340:333–339 
( ) 
26. Blumenfeld Z, Brenner B. Thrombophilia-associated pregnancy 
wastage. Fertil Steril 1999;72:765–774 
( ) 
27. Quéré I, Mercier E, Bellet H, Janbon C, Marès P, Gris JC. 
Vitamin supplementation and pregnancy outcome in 
women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and hyperhomocysteinemia. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:823–825 
( ) 

162 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 


Hormonal contraceptive methods available in the United 
States include combination oral contraceptives (OCs), 
progestin-only pills, injectable agents such as a combination 
estrogen and depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(DMPA) or DMPA only, progestin-containing intrauterine 
contraceptive devices (IUDs), subdermal implants, 
contraceptive patch, and vaginal ring (1). 

Hormonal contraceptives have high efficacy rates that 
approach those seen with sterilization. When comparing 
the efficacy of different hormonal methods, however, it is 
important to consider both the theoretical and actual, or 
typical, efficacy rates. Theoretical rates are calculated 
assuming perfect use. For some hormonal methods, such 
as IUDs and implants, theoretical and actual efficacy 
rates are similar and approach rates of sterilization. 
Typical efficacy rates are rates found with regular use, 
which may be somewhat lower than theoretical rates 
because of poor compliance or other difficulties in using 
the contraceptive method. Injectable hormonal contraception, 
such as DMPA, and oral contraceptive pills have 
theoretical efficacy rates that approach sterilization. 
However, typical efficacy rates associated with these 
methods are often lower. For example, combination OCs 
have a failure rate of less than 1 in 200 women per year, 
assuming perfect use (ie, no missed pills). In clinical 
practice, however, typical failure rates with this method 
range between 2% and 8% because of poor compliance. 
Postpartum adolescents, less educated women, and poor 
women seem to have poor compliance with these pills. 
The more days of no pill use—especially prolonging the 
normal pill-free week—the higher the chance of ovulation 
and pregnancy. Because user failure with combination 
OCs mainly results from missed pills, there is little 
evidence of difference in effectiveness among the various 
products available. 

COMBINATION ORAL 
CONTRACEPTIVES 

Combination OCs contain both estrogen and progestin in 
each tablet. They prevent ovulation by suppression of 
both pulsatile GnRH at the level of the hypothalamus and 
release of LH at the level of the pituitary. This is a classic 
negative feedback system. Follicles may continue to grow 
and regress, but ovulation does not occur. The progestin 
in the pill has the dominant hormonal action and is mainly 
responsible for suppression of the LH surge necessary 
for ovulation. Estrogen potentiates that effect by increasing 
the intracellular progesterone receptor pool. Estrogen 
suppresses FSH and growth of the follicle. As a result, 

follicular cysts are less common among users of pills with 
higher doses of estrogen. 

The progestin in the pill thickens the cervical mucus, 
making it less hospitable to sperm survival and migration. 
In a normal fertile cycle, cervical mucus just before ovulation 
is clear, copious, and stretchable because of an 
increased water content from the high levels of estradiol 
relative to progesterone at that time of the cycle. This 
mucus allows for sperm survival and transport. Exposure 
to exogenous progestins makes the mucus thick, tacky, 
and less receptive to sperm survival and transport. This 
mucous effect is the main mechanism of contraceptive 
action of progestin-only methods, such as progestin-only 
pills and levonorgestrel implants. 

The two types of estrogen used in OCs are ethinyl 
estradiol and mestranol, the 3-methyl ester of ethinyl 
estradiol. When mestranol is included, it must be con-
verted to the active estrogen. Most pills on the market 
today contain ethinyl estradiol; in fact, all pills containing 
35 m g of estrogen contain ethinyl estradiol. In contrast, a 
number of different progestins are used in OCs, including 
norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, 
norgestrel, levonorgestrel, and norethynodrel. 
Desogestrel and norgestimate have been most recently 
introduced in the United States and were derived to have 
strong progestational activity with minimal androgenicity. 
Combination OCs frequently are referred to as first, 
second, or third generation. First-generation combination 
OCs generally contain 50 m g mestranol, whereas secondand 
third-generation combination OCs contain less than 
50 m g ethinyl estradiol. Pills are divided into second- or 
third-generation categories according to the progestin 
they contain. Combination OCs containing levonorgestrel 
or norethindrone acetate have been classified as second 
generation, whereas those containing gestodene, norgestimate, 
or desogestrel usually are termed third generation. 
These groupings have led to some confusion, however, 
because they are based on the time of their introduction to 
the market and do not take into account the structure or 
pharmacologic characteristics of the drug. 

Combination OCs have not included progestins 
derived from progesterone, such as medroxyprogesterone 
acetate or megestrol acetate, which are used to prevent or 
treat endometrial hyperplasia. A new class of progestins 
derived from 19-norprogesterone, such as normegestrol, 
elcometrine, and trimegestone, may be available in the 
near future. Another new class of progestin in combination 
OCs, drospirenone, derived from 17a -spironolactone, 
has been approved recently by the FDA. 
Drospirenone has a structure and properties similar to 


spironolactone, acting as an androgen antagonist by 
blocking receptor binding. It also binds to the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. This manifests as a progestin with 
antimineralocorticoid and antiandrogenic activity. Like 
progesterone, it binds to the corticosteroid receptor, but 
this has no effect at therapeutic doses (2). 

The modern safety of combination OCs has been 
achieved by lowering the dose of active hormone in each 
pill and understanding which patients should not use 
combination OCs. The combination OC that was introduced 
in 1960 had up to 150 m g of mestranol. Today, 
commonly used pills contain 15–35 m g of ethinyl estradiol. 
Progestins in the combination OCs are derived from 
19-nortestosterone (ie, removal of the C-19) and adding 
ethinyl substitution at the C-17 position, increasing oral 
absorption. The combination OCs of the 1960s contained 
up to 10 mg of progestin, compared with the 0.5–1 mg of 
norethindrone in today’s pills. 

The lowering of the dose of ethinyl estradiol from 
150 m g to 35 m g has been associated with a decreased risk 
of cardiovascular complications. Thus, combination OCs 
containing less than 50 m g of ethinyl should be used 
exclusively. Many combination OCs today contain 20 m g 
estrogen, but possibly because the combination OC is 
being used in lower-risk individuals, it has been difficult 
to show a further lowering of thrombosis risk. 

Contraindications 

The most common serious adverse effect of combination 
OC use, increased risk of thrombosis and thromboembolic 
events, occurs because of the estrogen impact on 
clotting factors made in the liver. Users of combination 
OCs older than 35 years who smoke or those who have 
atherosclerotic vascular changes secondary to long-standing 
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, lipid disorders, or 
lupus erythematosus have a higher risk of myocardial 
infarction or stroke and should avoid estrogen-containing 
hormonal contraceptives. As the dose of ethinyl estradiol 
in the pill has decreased over the past 50 years, the risk of 
thromboembolic events also has decreased. Whereas the 
risk of myocardial infarction can be limited by avoiding 
combination OC use in older smokers or in patients with 
other risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes, 
thrombosis cannot be predicted easily. Women who have 
had thrombosis during pregnancy or while receiving 
estrogen therapy should not use estrogen-containing pills. 
Gross obesity is a risk factor for thrombosis, but it is not 
known whether obesity increases the risk with oral contraceptives, 
so obesity is not considered a contraindication 
for their use. Although smoking increases the risk of 
myocardial infarction in older users of combination OCs, 
most studies have not found that it increases the risk of 
venous thrombosis (3, 4). 

In recent years a hereditary susceptibility to venous 
thrombosis has been recognized, among those with the 

HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 163 

factor V Leiden mutation; prothrombin mutation; and 
deficiency of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin (5). 
The factor V Leiden mutation is much more common 
than the other mutations and is present in about 5% of 
white European women. Even though these mutations 
increase the risk of thrombosis in combination OC users, 
currently there are no indications to screen for them, 
because even among carriers, the actual risk of thromboembolism 
is low. Although a family history of thrombosis 
may be a relative contraindication to combination 
OC use, even in this group, most women do not have 
mutations when screened. 

Several international studies have reported that the 
progestins desogestrel and gestodene (not available in the 
United States), in combination with estrogen, may 
increase the risk of thromboembolism compared with 
second-generation combination OCs, although the risk is 
still very low (20–30 cases per 100,000 per year versus 
10–15 cases per 100,000 per year) (6–8). The validity of 
these studies has been called into question because of 
concerns about several types of inherent biases (9). 

Combination OCs are metabolized in the liver; therefore, 
active liver disease is a contraindication to their use. 
They do not increase the risk of breast cancer, but diagnosed 
breast cancer is a contraindication (although there 
are few data to support this recommendation). Combination 
products are ineffective in pregnant women; 
therefore, pregnancy is a contraindication. The pills do 
not appear to be teratogenic. 

Interaction with Other Medications 

Rifampin and most antiseizure medications stimulate 
liver metabolism of the combination OC hormones, 
decreasing blood levels and effectiveness. Some anecdotal 
evidence suggests decreased effectiveness of OCs with 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Controlled studies have not 
confirmed this finding, but it seems prudent to recommend 
a barrier method for users of OCs while they are 
receiving antibiotics. Other medications that decrease the 
effectiveness of contraceptives are listed in Box R (10). 

Adverse Effects 

Adverse effects such as so-called breakthrough bleeding 
(irregular sloughing of the endometrium), breast tenderness, 
nausea, mood changes, and headaches seem to differ 
somewhat between pills, but unfortunately, no 
validated medical evidence is available to determine what 
pill is best for an individual patient. Present guidelines in 
starting combination OCs include using a pill with 35 m g 
of estrogen that is affordable and with which both the 
patient and physician are comfortable. If annoying 
adverse effects develop and do not improve over three 
cycles, switching to a different pill may be warranted. 

Breakthrough bleeding is common among users of 
low-dose combination OCs and can lead to noncompli



164 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX R 
Medications That Decrease the 
Effectiveness of Contraceptives* 


Antiseizure Medications 

Carbamazepine (Tegretol) 

Phenobarbital 

Phenytoin sodium (Dilantin) 

Felbamate (Felbatol) 

Oxcarbazepine (Trileptel) 

Primidone (Mysoline) 

Topiramate (Topamax) 

Antibiotic 

Rifampicin (Rifampin) 

Antifungal 

Griseofulvin 

*Combination oral contraceptives, progestin-only contraceptives, 
and the progestin-only implants other than depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. 

ance with the prescribed regimen. Noncompliance may 
be due to fear that the bleeding is a sign of cancer, which 
is almost never the case, and education may help improve 
compliance. 

Hormonal contraception does not prevent sexually 
transmitted disease. Women who develop breakthrough 
bleeding after regular pill use have a higher incidence of 
chlamydial and gonorrheal cervical infection. 

The effects of combination OCs are rapidly reversible; 
ovulation often occurs within a month of discontinuation. 
Some women have a slight delay in return to ovulation, 
but by 18 months after stopping use, as many women are 
pregnant as is true in those stopping a barrier method. 
Combination OCs do not cause amenorrhea after discontinuation, 
but their use may mask underlying amenorrhea. 

Noncontraceptive Benefits of 
Combination Oral Contraceptives 

Benefits of combination OCs extend beyond that of highly 
effective and safe contraception (see Box S). Their use 
is associated with less menstrual blood loss and less 
cramping, resulting from the continued progestin effect 
on the endometrium. This progestin effect also is associated 
with a decreased risk of endometrial cancer, particularly 
in less parous women or women who do not ovulate 
regularly. In some women, this progestin effect, which 
leads to thinning of the endometrium and decreased men


strual blood loss, will be manifested by no bleeding at all. 
This amenorrhea is reversible and safe, and it does not 
require endocrine evaluation. It does not increase the risk 
of subsequent amenorrhea or infertility. 

Epithelial ovarian cancers are less frequent in combination 
OC users, and it is recommended that women at 
high risk of ovarian cancer use combination agents. One 
recent study did not show protection from ovarian cancer 
in women who tested positive for the BRCA1-2 gene (11), 
but another study did (12). Because the combination OC 
suppresses ovulation, ectopic pregnancy is less frequent 
with its use. 

Oral contraceptives also reduce the incidence and 
severity of acne vulgaris in patients by decreasing LH and 
5a -reductase activity, as well as by increasing sex hormone–
binding globulin levels. However, occasionally 
women develop acne while taking oral contraceptives. 

Changes in cervical mucus and a thin endometrium 
may account for a possible decrease in symptomatic 
upper tract pelvic infections in patients exposed to gonorrhea 
or chlamydia. Hormonal contraception methods, 
however, do not prevent sexually transmitted diseases and 
do not decrease infertility due to exposure to chlamydia. 

For patients who prefer not to have a period each 
month, active combination OCs may be administered for 
42 or 63 days continuously prior to administering the 
placebo pills, instead of the regular 21-day interval. 
Women using this regimen may have only four periods a 
year. 

PROGESTIN-ONLY PILLS 

The mechanism of action of progestin-only pills is primarily 
thickening of the cervical mucus. These pills also 
suppress ovulation in some cycles in some patients. The 

BOX S 
Noncontraceptive Benefits of 
Hormonal Contraception 


Decrease in iron-deficiency anemia 
Less dysmenorrhea 
Reduced ectopic pregnancy 
Less ovarian cancer 
Less endometrial cancer 
Fewer breast cysts and adenomas 
Possible improvement in bone mineral density in peri


menopausal users 
Less severe endometriosis 
Reduced risk of uterine fibroids 


HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 165 

endometrium has a thin progestational effect. Because 
folliculogenesis is not suppressed, not taking these pills 
leads to ovulation and pregnancy more frequently than is 
true with combination pills. 

The 19-nortestosterone–derived progestins in progestin-
only pills are norethindrone or norgestrel. 
Norgestrel is also called dL-norgestrel, because it contains 
equal amounts of both mirror-image forms of this 
compound (levonorgestrel is the active form). Thus, a 
norgestrel formulation of 1.5 mg is equivalent to 0.75 mg 
of levonorgestrel, the dose in a single emergency contraceptive 
tablet. 

Progestin-only pills can be used in patients for whom 
estrogen-containing pills have greater risk, such as older 
smokers and women with a prior history of thrombosis or 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus with vascular 
disease, hypertension, or valvular cardiac diseases with 
increased risk of thrombosis. Progestin-only pills also are 
a good contraceptive choice for lactating women, because 
they do not affect the quality or quantity of milk produced. 


DEPOT MEDROXYPROGESTERONE 
ACETATE 

In 1992, DMPA was approved for contraceptive use in the 
United States. This method has a failure rate of less than 
1% when administered intramuscularly into the dorsal 
part of the arm or the buttocks every 12 weeks. The primary 
mechanism of action is ovulation suppression. 
Antiseizure medications listed in Box R do not decrease 
DMPA’s effectiveness and are a good contraceptive 
choice for these patients. In addition, DMPA thickens the 
cervical mucus and alters the endometrium, making it 
inhospitable to implantation. 

Menstrual disturbances occur in approximately 70% 
of users during the first 3 months and are the most common 
reason cited for method discontinuation (13). The 
frequency of irregular bleeding decreases over time, and 
by 1 year, a large proportion of users experience amenorrhea. 
Women who use DMPA also frequently experience 
weight gain, with an average of 5.4 lb in the first year 
(14). Other adverse effects associated with DMPA use 
include breast tenderness, mood changes, headaches, nervousness, 
and fatigue. 

Several studies recently have reported that women 
who use DMPA may experience a decrease in bone mineral 
density. Loss of bone mineral density during the 
reproductive years is cause for concern, because bone 
mass attained early in life may be the greatest determinant 
of whether patients will develop osteoporosis in later 
life. In a recent prospective study, a mean decrease of 
2.7% was observed after 12 months of use among DMPA 
users 18–33 years of age as compared with a gain among 
oral contraceptive pill users (15). Other studies have 
observed that this change may be limited to women who 

use DMPA prior to age 21 (16, 17). At least one study has 
suggested that these changes are reversible after discontinuation 
of DMPA (18). 

MONTHLY INJECTABLE 
COMBINATION CONTRACEPTIVE 

A monthly injectable combination contraceptive consisting 
of an ester of estradiol, estradiol cypionate, and 
DMPA is now available in the United States. The estradiol 
cypionate is metabolized to estradiol in the liver; 
estradiol is the active estrogen rather than the ethinyl 
estradiol in combination OCs. Peak estradiol levels are 
reached on day 3 after injection levels similar to the midcycle 
preovulatory level. Estradiol levels then decrease so 
that regular monthly withdrawal bleeding occurs. 

The progestational agent is DMPA, not a 19-nortestosterone 
derivative. Its main contraceptive effect is 
consistently suppressed ovulation, thickening of the 
cervical mucus, and creation of a progestational endometrium. 


The administration of estradiol cypionate/DMPA theoretically 
should carry less risk of estrogen complications 
than combination OC administration, because there are 
fewer estrogenic changes to the blood-clotting parameters. 
In studies used for obtaining FDA approval, there 
were no cardiovascular complications, but these studies 
excluded women at risk of cardiovascular complications. 
The most common adverse effects reported with use of 
this method include menstrual changes, weight changes, 
breast tenderness, and emotional lability. Adverse effects 
usually decrease with continued use. 

The monthly injectable combination contraceptive has 
the advantage of high effectiveness: 0.2% per 100 women 
years, according to a WHO study (19). Its use results in 
fewer bleeding days than does the use of DMPA, and the 
number of bleeding days averages only 1 day longer than 
the number with combination OC use. The profile of 
adverse effects is similar to that of combination OC, but 
with more weight gain, on average. The injections are 
meant to be given every 28 days (23–33 days). Ovulation 
occurs as early as 60 days after the last injection, but follicular 
development may occur earlier. 

HORMONE-RELEASING 
INTRAUTERINE DEVICES 

The only hormone-releasing IUD currently available in 
the United States contains levonorgestrel-20, which is 
released at a rate of 20 m g/24 h in the first year after insertion. 
This device is approved for 5 years of use. 
Contraceptive efficacy is very high because of suppression 
of ovarian function and endometrial growth. It also 
prevents pregnancy by thickening the cervical mucus. In 
a large randomized comparison study of the use of levonorgestrel- 
versus copper-releasing IUDs, it was noted 


166 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

that the number of bleeding or spotting days, as well as 
the amount of dysmenorrhea, vaginitis, and myoma 
development, was significantly lower among users of the 
levonorgestrel IUD. Adverse effects, such as hirsutism, 
acne, and headache, however, were more frequent among 
users of the levonorgestrel IUD. The incidence of pelvic 
inflammatory disease was not significantly different 
between the two groups. In both groups, adverse effects 
were more common during the first 2 years of use and 
among women younger than 25 years (20). Ectopic pregnancies 
are rare among women using levonorgestrel 
IUDs, and return to fertility after their discontinuation is 
rapid. 

Amenorrhea occurs in approximately 20% of levonorgestrel 
IUD users as a result of reversible endometrial 
thinning. Thus, this contraceptive method may be especially 
beneficial to women with menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea. 
Hormone-releasing IUDs may be inserted in 
nulliparous women if they are at low risk of sexually 
transmitted diseases. Intrauterine devices may be inserted 
immediately after an uninfected abortion, but they should 
not be inserted after a septic abortion. It has been suggested 
that an IUD not be inserted less than 6 weeks after 
delivery to reduce the risk of prolonged bleeding. The 
insertion technique for the levonorgestrel IUD is different 
from the technique for the copper-releasing IUD and 
requires special training. 

TRANSDERMAL CONTRACEPTIVE 
PATCH 

A new method of administering hormonal contraception 
is by the use of a transdermal patch containing both an 
estrogen and progestin. The patch measures approximately 
4.5 cm3 and usually is applied to the lower abdomen or 
buttocks, but it also may be placed on the upper outer arm 
or upper torso. Each patch releases 20 m g of ethinyl estradiol 
and 150 m g of norelgestromin (the active metabolite 
of norgestimate) into the circulation daily for 7 days. 
After 7 days, the patch should be removed and discarded 
and a new one placed in a slightly different location on 
the skin. The standard regimen is to administer three 
patches for a total of 21 days and then allow 7 days of 
withdrawal bleeding. 

In a prospective clinical trial comparing the contraceptive 
patch to a triphasic oral contraceptive, both methods 
were noted to have similar efficacy (Pearl index of 

1.2 versus 2.2). Patch users experienced more breakthrough 
bleeding or spotting in the first two cycles of use; 
perfect compliance was higher among users of the patch. 
The four most common adverse effects reported by patch 
users—headache, nausea, application site reactions, and 
breast tenderness—were each reported by approximately 
20% of users. Most adverse effects were reported with 
similar frequency by both groups, except breast tenderness, 
which was reported by only 6% of oral contraceptive 
users. Application site reactions were the most 
commonly cited reason for discontinuation and were 
reported by 3% of patch users (21). 

CONTRACEPTIVE VAGINAL RING 

A vaginal ring that releases 15 m g of ethinyl estradiol and 
120 m g of etonorgestrel daily received FDA approval in 
October 2001. The ring is 4 mm thick, transparent, and 
flexible. It has a diameter of 54 mm, smaller than the 
diaphragm. The ring is inserted into the vagina during the 
first 5 days of the menstrual period and left in place for 
3 weeks, then removed and discarded. After 1 week, during 
which withdrawal bleeding occurs, the woman inserts 
a new ring. During the first cycle in which the ring is 
used, the woman should use a backup method of contraception 
for the first 7 days that it is in place. The ring may 
be left in place during intercourse or be removed, if the 
interval is less than 3 hours. If the ring is left out for more 
than 3 hours, it is necessary to use a backup method of 
contraception for 7 days. 

No progestin-only vaginal rings are currently available 
in the United States. Progestin-only rings usually are 
inserted into the vagina for an interval of 3–6 months. 
Several different progestins have been used, including 
medroxyprogesterone acetate, norethindrone, norgestrel, 
levonorgestrel, megestrol, and progesterone. Progestinonly 
rings are limited in their usefulness because of the 
frequency of breakthrough bleeding and failure rates 
from 3% to 6%. No progestin-only rings are currently 
available. 

The use of a combination ring results in better efficacy 
and cycle control than does the use of progestin-only 
rings. A large, 1-year, multicenter European study of 
1,145 women demonstrated only six pregnancies, with a 
Pearl index of 0.7 (22). Ovulation is suppressed consistently 
during treatment but returns in the first month after 
discontinuation; thus, the method is rapidly reversible 
(23). The most common reasons for discontinuation were 
perceived adverse effects (15% of the sample), followed 
by sensation of a foreign body, coital problems, or expulsion 
(3%). Overall, the ring was well tolerated by most 
users. As with other hormonal methods of contraception, 
the use of the vaginal ring does not protect against sexually 
transmitted diseases. 

LEVONORGESTREL IMPLANTS 

Subdermal contraceptive implants (Norplant) received 
FDA approval in 1990. This extremely effective contraceptive 
method consists of six flexible, closed capsules 
measuring 34 mm long and 2.4 mm each in diameter. 
These capsules provide contraception by releasing 
approximately 30 m g of levonorgestrel into the circulation 
daily. When inserted during the first 7 days of the menstrual 
cycle, pregnancy protection is effective that same 
cycle. Capsules are effective for 5 years. During the first 
year of use, the failure rate is only 0.2%, and it is approx



imately 1% or less during years 2–5. If use is desired 
beyond 5 years, the capsules should be removed and a 
new set inserted facing the opposite direction. Once 
implants are removed, ovulation may resume the next 
cycle. As is true with oral contraceptive use, rifampin and 
most antiseizure medications should not be used in combination 
with levonorgestrel implants, because they 
decrease contraceptive effectiveness. 

The most common adverse effect of subdermal 
implants is irregular menstrual bleeding, which occurs in 
more than 70% of users during the first 6 months (24). A 
course of exogenous estrogen or prostaglandin inhibitors 
often helps decrease the number of days of bleeding (25). 
Other adverse effects reported by implant users include 
headaches, breast tenderness, nausea, and emotional disturbances. 
In addition, a significantly greater amount of 
weight gain has been reported among implant users than 
among users of low-dose oral contraceptives (26). 
Infection at the site of insertion occurs 0.7% of the time. 
Difficulty with removal also has been reported by a number 
of providers. 

In the past decade, a number of lawsuits in the United 
Kingdom and the United States have been filed on behalf 
of users of subdermal implants, claiming that implant use 
is associated with a wide range of complications. The 
FDA conducted a reanalysis of implant safety in response 
to these claims, and it concluded that the method was safe 
and effective when used as directed. In 1999, however, 
the manufacturer withdrew this product from the market 
in the United Kingdom, citing as reasons adverse media 
reports and the large number of lawsuits. 

Research to improve contraceptive delivery by subdermal 
implants continues. A two-rod system that releases 
levonorgestrel has received FDA approval, but it has not 
been marketed in the United States because of concerns 
about possible litigation. Single-rod systems and biodegradable 
implants also are under investigation. In fact, a 
single-rod system containing etonorgestrel (the new name 
for 3-keto-desogestrel) provides effective contraception for 
up to 3 years and may be available in the near future. 

EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION 
WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES 

Although a number of different estrogens or progestins can 
be used for emergency contraception, only two oral hormonal 
preparations have FDA-approved labeling for this 
purpose in the United States (27). The first to be approved, 
the Yuzpe regimen, consists of four pills, each containing 
50 m g of ethinyl estradiol and 0.25 mg of levonorgestrel. 
Two pills are taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, 
and the other two pills are taken 12 hours later. 
Possible mechanisms of action include delay or interruption 
of follicular development, delay or interruption of 
ovulation, or disturbance of early endometrial development 
(28). The most common adverse effects are nausea and 
vomiting. In addition to current pregnancy, contraindications 
include a history of severe cardiovascular complica-

HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 167 

tions, acute ongoing focal migraine headaches, and severe 
acute liver disease, although the risks are quite small. 

A more recently approved emergency contraceptive in 
the United States contains a progestin only. One dose of 

0.75 mg of levonorgestrel is administered as soon as possible 
followed by a second dose 12 hours later. One study 
published in 1998 demonstrated that vomiting is less common 
with this regimen than with the Yuzpe regimen (6% 
versus 19%). Furthermore, progestin-only emergency 
contraception was more effective; 85% of pregnancies that 
would have occurred were prevented with this regimen, 
compared with only 57% with the Yuzpe regimen (29). 
With both methods, treatment efficacy was greatest among 
those who took the medication within 24 hours of unprotected 
intercourse. 
Emergency contraceptive pills should not be used routinely 
to prevent pregnancy because they are less effective 
than other methods. In fact, daily use of OCs or another 
effective method should be started the day after taking the 
oral hormone preparation for emergency contraception. 

References 

1. Speroff L, Darney P. A clinical guide for contraception. 3rd 
ed. Baltimore: Lippincott, Williams & Williams, 2001 
2. Parsey KS, Pong A. An open-label, multicenter study to 
evaluate Yasmin, a low dose combination oral contraceptive 
containing drospirenone, a new progestogen. Contraception 
2000;61:105–111 
( ) 
3. Vandenbroucke JP, Rosing J, Bloemenkamp KW, Middeldorp 
S, Helmerhorst FM, Bouma BN, et al. Oral contraceptives 
and the risk of venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 
2001;344:1527–1535 
( ) 
4. Petitti D, Sidney S, Quesenberry CP. Oral contraceptive use 
and myocardial infarction. Contraception 1998;57:143–155 
( ) 
5. Cosmi B, Legnani C, Bernandi F, Coccheri S, Palareti G. 
Value of family history in identifying women at risk of 
venous thromboembolism during oral contraception: observational 
study. BMJ 2001;322:1024–1025 
( ) 
6 Jick H, Kaye JA, Vasilakis-Scaramozza C, Jick SS. Risk of 
venous thromboembolism among users of third generation 
oral contraceptive compared with users of oral contraceptives 
with levonorgestrel before and after 1995: cohort and 
case-control analysis. BMJ 2000;321:1190–1195 



( ) 
7. Bloemenkamp KW, Rosendaal FR, Helmerhorst FM, Buller 
HR, Vandenbroucke JP. Enhancement by factor V Leiden 
mutation of risk of deep-vein thrombosis associated with 
oral contraceptives containing a third-generation progestagen. 
Lancet 1995:346:1593–1596 
( ) 
8. Spitzer WO, Lewis MA, Heinemann LA, Thorogood M, 
MacRae KD. Third generation oral contraceptives and risk 
of venous thromboembolic disorders: an international case-
control study. Transnational Research Group on Oral 
Contraceptives and the Health of Young Women. BMJ 
1996:312:83–88 
( ) 
9. Spitzer WO. Bias versus causality: interpreting recent evidence 
of oral contraceptive studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998:179: S43–S50 
( ) 

168 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

10. Dickinson BD, Altman RD, Nielsen NH, Sterling ML; 
Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical 
Association. Drug interactions between oral contraceptives 
and antibiotics. Obstet Gynecol 2001;98:853–860 
( ) 
11. Modan B, Hartge P, Hirsh-Yechezkel G, Chetrit A, Lubin F, 
Beller U, et al. Parity, oral contraceptives, and the risk of 
ovarian cancer among carriers and noncarriers of a BRCA1 
or BRCA2 mutation. N Engl J Med 2001;345:235–240 
(button) 
12. Narod SA, Risch H, Moslehi R, Dorum A, Neuhausen S, 
Olsson H, et al. Oral contraceptives and the risk of hereditary 
ovarian cancer. Hereditary Ovarian Cancer Clinical 
Study Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:424–428 
( ) 
13. Paul C, Skegg DC, Williams S. Depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. Patterns of use and reasons for discontinuation. 
Contraception 1997;56:209–214 
( ) 
14. Schwallie PC, Assenzo JR. Contraceptive use—efficacy 
study utilizing medroxyprogesterone acetate administered 
as an intramuscular injection once every 90 days. Fertil 
Steril 1973:24:331–339 
( ) 
15. Berenson AB, Radecki CM, Grady JJ, Rickert VI, Thomas 
A. A prospective, controlled study of the effects of hormonal 
contraception on bone mineral density. Obstet 
Gynecol 2001;98:576–582 
( ) 
16. Cundy T, Cornish J, Roberts H, Elder H, Reid IR. Spinal 
bone density in women using depot medroxyprogesterone 
contraception. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:569–573 
( ) 
17. Scholes D, Lacroix AZ, Ott SM, Ichikawa LE, Barlow WE. 
Bone mineral density in women using depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate for contraception. Obstet Gynecol 1999; 
93:233–238 
( ) 
18. Cundy T, 
Cornish J, Evans MC, Roberts H, Reid TR. 
Recovery of bone density in women who stop using 
medroxyprogesterone acetate. BMJ 1994;308:247–248 
(button) 
19. A multicentred phase III comparative study of two hormonal 
contraceptive preparations given once-a-month by intramuscular 
injection: I. Contraceptive efficacy and side 
effects. World Health Organization. Task Force on Long-
Acting Systemic Agents for Fertility Regulation. 
Contraception 1988;37:1–20 
( ) 
20. Sivin I, Stern J. Health during prolonged use of levonorgestrel 
20 micrograms/d and the copper TCu 380Ag 
intrauterine contraceptive devices: a multicenter study. 
International Committee for Contraception Research 
(ICCR). Fertil Steril 1994:61:70–77 
( ) 
21. Audet MC, Moreau M, 
Koltun WD, Waldbaum AS, 
Shangold G, Fisher AC, et al. Evaluation of contraceptive 
efficacy and cycle control of a transdermal contraceptive 
patch vs an oral contraceptive: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA 2001;285:2347–2354 
( ) 
22. Roumen FJ, Apter D, Mulders TM, Dieben TO. Efficacy, 
tolerability, and acceptability of a novel contraceptive vaginal 
ring releasing etonogestrel and ethinyl oestradiol. Hum 
Reprod 2001;16:469–475 
( ) 
23. Davies GC, Feng LX, Newton JR, Dieben TO, Coelingh-
Benrik HJ. Ovarian activity and bleeding patterns during 
extended continuous use of a combined contraceptive vaginal 
ring. Contraception 1992;46:269–278 
( ) 
24. Datey S, Gaur LN, Saxena BN. Vaginal bleeding patterns of 
women using different contraceptive methods (implants, 
injectables, IUDs, oral pills)—an Indian experience. An 
ICMR Task Force Study. Indian Counsil of Medical 
Research. Contraception 1995;51:155–165 
( ) 
25. Diaz S, Croxatto HB, Pavez M, Belhadj H, Stern J, Sivin I. 
Clinical assessment of treatments for prolonged bleeding 
in users of Norplant implants. Contraception 1990: 42: 
97–109 
( ) 
26. Berenson AB, Wiemann CM, Rickerr VI, McCombs SL. 
Contraceptive outcomes among adolescents prescribed 
Norplant implants versus oral contraceptives after one year 
of use. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997:176:586–592 
( ) 
27. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Emergency oral contraception. ACOG Practice Bulletin 25. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
28. Croxatto HB, Devoto L, Durand M, Ezcurra E, Larrea F, 
Nagle C, et al. Mechanism of action of hormonal preparations 
used for emergency contraception: a review of the literature. 
Contraception 2001;63:111–121 
( ) 
29. Randomized controlled trial of levonorgestrel versus the 
Yuzpe regimen of combined oral contraceptives for emergency 
contraception. Task Force on Postovulatory Methods 
of Fertility Regulation. Lancet 1998;352:428–433 
( ) 

MENOPAUSE 169 

Menopause 


PHYSIOLOGY 

Menopause is the time when permanent cessation of 
menstruation has occurred for 12 months following the 
final menstrual period. A nomenclature for the time frame 
surrounding menopause has been developed and is 
depicted in Table 16. Based on cross-sectional studies, 
the average age for menopause has been estimated to be 
between 50 and 52 years. In prospective studies, the 
median age has been about 51 years. Approximately 1% 
of women experience menopause before age 40 years. 

Clinical impression has suggested that mothers and 
daughters tend to experience menopause at the same age, 
and studies indicate that daughters of mothers with an 
early menopause (younger than 46 years) also have an 
early menopause. There is sufficient evidence to believe 
that undernourished women and vegetarians experience 
an earlier menopause. Because of the contribution of 
body fat to estrogen production, thinner women experience 
a slightly earlier menopause. Multiple studies have 
consistently documented that smoking is associated with 
an earlier menopause (an average of 1.5 years earlier). 
Even former smokers show evidence of an impact. There 
is also a dose–response relationship with both the number 
of cigarettes smoked and the duration of smoking. The 
consumption of alcohol is associated with a later 

menopause. There is no correlation between age of 
menarche and age of menopause. In most studies, race, 
parity, and height have no influence on the age of 
menopause. 

The years before menopause that encompass the 
change from normal ovulatory cycles to the cessation of 
menses traditionally have been known as the perimenopausal 
transitional years, marked by irregularity of 
menstrual cycles. This time has now been defined as 
stage –2 (Table 16). Menarche is followed by approximately 
5–7 years of relatively long cycles at first, and 
then there is increasing regularity as cycles shorten to 
reach the usual reproductive-age pattern. In the 40s, 
cycles begin to lengthen again. The highest incidence of 
anovulatory cycles is among women younger than 20 
years and older than 40 years. In the longitudinal 
Massachusetts Women’s Health Study, women who 
reported the onset of menstrual irregularity were considered 
to be in the perimenopausal period of life (1). The 
median age for the onset of this transition was 47.5 years. 
Only 10% of women ceased menstruating abruptly, with 
no period of prolonged irregularity. The perimenopausal 
transition from reproductive to postreproductive status 
was, for most women, approximately 4 years in duration, 
with a range of 2–8 years. 

n TABLE 16. Stages and Nomenclature of Normal Reproductive Aging in Women 
Final Menstrual Period 

Stages –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 +1 +2 
Terminology Reproductive Menopausal Transition Postmenopause 
Early Peak Late Early Late* Early* Late 
Perimenopause 
Duration 
of stage 
Variable Variable a) 
1 yr 
b) 
4 yrs 
until 
demise 
Menstrual 
cycles 
Variable Regular 
to regular 
Variable 
cycle length 
(>7 days difference 
from 
normal) 
³2 skipped 
cycles and an 
interval of 
amenorrhea 
(³60 days) 
Amen x 12 mon 
None 
Endocrine Normal FSH ­ FSH ­ FSH ­ FSH 

*Stages most likely to be characterized by vasomotor symptoms. Abbreviation: ­ indicates elevated 

Soules MR, Sherman S, Parrott E, Rebar R, Santoro N, Utian W, et al. Executive summary: Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW). 
Fertil Steril 2001;874—878 


170 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Hormone Production 

Contrary to older belief, estradiol levels do not gradually 
wane in the years before the menopause but instead 
remain in the normal range, although slightly elevated, 
until 6 months to 1 year before follicular growth and 
development cease (2–5). Women experiencing the perimenopausal 
transition actually have higher overall estro-
gen levels. This finding is explained logically as an 
increased ovarian follicular response to the elevated FSH 
secretion that occurs during these years (3, 6). 

As noted, most women experience a period of 2–8 
years before menopause when anovulation becomes 
prevalent. During this period, ovarian follicles undergo an 
accelerated rate of loss until eventually the supply of follicles 
is finally depleted. The accelerated loss begins 
when the total number of follicles is approximately 
25,000; in normal women, this occurs at approximately 
age 37–38 years. This loss correlates with a subtle but 
real increase in FSH and decrease in inhibin. The accelerated 
loss is probably secondary to the increase in FSH 
stimulation. These changes, including the increase in 
FSH, reflect the reduced quality and capability of aging 
follicles and their reduced secretion of inhibin, the granulosa 
cell product that exerts an important negative feedback 
influence over FSH secretion by the pituitary gland. 
Both inhibin A and inhibin B may be involved. Luteal 
phase levels of inhibin A and follicular phase levels of 
inhibin B decrease with aging and may antedate the rise 
in FSH. 

The inverse and tight relationship between FSH and 
inhibin indicates that inhibin is a sensitive marker of 
ovarian follicular competence and, in turn, that FSH measurement 
is a clinical assessment of inhibin. Thus, the 
changes in the later reproductive years (the decline in 
inhibin levels, allowing a rise in FSH) reflect diminishing 
follicular reactivity and a reduction in ovarian reserve as 
the ovary ages. The decrease in inhibin secretion by the 
ovarian follicles begins early (around age 35 years) but 
accelerates after age 40 years. This is reflected in the 
decrease in fecundity that occurs with aging. Recent studies 
suggest that the decline in the number of antral follicles 
that are present during the early follicular phase of 
the menstrual cycle is associated with the decline in 
oocyte number with aging. New markers of ovarian aging 
may be identified in the future. 

The perimenopausal years are a period during which 
postmenopausal levels of FSH (>20 IU/L) occur despite 
continued menstrual bleeding, whereas LH levels remain 
in the normal range. Occasionally, corpus luteum formation 
and function occur, and the perimenopausal woman 
is not safely beyond the risk of an unplanned and unexpected 
pregnancy until elevated levels of both FSH (>20 
IU/L) and LH (>30 IU/L) can be demonstrated. However, 
even under these circumstances, fluctuations can occur, 
with a period of ovarian failure followed by resumption 
of ovarian function. 

It can safely be said that shortly after menopause, 
there are no remaining ovarian follicles. Eventually there 
is a 10–20-fold increase in FSH and an approximately 
3-fold increase in LH, reaching a maximal level 1–3 years 
after menopause. This is followed by a gradual, but slight, 
decline in both gonadotropins. Elevated levels of both 
FSH and LH at this time in life are conclusive evidence 
of ovarian failure. Levels of FSH are higher than levels of 
LH because LH is cleared from the blood much faster 
(initial half-lives are approximately 20 minutes for LH 
and 3–4 hours for FSH), and perhaps because there is no 
specific negative feedback peptide for LH-like inhibin. 

Testosterone production decreases by approximately 
25% after menopause, but the postmenopausal ovary in 
most, but not all, women secretes more testosterone than 
the premenopausal ovary. With the disappearance of follicles 
and estrogen, the elevated gonadotropins drive the 
remaining stromal tissue in the ovary to secrete increased 
testosterone. The suppression of gonadotropins with 
GnRH agonist or antagonist treatment in postmenopausal 
women results in a significant decrease in circulating levels 
of testosterone, indicating the gonadotropin-dependent 
postmenopausal ovarian origin. The total amount of 
testosterone produced after menopause, however, is 
decreased because the amount of the primary source, 
peripheral conversion of androstenedione, is reduced. 
The early postmenopausal circulating level of 
androstenedione decreases approximately 62% from 
young adult life (7). The menopausal decline in the circulating 
levels of testosterone is not great, from no 
change in many women to as much as 15% in others (2, 
7, 8). Nevertheless, compared with young women, the 
overall exposure of postmenopausal women to androgens 
is lower (9). 

The postmenopausal ovary secretes primarily androstenedione 
and testosterone. After menopause, the circulating 
level of androstenedione is about one half that seen 
before menopause (10). Most of this postmenopausal 
androstenedione is derived from the adrenal gland, with 
only a small amount secreted from the ovary, although 
androstenedione is the principal steroid secreted by the 
postmenopausal ovary. Dehydroepiandrosterone and its 
sulfate, DHEAS, originating in the adrenal gland, decline 
markedly with aging. In the decade after menopause, the 
circulating levels of DHEA are approximately 70% 
lower, and levels of DHEAS are about 74% lower than 
the levels in young adult life (7). 

The circulating estradiol level after menopause is 
approximately 10–20 pg/mL, most of which is derived 
from peripheral conversion of estrone. This in turn is 
mainly derived from the peripheral conversion of 
androstenedione. The circulating level of estrone 
(approximately 30–70 pg/mL) in postmenopausal women 
is higher than that of estradiol. The average postmenopausal 
production rate of estrogen is approximately 
45 m g/24 h; almost all, if not all, is estrogen derived from 
the peripheral conversion of androstenedione. The andro



gen-to-estrogen ratio changes dramatically after 
menopause because of the more marked decline in estro-
gen, and an onset of mild hirsutism is common, reflecting 
this marked shift in the sex hormone ratio. With increasing 
age, a decrease can be measured in the circulating levels 
of DHEAS and DHEA, whereas the circulating 
postmenopausal levels of androstenedione, testosterone, 
and estrogen remain relatively constant (8, 10). 

Estrogen production by the ovaries does not continue 
beyond menopause. However, estrogen levels in postmenopausal 
women can be significant, principally 
because of the extraglandular conversion of androstenedione 
and testosterone to estrogen. The clinical impact of 
this estrogen varies from one postmenopausal woman to 
another, depending on the degree of extraglandular production 
and modified by a variety of factors. 

The percentage of androstenedione converted to estro-
gen correlates with body weight. Increased production of 
estrogen from androstenedione with increasing body 
weight is probably due to the ability of fat to aromatize 
androgens. This fact and a decrease in the levels of sex 
hormone–binding globulin (which results in increased 
free estrogen concentrations) contribute to the wellknown 
association between obesity and the development 
of endometrial cancer. Body weight, therefore, has a positive 
correlation with the circulating levels of estrone and 
estradiol (10). Aromatization of androgens to estrogens is 
not limited to adipose tissue, however, because almost 
every tissue tested has this activity. 

Menstrual Disturbances 

Throughout the perimenopausal period of life, there is a 
significant incidence of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. 
Although the greatest concern provoked by this symptom 
is that it is caused by endometrial neoplasia, the usual 
cause is nonneoplastic tissue that is displaying estrogen 
effects unopposed by progesterone. This condition results 
from anovulation in premenopausal women and from 
extragonadal endogenous estrogen production or estro-
gen administration in the postmenopausal woman. In all 
women—whether they are premenopausal or postmenopausal 
and whether they are or are not receiving 
hormone therapy—specific organic causes (neoplasia, 
complications of unexpected pregnancy, or bleeding from 
extrauterine sites) must be ruled out. In addition to a careful 
history and physical examination, an aspiration 
endometrial biopsy should be performed to evaluate dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. 

Vasomotor Symptoms 

Approximately 75–80% of white women report hot flushes 
during menopause. In general, these hot flushes will 
diminish in 1–2 years, although in some women flushes 
can occur for longer than 5 years. Hot flushes last from 2 
minutes to 6 minutes. They are characterized by a generalized 
activation of the hypothalamic thermoregulatory 

MENOPAUSE 171 

center resulting in an increase in GnRH–LH release, an 
increase in sympathetic nervous system outflow, an 
increase in heart rate, vasodilatation of the small vessels 
in the face, an increase in sweating, and a drop in the core 
body temperature. The number of hot flushes can range 
from 5 to more than 15 episodes per day. Estrogen therapy 
is effective in relieving hot flushes usually within 3 to 
4 weeks in 95% of women; discontinuation of estrogen 
will result in resumption of hot flushes for a period (see 
“Effects on the Central Nervous System”). 

Psychophysiologic Effects 

The view that menopause has a deleterious effect on mental 
health is not supported in the psychiatric literature or 
in surveys of the general population. The concept of a 
specific psychiatric disorder (involutional melancholia) 
has been abandoned. Indeed, depression is less common, 
not more common, among middle-aged women, and 
menopause cannot be linked to psychologic distress 
(11–18). Longitudinal study of premenopausal women 
indicates that hysterectomy with or without oophorectomy 
is not associated with a negative psychologic 
impact among middle-aged women (19). Finally, longitudinal 
data from the Massachusetts Women’s Health Study 
establish that menopause is not associated with an 
increased risk of depression (20). 

A negative view of mental health at the time of 
menopause is not justified; many of the problems reported 
at menopause are due to the vicissitudes of life (21, 
22). Thus, problems are encountered frequently in early 
postmenopause, but a causal relationship with estrogen is 
unlikely. These problems include fatigue, nervousness, 
headaches, insomnia, depression, irritability, joint and 
muscle pain, dizziness, and palpitations. Both men and 
women at this stage of life express a multitude of problems, 
a fact that does not reveal a gender difference that 
could be explained by a hormonal cause. 

Emotional stability during the perimenopausal period 
can be disrupted by poor sleep patterns. Hot flushes do 
have an adverse impact on the quality of sleep. Estrogen 
therapy can improve the quality of sleep, decreasing the 
time to onset of sleep and increasing the amount of rapid 
eye movement sleep (23–25). Flushing may be insufficient 
to awaken a woman but sufficient to affect the quality 
of sleep, thereby diminishing the ability to handle the 
next day’s problems and stresses. An improvement in 
insomnia with estrogen treatment can be documented 
even in postmenopausal women who are reportedly 
asymptomatic (26). 

Thus, the overall quality of life reported by women 
can be improved by better sleep and alleviation of hot 
flushes. However, it is still uncertain whether estrogen 
treatment has an additional direct pharmacologic antidepressant 
effect or whether the mood response is an indirect 
benefit of relief of physical symptoms and, 
consequently, improved sleep. Various assessment tools 


172 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

for measuring depression have documented improvements 
with estrogen treatment in oophorectomized women. 

Cognition and Alzheimer’s Disease 

Up to three times as many women as men develop 
Alzheimer’s disease. In animal and cell models, estrogen 
is capable of protecting central nervous system function 
by means of multiple mechanisms. For example, estrogen 
protects against neuronal cytotoxicity induced by oxidation, 
reduces the serum concentration of amyloid P component 
(the glycoprotein found in Alzheimer’s 
neurofibrillary tangles), and increases synapses and neuronal 
growth, especially dendritic spine density (27–29). 
Progestational agents do not exert similar actions. 

Depending on the method of assessment, evidence for 
the beneficial effects of estrogen on cognition, especially 
on verbal memory, can be found in the literature (30, 31). 
However, the effects in healthy women are not impressive 
and perhaps are of little clinical value. Women in the 
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging who were using 
estrogen performed better in a test of short-term visual 
memory (32). In a New York City cohort of women, the 
use of estrogen was associated with better performance 
on tests of cognition and better performance in verbal 
memory (33). Perhaps the lack of agreement is due to the 
variability in test vehicles and the specific aspects of 
memory function studied. Furthermore, individual variability 
is impressive; when improvements have been 
observed, they have not been large and perhaps have been 
of little clinical importance. In addition, any beneficial 
effects may be attenuated by progestational agents (31). 
Fatigue, irritability, headache, and depression are not 
thought to be estrogen-related phenomena. 

Cardiovascular Changes 

During the reproductive years, women are “protected” 
from coronary heart disease. For this reason, women lag 
behind men in the incidence of coronary heart disease by 
10 years, and for myocardial infarction and sudden death, 
women have had a 20-year advantage. The reasons for 
this protection are complex, but a significant contribution 
can be assigned to the higher HDL levels in younger 
women, an effect of estrogen. Throughout adulthood, 
HDL-cholesterol levels are approximately 10 mg/dL 
higher in women, and this difference continues throughout 
the postmenopausal years. Total cholesterol and 
LDL-cholesterol levels are lower in premenopausal 
women than in men; however, the levels gradually 
increase with aging, and after menopause they rise rapidly. 
After menopause the risk of coronary heart disease 
doubles for women; at about 60 years, the atherogenic 
lipids reach levels higher than the levels in men. 

Animal studies suggest that a potential contribution to 
the gender difference in the incidence and age of onset of 
cardiovascular disease is the favorable effect of estrogen 
on important endothelial events. Vasodilatory and 

antithrombotic activities can be attributed to endothelial 
production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin, a process 
favorably influenced by estrogen. Hypercholesterolemia 
adversely affects this important endothelial process, and 
estrogen protects this important endothelial function in 
the presence of hypercholesterolemia. Estrogen inhibits 
the oxidation of LDL and protects against the toxic 
effects of oxidized LDL on the endothelium. 

Observational studies and clinical trials indicate that 
the major determinants of blood lipid levels are the same 
for both sexes. A diet high in saturated fatty acids and 
cholesterol unfavorably increases blood lipid levels. 
Excess caloric intake and obesity decrease levels of HDL 
cholesterol and increase levels of total cholesterol, LDL 
cholesterol, and triglycerides. Smoking decreases HDL 
cholesterol levels (and also produces lower estrogen levels 
and an earlier menopause). Genetic defects of receptor-
mediated cholesterol uptake account for only a small 
percentage of hyperlipidemia in men and women. 

Adiposity of the trunk is a risk factor for coronary 
heart disease in women and is associated with a relatively 
androgenic hormonal state, hypertension, and disorders 
of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Central fat 
distribution in women is positively correlated with 
increases in total cholesterol, triglyceride, and LDL levels 
and negatively correlated with HDL levels. The 
atherogenic lipid profile associated with abdominal adiposity 
is at least partly mediated through an interplay 
with insulin and estrogen. It is worth noting that there is 
a strong correlation between the magnitude of the worsening 
in cardiovascular risk factors (lipid and lipoprotein 
changes, blood pressure, and insulin levels) and the 
amount of weight gained during the menopausal transition 
(34). Attention to weight gain during middle age is 
one of the most important components of good preventive 
health care. However, weight gain at menopause is not an 
effect of hormonal changes but rather reflects diet, exercise, 
and aging (34). 

Menopause and Bone 

Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized 
by microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, which 
leads to reduced bone mass and enhanced bone fragility. 
This leads to an increased risk of fracture in the absence 
of trauma. It is estimated that 13–18% of women in the 
United States who are aged 50 years and older have 
osteoporosis, resulting in 1.5 million fractures each year. 
The most common sites for fracture include lumbar vertebrae, 
distal radius, and femoral neck. The overall mortality 
from hip fracture alone is estimated to be 30%, with 
an annual health care cost of $7 billion. 

Bone is a dynamic, living tissue and is constantly 
remodeled to adapt to mechanical changes in weight 
bearing and other physical activities. Bone breakdown 
(resorption) requires the activity of multinucleated giant 
cells, called osteoclasts (Fig. 64), whereas bone forma



MENOPAUSE 173 


AB 

n FIG. 64. Structural bone changes with osteoporosis. (A) Normal bone. (B) 
Osteoporotic trabecular bone. 

tion is mediated by osteoblasts. Bone resorption is coupled 
to bone formation such that positive bone balance is 
achieved when skeletal maturity is attained (typically at 
age 25–35 years). Thereafter, bone mass declines at a 
slow, steady rate of 0.4% per year. After menopause, this 
rate increases to 2–5% per year for the first 5–10 years 
and then slows to 1% per year. Although estrogen, progesterone, 
and androgen receptors are present in bone, 
their specific roles have not been defined. 

The amount of bone at any point in time reflects the 
balance of the osteoblastic and osteoclastic activities, 
which are influenced by a multitude of stimulating and 
inhibiting agents. Both aging and a loss of estrogen lead 
to excessive osteoclastic activity. A decrease in calcium 
intake or absorption lowers the serum level of ionized calcium. 
This stimulates parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion 
to mobilize calcium from bone by direct stimulation 
of osteoclastic activity. Increased PTH also stimulates the 
production of vitamin D to increase intestinal calcium 
absorption. Calcium increases and PTH levels return to 
normal. A deficiency in estrogen is associated with a 
greater responsiveness of bone to PTH. Thus, for any 
given level of PTH, there is more calcium removed from 
bone. This condition raises the level of serum calcium, 
which in turn lowers the level of PTH and decreases the 
vitamin D level and intestinal absorption of calcium. 

The subsequent risk of fracture from osteoporosis 
depends on bone mass at the time of menopause and the 
rate of bone loss following menopause. Although the 
peak bone mass is influenced by heredity and endocrine 
factors, it is now recognized that there is only a relatively 
narrow window of opportunity for acquiring bone 

mass. Almost all bone mass in the hip and the vertebral 
bodies will be accumulated in young women by late adolescence, 
so the years immediately following menarche 
(ages 11–14 years) are especially important. (Table 17 
lists sources of calcium in food.) Prophylaxis for osteoporosis 
should begin in adolescence, given the slow 
decline in bone mass density after age 30 years in most 
people. 

The onset of spinal bone loss begins in the 20s, but the 
overall change is small until menopause. Bone density in 
the femur peaks in the mid to late 20s and begins to 
decrease around age 30 years. In general, bone resorption 
and formation occur four to eight times as fast in trabecular 
bone as in cortical bone. Beyond age 30 years, 
trabecular resorption begins to exceed formation by 
approximately 0.7% per year. This adverse relationship 
accelerates after menopause; 2–5% of total bone mass 
will be lost each year. This accelerated loss will continue 
for approximately 5 years, after which bone loss is considerably 
diminished but continues as the aging-related 
loss. For the first 20 years following the cessation of 
menses, menopause-related bone loss can result in a 50% 
reduction in trabecular bone and a 30% reduction in cortical 
bone. 

In general, bone mass is higher in black and obese 
women and lower in white, Asian, thin, and sedentary 
women. Despite the greater bone mass (and lower fracture 
rates) in black women, the impact of osteoporotic 
fractures in this group is still considerable. Black women 
are subject to similar risk factors for osteoporosis (eg, 
thinness and high alcohol consumption), and most important, 
postmenopausal estrogen therapy is associated with 


174 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 17. Foods Containing Calcium 
Food Amount Calcium (mg) Fat (g) 


Milk and dairy products 
American cheese 1 oz 195 8.4 
Cheddar cheese 1 oz 211 9.1 
Swiss cheese 1 oz 219 7.1 
Ice cream—hard 1 cup 176 14.1 
Low-fat milk 1 cup 298 4.7 
Skim milk 1 cup 303 0.4 
Low-fat plain yogurt 1 cup 415 3.4 

Nuts 
Almonds 1 oz 66 16.2 
Sesame seeds, dried, hulled 3.5 oz 100 53.4 

Seafood 
Scallops, steamed 3.5 oz 115 1.4 
Shrimp, raw 3.5 oz 63 0.8 

Green leafy vegetables 
Broccoli, cooked 2/3 cup 88 0.3 
Kale, cooked, without stem 3/4 cup 187 0.7 
Spinach, cooked 1/2 cup 83 0.3 
Turnip greens, cooked 2/3 cup 184 0.2 

Other foods 
Chili con carne with beans 5 oz 61 9.9 
Cream of celery soup made with milk 1 serving 135 33.0 
Figs, dried 5 medium 126 1.3 
Slice of 12-inch cheese pizza 1 piece 144 4.4 
Pudding, chocolate 1/2 cup 147 6.6 
Raisins, dried, seedless 5/8 cup 62 0.2 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Preventing osteoporosis. ACOG Patient Education Pamphlet APO48. Washington, DC: 
ACOG, 1997 

protection. Japanese women demonstrate the same amount 
and pattern of bone loss after menopause as white women. 

Atrophic Changes 

Because of the extremely low estrogen production in the 
late postmenopausal stage or many years after castration, 
atrophy of vaginal mucosal surfaces takes place, accompanied 
by vaginitis, pruritus, dyspareunia, and stenosis. 
Genitourinary atrophy leads to a variety of symptoms that 
affect the ease and quality of living. Urethritis with 
dysuria, urgency incontinence, and urinary frequency are 
further results of mucosal thinning (in this instance, of the 
urethra and bladder). Vulvar dystrophies and vaginal 
relaxation with cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse 
are not a consequence of estrogen deprivation. 

Although some argue that genuine stress incontinence 
will not be affected by treatment with estrogen, others 
contend that estrogen treatment improves or cures stress 

incontinence in more than 50% of patients because of a 
direct effect on the urethral mucosa. Most cases of urinary 
incontinence in elderly women are a mixed problem 
with a significant component of urge incontinence that 
can be improved by estrogen therapy. 

A decline in skin collagen content and skin thickness 
that occurs with aging can be considerably avoided by 
postmenopausal estrogen therapy. The effect of estrogen 
on collagen is evident in both bone and skin; bone mass 
and collagen decline in parallel after menopause, and 
estrogen treatment reduces collagen turnover and 
improves collagen quality. 

APPROACH TO THERAPY 

In our fast-paced environment, much of what women 
know about health care is gleaned from the mass media. 
In general, the more sensational an item is, the more noteworthy. 
For example, although breast cancer risk is a real 


and serious concern for all women, the fear of breast cancer 
seems to drive all decision making, particularly 
regarding hormonal options. The decision analysis with 
hormonal therapies largely contrasts the risks and mortality 
of cardiovascular disease (CVD) with those of breast 
cancer (35). No one standard regimen—hormonal or otherwise—
is recommended for all women. The key perspective 
in recommending a treatment regimen is that it 
should remain flexible and be individualized to the 
patient’s preferences. 

American women believe that the leading cause of 
death in women is breast cancer and attribute only a small 
percentage of deaths to CVD. In reality, the opposite is 
true. Statistics indicate that one in three women older 
than 65 years has some evidence of CVD. Despite public 
perception, the overall incidence of breast cancer has 
remained constant in recent years. Nevertheless, what is 
not commonly appreciated by those counseling patients is 
the age-associated relationship in the incidence of breast 
cancer. Although it has been widely asserted that the incidence 
of breast cancer in women is approximately one in 
eight, this is the lifetime risk. The age-specific data are 
quite different: 1 of 77 in the fourth decade and 1 of 32 in 
the fifth decade, rising to 1 of 45 when a woman is in her 
eighth decade (Table 18). Misperceptions about the magnitude 
of cancer risk may lead some women not to consider 
HRT for the prevention of other conditions that 

Percentage of 
all 
deaths 


50 


40 


30 


20 


10 


0 


MENOPAUSE 175 

actually have greater morbidity and mortality, as well as 
for the alleviation of menopausal symptoms. 

Because the case fatality rate of CVD is several times 
greater than that of breast cancer, even if the incidence of 
these two diseases were similar, many more women 
would die of CVD. Figure 65 shows the death rate 

n TABLE 18. Women Who Will Develop Breast 
Cancer: Risk According to Age 
Decade of Life Incidence 
Third 1 of 250 
Fourth 1 of 77 
Fifth 1 of 42 
Sixth 1 of 36 
Seventh 1 of 34 
Eighth 1 of 45 

Of the risk factors for breast cancer, age is the most significant, with 
the risk being greatest for women in their 70s. 

Source: Cancer Care Ontario. From Lobo RA. Treatment of the 
postmenopausal woman: where we are today. In: Lobo RA, ed. 
Treatment of the postmenopausal woman: basic and clinical 
aspects. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
1999:655–659 

Deaths 
from 
cardiovascular 
disease 

Deaths 
from 
breast 
cancer 

Deaths 
from 
lung cancer 

Age Group 

n FIG. 65. Risks of breast cancer and lung cancer versus cardiovascular disease in various age categories. (Adapted from 
Phillips KA, Glendon G, Knight JA. Putting the risk of breast cancer in perspective. N Engl J Med 1999:340:141–144. Copyright 
© 1999 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.) 

176 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

according to different ages (36). Soon after menopause, at 
age 50–54 years, the death rate for breast cancer decreases 
while the death rate for CVD rises steadily. The leading 
cause of cancer death in women is lung cancer (see Fig. 
65). By age 55, 20% of all deaths are caused by CVD; 
overall, 30–40% of women eventually will die of CVD. 

The various hormonal preparations available for treatment 
are listed in Box T. Also included are the selective 
estrogen receptor modulator raloxifene and other compounds 
such as bisphosphonates, tibolone, and human 
parathyroid hormone 1-34. 

Estrogen Replacement Regimens 

For the clinician and patient, the decision to start estrogen 
therapy need not involve a long-term commitment. For 
short-term treatment of symptoms, estrogen can be used 

at the lowest dose that can control hot flushes or can be 
administered via the vaginal route for symptoms of dryness 
or dyspareunia. Clinical guidelines will be modified when 
more data from prospective trials, such as the Women’s 
Health Initiative, become available in 2005 or 2007. 

Estrogen may be administered continuously (daily) or 
for 21–26 days each month. In recent years, a continuous 
regimen has been preferred unless this regimen leads to 
certain adverse effects, such as breast tenderness, bloating, 
or fluid retention. Because these adverse effects often 
are related to the estrogen dosage, there has been an 
increasing trend to use lower dosages of both estrogens 
and progestins. 

If the woman has a uterus, a progestin should be added 
to the regimen (Box U). For women who are totally intolerant 
of progestins (regardless of the dose and route of 
administration) and take unopposed estrogen, annual 

BOX T 
Common Treatments for Postmenopausal Women 

Estrogens 

Oral 
Oral CEE, 0.3, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25, and 2.5 mg 
Piperazine estrone sulfate, equivalent of 0.625, 1.25, 

and 2.5 mg 
Esterified, 0.3, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25, and 2.5 mg 
Micronized esterified, 0.5, 1, and 2 mg 


Transdermal 
Estradiol patches, 0.025, 0.0375, 0.05, 0.75, and 

0.10 mg/d 
Estradiol gel, 1.5 and 3 mg 
Vaginal 
Cream: CEE (0.0625%), estradiol (0.01%) 
Estradiol ring, 2 mg; vaginal tablets, 25 m g 

Parenteral 
Intramuscular injections should be avoided 

Progestins 

Oral 
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 2.5, 5, and 10 mg 
Norethindrone acetate, 5 mg 
Micronized progesterone, 100 and 200 mg 

Vaginal 
Micronized progesterone, 100 mg 
Progesterone gel, 4% and 8% 

Combinations 

Oral 
CEE + MPA (0.625 mg) + MPA (2.5 or 5 mg) 
CEE + MPA (0.45 mg + MPA ,1.5 mg)* 
Micronized estradiol (1 mg) + norethindrone acetate 

(0.5 mg) 
Ethinyl estradiol, 5 m g; norethindrone, 1 mg 
Transdermal 
Patch: 0.05 mg estradiol with 140 m g or 250 m g 
norethindrone acetate 

Androgens 

Oral 
Esterified estrogen and methyl testosterone 
(0.625/1.25 mg and 1.25/2.5 mg) 
Transdermal 
Patch, 150 m g/300 m g in development 

Bisphosphonates 

Alendronate, 5 and 10 mg daily; 35 and 70 mg weekly 
Risedronate, 5 mg 
Etidronate, 200 mg (intermittent) 

Selective estrogen receptor modulator 

Raloxifene, 60 mg 

Others 

Tibolone, 2.5 mg* 
Human parathyroid hormone 1-34* 


Abbreviations: CEE indicates conjugate equine estrogen; MPA, medroxyprogesterone acetate. 

* Awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

BOX U 
Options for Endometrial Protection 
with Progestogens 

Sequential for 12–14 days each month 

Continuous combined: daily dose 

Sequential combined: estrogen with progestogen daily for 

25 days 
Cyclophasic or “pulsed” 
Intermittent: every 3 months 
Intrauterine progestogen 


Adapted from Lobo RA. Progestogens. In: Lobo RA, Kelsey J, 
Marcus R, eds. Menopause, biology and pathobiology. San Diego: 
Academic Press, 2000:429–444 

endometrial biopsies are necessary. Alternatively, a progestin-
containing IUD can be used to prevent endometrial 
hyperplasia. The lowest possible dose of estrogen 
should be used under these circumstances, or an alternative 
therapy that is specific for symptoms should be considered. 


Box U outlines the use of sequential progestin administration 
where cyclic withdrawal uterine bleeding occurs 
but decreases with time, particularly if the dosages of 
estrogen and progestin are lowered (37). The most widely 
used regimens are oral continuous combined therapies 
that employ daily estrogen together with a progestin. A 
continuous combined transdermal method also is available. 
An intermittent or cyclophasic regimen of progestin 
(3 days on, 3 days off) recently has been introduced. 
Intermittent progestin administration (every 3 months) has 
been considered as an option, but it may result in heavy 
bleeding at these intervals and a greater risk of endometrial 
hyperplasia after several years. With all progestin regimens, 
the vaginal route also may be considered, using 
progesterone sequentially or continuously. Vaginal administration 
reduces the systemic concentration of progesterone, 
yet allows for a higher intrauterine concentration. 

Although any progestin can be considered, only natural 
progesterone is in wide use, in the form of suppositories, 
tablets, or a gel. The progesterone vaginal gel 
(4–8%) has become commercially available. Intrauterine 
delivery of progestin has been studied and provides direct 
suppressive effects on the endometrium while limiting 
systemic effects. One current progesterone-releasing IUD 
(Progestasert) must be inserted annually. The insertion of 
an IUD in postmenopausal women may be difficult. A 
smaller, levonorgestrel-releasing IUD (Mirena) is also 
available. Although progestins have the potential of attenuating 
some of the beneficial effects of estrogen on various 
parameters, lower doses of added progestin have not 

MENOPAUSE 177 

been shown to be detrimental overall and, in some circumstances, 
may be beneficial or synergistic in the control 
of hot flushes and bone density (38). However, effects 
on cardiovascular function (including blood flow and the 
rise of HDL cholesterol) and brain function may be negative. 


Clinical Indications for Hormone 
Replacement Therapy 

Before considering treatment, it is important to determine 
the symptoms present, patient risk factors, and family history 
for certain diseases. A complete examination and 
Pap test should be performed. 

EFFECTS ON THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Estrogen therapy is indicated primarily for the relief of 
vasomotor symptoms, or hot flushes, and vulvovaginal 
atrophy. It relieves hot flushes usually within 3 to 4 weeks 
in 95% of women. In general, the lowest effective dose to 
control vasomotor symptoms is warranted. Progestins 
such as norethindrone, megestrol acetate, and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate also can reduce hot flushes by 70%. 
Recent evidence suggests that lower doses of conjugated 
estrogen (0.45 mg in combination with 1.5 mg of 
medroxyprogesterone acetate) may be as effective as 
standard-dose therapy (39). When hot flushes are difficult 
to control, transdermal systems may offer an advantage 
for some women. Alternatives for treating hot flushes 
include phytoestrogens, clonidine, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, ergotamine, and black cohosh, but 
these alternatives are less effective. Recent blinded trials 
suggest that phytoestrogens and black cohosh have minimal 
effectiveness (see “Alternative Therapies for Menopause”). 


Hypoestrogenism can cause depressive symptoms that 
can be misdiagnosed as depression. Often these symptoms 
can be associated with fatigue, nervousness, 
headache, insomnia, irritability, and impaired short-term 
memory. As has been discussed, the alleviation of hot 
flushes with estrogen therapy can lead to improved regular 
sleep patterns and a report of better psychologic wellbeing. 


It has been postulated that decreases in endogenous 
estrogen levels are associated with an increased risk of 
dementia. Observational studies have suggested that 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia occur less frequently 
in estrogen users and that estrogen use may 
improve cognitive performance. One epidemiologic 
study examined the relationship between long-term exposure 
to endogenous estrogens and the incidence of 
dementia (40). The study found no relationship between 
a longer reproductive period and a reduced risk of dementia 
in women who have a natural menopause. 

Recently a large randomized controlled trial of women 
with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease showed no 
change in progression of dementia between women 


178 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

receiving estrogen or a placebo. Another randomized 
controlled trial demonstrated that estrogen users had a 
slightly greater decline on the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Assessment Scale (41, 42). Taken together, these studies 
suggest that once dementia has been established, neuronal 
cell death is already widespread, and estrogen probably 
has little effect in reestablishing normal neuronal 
cell function. 

The use of 21-carbon progestins, such as micronized 
progesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate, may 
increase mood disturbances in some patients. Switching 
to other progestins, such as norethindrone or norgestimate, 
or altering the route of administration may reduce 
these adverse effects. 

OSTEOPOROSIS 

Osteoporosis causes dramatic changes in bone structure. 
Risk factors will identify only 30% of women with osteoporosis. 
Modifiable risk factors include limited physical 
activity, cigarette smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, 
and low calcium and vitamin D intake. 
Nonmodifiable risk factors include a family history of 
hip fractures and white or Asian race. In addition, other 
causes of bone loss include the use of corticosteroids, 
prolonged hypoestrogenism from the use of GnRH analogues, 
hyperthyroidism, multiple myeloma, and hyperparathyroidism. 


A 


The standard for bone mass determination (ie, bone 
mineral density) is the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DXA) scan at the lumbar spine and hip sites (Fig. 66). 
The lumbar spine contains primarily trabecular or cancellous 
bone, which makes up 15% of the skeleton. Because 
this bone is less dense than cortical bone, it has a faster 
bone turnover rate; therefore, early, rapid bone loss can 
be determined by evaluation of this site. Cortical bone is 
dense or compact bone and makes up 85% of total bone 
in the skeleton. It is most abundant in the long-bone 
shafts of the appendicular skeleton. The greater 
trochanter and femoral neck contain both cortical and trabecular 
bone, and this site is ideal for the prediction of 
hip fracture risk in older women. Normative bone mineral 
density values for sex, age, and ethnic distribution have 
been determined and are available through the database 
of the third National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (43, 44). 

The World Health Organization defines osteopenia 
and osteoporosis using DXA-determined bone density 
measurements as follows: Osteopenia is bone mineral 
density less than –1.0 SD below the young adult mean to 
–2.5 SDs. Osteoporosis is bone mineral density less than 
–2.5 SDs below the young adult mean. The T score represents 
the standard deviation from the young adult mean, 
whereas the Z score represents the standard deviation 
from the chronologic age mean values (Fig. 67). For 


B 


n FIG. 66. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry output. (A) Output of the typical lumar spine scan showing severe osteopenia. 
(B) Output of the hip indicating osteoporosis at the femoral neck. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 

MENOPAUSE 179 

T Score 
n FIG. 67. Distribution of bone measurements versus age using the T-score distribution. Data are generated with peripheral and 
central bone measurement devices. Note the similar trends for various measurement devices. Stiffness index is determined by 
quantitative ultrasonography. Abbreviation: BMD indicates bone mineral density. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
example, if a patient’s T score based on her BMD is less 
than –2.5 and a fracture is present, the patient is said to 
have severe osteoporosis. Screening programs should 
include bone mineral density measurements in all postmenopausal 
women not receiving hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT), and if indicated, therapy to increase bone 
mineral density should be monitored. 

Other screening approaches are now available for the 
assessment of bone mineral density at peripheral skeletal 
sites, such as the finger, forearm, or heel (calcaneus). 
These methods use either X-ray absorptiometry, computed 
tomography, or ultrasonography. The preferred site for 
screening is the calcaneus, which is rich in trabecular 
bone and has an excellent predictive value for hip fracture. 
Although normative databases for these methods are 
being expanded, an abnormal finding on a screening test 
requires confirmation with a DXA scan. 

There are now several bone biochemical markers that 
measure bone degradation products in the urine and 
serum. The most widely used urine biomarkers, Ntelopeptide 
and C-telopeptide, are breakdown products of 
bone collagen and are considered markers for bone 
resorption. Unfortunately, variations in the day-to-day 
excretion of this peptide are relatively large, limiting its 
usefulness as a marker in predicting osteoporosis. 
However, it is useful in predicting an early response to 
antiresorptive therapies such as estrogen. 

A number of new therapeutic agents have been 
approved for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. 
At the present time, all drugs approved for osteoporosis 
(Table 19) primarily inhibit bone resorption. 
Unfortunately, no drugs have been approved by the FDA 

to promote bone formation. Human parathyroid hormone 
(1-34) has shown promise in phase III trials for increasing 
bone density in patients with severe osteoporosis. 

Estrogens remain the most widely used agents for the 
prevention and treatment of menopausal osteoporosis. 
The systemic administration of estrogen through oral, 
transdermal, or transvaginal routes is effective in preventing 
bone loss. Many observational studies also show that 
estrogen use is associated with a reduction in hip fractures; 
however, prospective clinical trials addressing this 
issue are limited. Estrogen use also has been shown to 
reduce bone turnover in the mandible, resulting in a 
decreased incidence of tooth loss. The Women’s Health 
Initiative has a large randomized control trial (n = 27,000 
women) on HRT that will evaluate its effectiveness in 
preventing fractures at multiple sites. 

Estrogen has been shown to be beneficial in the prevention 
of osteoporosis. A wide range of doses have been 
shown to be efficacious, although a great deal of individual 
variation exists. The minimal dosages of estrogens 
required for the prevention of bone loss are listed in Table 

20. 
Adequate vitamin D intake (400 IU daily) and calcium 
intake (1,000–1,500 mg daily) also are important. An 
alternative treatment for osteoporosis is 60 mg/d of raloxifene, 
which has been shown to prevent bone loss and 
new spine fractures. Because of its selective estrogen 
receptor modulation, raloxifene does not stimulate the 
endometrium. However, it does not reduce hot flushes 
and actually may increase them. The potential effects on 
cardiovascular risk and cognitive function also remain 
unknown. Raloxifene, however, does lower LDL-choles



180 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

¦ 
TABLE 19. Recommended Doses of Bone Antiresorptive Agents Based on Randomized Clinical Trials 
Compound Class Prevention Dose Treatment Dose 
Calcium carbonate Calcium 1,500 mg/d 1,200 mg/d on estrogen 
1500 mg/d 
Calcitriol Vitamin D analogue 1 mg/d 1 mg/d 
Salmon calcitonin Calcium regulation Not approved 200 IU/d 
Alendronate Bisphosphonate 5 mg/d 10 mg/d 
70 mg/week 
Risedronate Bisphosphonate 5 mg/d 5 mg/d 
Raloxifene Selective estrogen 60 mg/d 60 mg/d 
receptor modulator 
Tibolone* Synthetic steroid 2.5 mg/d 2.5 mg/d 

*Awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

n TABLE 20. Minimally Effective Estrogen Dosage 
for Prevention of Bone Loss 
Preventive 
Formulation Dosage 
Conjugated equine estrogen 0.3 mg/d 
Esterified estrogen 0.3 mg/d 
Conjugated estrone 0.3 mg/d 
Micronized estradiol 0.5 mg/d 
Transdermal estradiol 0.025 mg/d 
Ethinyl estradiol 5 m g/d 

terol without affecting HDL-cholesterol, and it has 
caused other beneficial changes in cardiovascular risk 
factors. Pilot studies show that raloxifene, acting as an 
antiestrogen like tamoxifen, may inhibit the development 
of estrogen-sensitive breast tumors. 

Bisphosphonates are beneficial in the prevention and 
treatment of osteoporosis (Fig. 68). They are the most 
potent antiresorptive agents available. These compounds 
induce controlled cell death (apoptosis) of osteoclasts and 
effectively arrest bone resorption in a short time, even in 
bone cancer metastases. This option is attractive for 
women who have no other indications or symptoms for 
which estrogen or raloxifene therapy would be warranted 
or for women in whom estrogen may be contraindicated. 
The major concern with bisphosphonates is the propensity 
for gastric irritation, resulting in the need to take 
them in the upright position with an empty stomach. 
Unlike alendronate and risedronate, etidronate requires 
intermittent therapy and is not approved for the treatment 
of osteoporosis by the FDA. Doses of alendronate (5 mg 
for prevention and 10 mg for treatment of osteoporosis) 
now can be administered once weekly (35 mg and 70 mg) 

with an adverse effect profile similar to that of the lower 
daily dose. Other options for the treatment of osteoporosis 
include calcitonin, fluoride, tibolone, and human 
parathyroid hormone (1-34). 

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 

Many investigators hypothesize that estrogen may confer 
protection from development of CVD. Multiple epidemiologic 
studies agree in reporting reduced rates of CVD 
among women on HRT: meta-analysis of 30 epidemiologic 
studies show a relative risk of 0.65 (95% confidence 
interval, 0.59–0.71); the Nurses’ Health Study, after 10 
years, found a relative risk of 0.56 (95% confidence interval, 
0.40–0.80); and the Nurses’ Health Study found a relative 
risk of 0.60 (95% confidence interval, 0.43–0.83) 
after 16 years (45). However, recent data from secondary 
prevention trials have not shown similar efficacy. A number 
of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the cardioprotective 
action based on animal and human studies: 

• 
Improvement in the lipid profile with decreased 
cholesterol, increased HDL, decreased LDL, and 
improvement in the LDL-to-HDL ratio 
• 
Improvement in insulin sensitivity and carbohydrate 
metabolism 
• 
Reduction in platelet adhesion and prevention of 
cholesterol accumulation in vessel walls 
• 
Reduction in arterial plaque formation 
• 
Vasodilatation of coronary arteries 
• 
Improvement in exercise tolerance 
• 
Reduction in circulating homocysteine levels 
• 
Increased antioxidant activity 
Recent observational data have suggested that lower 
doses (0.3 mg) of conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) may 
be as beneficial as 0.625 mg (45). For women with a 


MENOPAUSE 181 

O 
O 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
N 
N 
N 
CH3 
CH2 
CH2 CH2 NH2 
CH2 CH2 NH2 
CH3(CH2)4 
HO 
HO 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH OH 
CH2 
OH 
OH 
CH2 
OH 
OH 
H 
OH 
OH 
CI 
OH 
HO 
CI 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
CI 
HO 
OH 
OH 
N 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
S 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
CH2 
CH3 
P 
C 
P 
P 
P 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
P 
P 
P 
C 
HO 
HO 
HO 
n FIG. 68. Structure of bisphosphonates. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD)
strong family history of CVD, the choice to use estrogen 
may be influenced by the concept that it reduces CVD 
risk; however, there is no FDA-approved indication for 
estrogen in the prevention of CVD, and not all investigators 
agree about this role. Nevertheless, in the past the 
National Cholesterol Education Program guidelines have 
advocated the use of oral estrogen therapy in postmenopausal 
women as one possible strategy for lowering 
elevated cholesterol levels. No long-term data are available 
as yet regarding the use of raloxifene and cardiovascular 
risk. 

Despite carefully conducted prospective cohort studies, 
such as the Nurses’ Health Study, study biases inherent 
in the study design overestimate the cardioprotective 
benefits of HRT. Epidemiologists have classified these 
biases as the healthy-user bias, compliance bias, and 
healthy survivors bias. It is likely that women who choose 
estrogen therapy have health-conscious behaviors, are 
more compliant with medications, and have fewer medical 
contraindications to estrogen use. 

Two recent randomized clinical trials examined the 
effectiveness of HRT as secondary prevention in reducing 
the risk of myocardial infarction and CVD deaths in postmenopausal 
women with established heart disease. The 
Heart Estrogen/ Progestin Replacement Study trial studied 
2,763 menopausal women randomized to receive 

either 0.625 mg of CEE with 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone 
acetate daily or placebo (46). During the average 
follow-up time of 4.1 years, there was an increase in 
deaths from myocardial infarction or coronary heart disease 
during the first year in the HRT group (relative risk, 

1.52 [1.01–2.29]). However, during the overall duration 
of the study, there were no significant differences in 
number of deaths from myocardial infarction or coronary 
heart disease for women receiving the placebo or HRT. 
Fewer coronary heart disease events were observed in the 
HRT group during years 4 and 5 of the study. 
These findings in the trial are consistent with a recent 
report from the Data Safety Monitoring Board for the 
Women’s Health Initiative HRT trial (47). In this 10-year 
trial, more than 27,000 menopausal women aged 50–79 
years were randomized to receive either 0.625 mg of 
CEE, 0.625 mg of CEE with 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone 
acetate, or a placebo. Subjects receiving either 
CEE or CEE with medroxyprogesterone acetate experienced 
a small but significant increase in the incidence of 
heart attacks, strokes, and deep vein thrombosis over the 
placebo group. The increase in thrombotic events in these 
women is consistent with recent data that suggest that a 
proinflammatory marker may be elevated in women who 
are at increased risk for cardiovascular events. Recent 
guidelines from the American Heart Association no 


182 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

longer recommend estrogen replacement therapy for 
secondary prevention of CVD; clinical trials on primary 
prevention are not yet available to demonstrate effectiveness 
(48). 

Another trial, the Estrogen Replacement and 
Atherosclerosis study, was a smaller randomized trial that 
examined coronary artery angiographic changes in 309 
women randomized to receive either 0.625 mg of CEE, 

0.625 mg of CEE plus 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone 
acetate, or placebo over 3 years (49). There were no overall 
differences in progression of coronary lesions among 
the three groups, although the study was probably not 
sufficiently robust to demonstrate small differences 
among the treatment groups. Taken together, these two 
randomized trials suggest that HRT is probably not effective 
in secondary prevention of CVD and does not 
improve survival for women with established CVD. 
Clinicians should be judicious in starting HRT in women 
with known heart disease. For primary prevention of 
CVD, HRT has been shown to be effective based only on 
observational data. Results from the Women’s Health 
Initiative hormone replacement trial, which will finish in 
2005, may help resolve these issues. 
For the treatment of hyperlipidemia, the judicious use 
of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) 
reductase inhibitors such as statins has been shown to be 
effective in reducing overall morbidity and mortality and 
in slowing the progression of angiographically evident 
disease in women with established CVD in multiple trials. 
The American Heart Association recommends that this 
approach be used as secondary prevention for CVD (48). 

With regard to primary prevention, recent data indicate 
that low-dose aspirin therapy is of benefit in preventing 
CVD. British investigators randomized 4,495 people (³ 50 
years old, mean = 64.4 years old; 2,583 women) to treatment 
with aspirin (100 mg daily) or no aspirin and with 
vitamin E (300 mg daily) or no vitamin E and followed 
them for a mean of 3.6 years (50). The subjects were at 
high risk for CVD, with hypertension (systolic blood pressure 
>160 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure >95 mm 
Hg), hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, obesity, or a 
family history of myocardial infarction before age 55 
years. This trial was stopped early because it showed significant 
benefit of treatment with aspirin. With aspirin 
treatment, the risk for cardiovascular death was significantly 
lower when compared with controls (1.4% versus 
0.8%; relative risk, 0.56; 95% confidence interval, 
0.31–0.99), as was the risk for cardiovascular events 
(8.2% versus 6.3%; relative risk, 0.77; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.62–0.95). Patients taking aspirin, however, had 
significantly increased risk for severe gastrointestinal 
bleeding (1 death) (0.3% versus 1.1%; P <0.0008). 
Vitamin E had no effect on any end point followed. 

COLON CANCER AND MACULAR DEGENERATION 

Observational studies have reported a reduced risk of 
colorectal cancer in menopausal women who are current 

and past users of HRT. This protective effect increases 
with duration of use. At present, no clinical trials confirm 
this benefit. The postulated mechanism for this benefit is 
the estrogen-induced changes in bile acid composition. 

With aging, there is a decline in macular function. In 
observational studies, estrogen therapy has been reported 
to reduce macular degeneration and maintain visual acuity 
in menopausal women. A prospective trial to examine 
this potential benefit of HRT is in progress through the 
Women’s Health Initiative (47). At present, estrogen therapy 
has not been approved by the FDA for the prevention 
of colon cancer or the treatment of macular degeneration. 

Androgen Therapy 

Although androgen therapy has been prescribed for sexual 
dysfunction for many years, data regarding its safety 
and efficacy are incomplete, and physiologic androgen 
therapy has not been shown to consistently affect the 
libido. Patients most likely to benefit from androgen therapy 
are young women who have undergone oophorectomy. 
Although it is possible that other women 
experiencing decreased libido may benefit from a trial of 
androgen therapy, the lack of definitive data should lead 
to a cautious approach. In general, lower doses of oral 
preparations are preferred. Appropriate monitoring for 
side effects, including lipoprotein alteration, should be 
undertaken. 

Phytoestrogens 

Phytoestrogens are a class of plant-derived estrogen-like 
compounds conjugated to glycoside moieties. 
Phytoestrogens are not biologically active in their native 
forms unless taken orally. After oral ingestion, colonic 
bacteria cleave the glycosides, producing active compounds 
that are subject to the enterohepatic circulation. 
Phytoestrogens like raloxifene are considered to be in the 
class of selective estrogen receptor modulators and bind 
to estrogen a and estrogen b receptors. These compounds 
can produce estrogen-like effects in some tissues, whereas 
in other tissues they can produce estrogen-blocking 
effects. 

Few randomized trials have examined the efficacy of 
phytoestrogens on menopausal symptoms such as hot 
flushes. Investigators in one study reported that soy isolate 
treatment reduced hot flushes by more than 40% at 
12 weeks and was significantly better than placebo (51). 
However, estrogen treatment reduced hot flushes by more 
than 80% in the same study. In two small studies, phytoestrogens 
were reported to reduce total cholesterol levels 
in women with high cholesterol levels; however, these 
effects were not confirmed by other studies. Soy compounds 
appear to have little effect on bone metabolism, 
although they may have weak antiresorptive effects on 
bone turnover. In general, phytoestrogens are 1,000- to 
10,000-fold less potent than estradiol. 


MENOPAUSE 183 

Compliance Issues 

Adherence to long-term HRT and other therapies is 
important in the treatment of chronic diseases such as 
osteoporosis. However, less than 20% of women remain 
on HRT for more than 5 years. Reasons for discontinuation 
of HRT include unanticipated vaginal bleeding, 
breast tenderness, weight gain, perceived risks of estro-
gen, and an improvement in symptoms. Strategies to 
improve compliance should be implemented before a 
patient begins therapy. To reduce misunderstandings, a 
careful discussion between the patient and health care 
provider should cover the clinical indications, benefits, 
and adverse effects of treatments. A telephone call at 
6 weeks of therapy by a nurse or health care provider to 
discuss adverse effects or review other new concerns may 
improve long-term compliance. 

Risks and Contraindications 

Among the treatment options that have been discussed, 
only the risks and contraindications associated with hormonal 
use will be covered here. Estrogen use is associated 
with increased mitotic activity and density on 
mammography. In contrast to what happens in endometrial 
tissue, progestins do not oppose the action of estro-
gen on breast tissue. For example, in premenopausal 
women, increasing progesterone levels during the luteal 
phase of the menstrual cycle is associated with increased 
mitotic activity. These physiologic responses to sex 
steroids by breast tissue have led to increased concerns 
regarding the link between estrogen and estrogen–progestin 
use and breast cancer. 

A recent reanalysis of 51 epidemiologic studies by the 
Collaborative Group on Hormone Factors in Breast 
Cancer in more than 52,705 women with breast cancer 
and 108,411 women without breast cancer using the original 
data sets indicates that there is little risk of cancer in 
HRT users with up to 5 years of estrogen use (52). 
Thereafter, there is a relative risk of 1.023 per year of 
estrogen use in menopausal women. This risk is similar to 
the increase in incidence of breast cancer associated with 
a delay in menopause for 1 year (relative risk, 1.028). The 
relative risk for estrogen users after 5 years was 1.35. 
Moreover, this increased risk disappears 5 years after discontinuation 
of hormone treatment. 

In addition, two recent epidemiologic studies have 
examined the association between combination estrogen–
progestin regimens and the risk of breast cancer. One 
study that examined 45,355 postmenopausal women 
found that women taking estrogen alone had a 1.2-fold 
increase (confidence interval, 1.0–1.4) in risk of breast 
cancer, whereas women taking estrogen plus a progestin 
in a sequential regimen had a 1.4-fold risk increase (confidence 
interval, 1.1–1.8) (53). In the second study, 
women using combined HRT had a higher risk (odds 
ratio, 1.24; confidence interval, 1.07–1.45) than those 
using estrogen alone (odds ratio, 1.06; confidence inter


val, 0.97–1.15), but this difference was not significant 
(54). The use of sequential progestin regimens versus 
continuous progestin regimens also was associated with a 
nonsignificant, but higher, risk (odds ratio, 1.38 versus 
1.09). 

Based on the findings of the first study, the projected 
absolute lifetime risk for nonestrogen users in menopause 
is approximately 10 cases of breast cancer per 100 
women (53). With unopposed estrogen use, it would 
increase to 12 cases per 100 women, and it would 
increase to 14 cases per 100 women for combined HRT. 
Taken together, these studies suggest general agreement 
that HRT is associated with a slight, but significant, risk 
of breast cancer. This risk would have to be balanced by 
the potential benefit of relief of menopausal symptoms 
and the prevention of heart disease. 

Continuous combined regimens result in irregular 
bleeding for the first 6–9 months, particularly in younger 
women (55). This, combined with fear of cancer, may 
lead to early discontinuation of HRT. Thereafter, the 
majority (85%) of women have amenorrhea. Sequential 
regimens induce cyclic uterine bleeding, but it continues 
for many years unless lower doses of both estrogen and 
progestin are used. 

Endometrial hyperplasia occurs with the use of unopposed 
estrogen at a rate of approximately 20% per year 
with standard doses (56). Particularly in the first year, virtually 
all the hyperplasias are of the simple cystic variety. 
The use of added progestin essentially eliminates this 
increased risk. 

Gallbladder disease is more prevalent with oral ERT 
(an increase of 1.5–2-fold). This fact should be considered 
in women who are contemplating the use of estrogen 
therapy. 

Thrombosis and thromboembolic disease are increased 
twofold to threefold in women who receive standard doses 
of oral estrogens. They appear early (in the first year), and 
the actual risk is relatively small, occurring in 25 of 
100,000 women. The risk may be less with nonoral estro-
gen and with lower doses. Women with a history of thrombosis 
or thromboembolism, particularly if it occurred with 
prior hormone use, should not receive standard therapy. If 
there are no alternatives for the treatment of symptoms, 
low-dose transdermal treatment or vaginal estrogen treatment 
may be considered after a thorough evaluation for 
thrombophilias. Raloxifene carries similar risks as estro-
gen in terms of thrombosis. 

Estrogen treatment is relatively contraindicated in the 
presence of hormonally sensitive neoplasia (breast and 
uterus). In women with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma 
of the endometrium stage I, estrogen therapy can be 
used in severely symptomatic women. Similarly, in 
women with previously treated breast cancer, estrogen 
therapy can be considered in severely symptomatic 
women with their consent (57). 

Estrogen therapy is relatively contraindicated in 
women with liver disease and those who have significant 


184 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

hypertriglyceridemia (>250 mg/dL), including women 
with diabetes mellitus who have this profile. In this setting, 
nonoral estrogen therapy may be considered and is 
viewed to be beneficial in women with relatively uncomplicated 
diabetes mellitus. Although estrogen generally 
tends to lower blood pressure, some women may exhibit 
an idiosyncratic blood pressure rise with certain doses of 
oral estrogen. Changing the dose or switching to a non-
oral route of administration is usually advantageous. 

Women who have significant CVD, such as severe 
atherosclerosis with coronary occlusion, may have an 
increased risk with a standard dose of estrogen (46), particularly 
if administered within 1 year of a myocardial 
infarction. In these women, hormones should be prescribed 
cautiously and on an individual basis. 

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES 
FOR MENOPAUSE 

Alternative medicine encompasses a number of systematic 
medical practices based on physical assessments that 
differ from physiology as it is taught in Western medical 
institutions. Examples include traditional Chinese 
medicine, a system defining health in terms of the balance 
of an essential life force called Qi (pronounced 
“chee”). Acupuncture is said to support wellness and to 
treat disease by regulating the flow of Qi along meridians 
that course through the body. Mind–body systems of 
medicine support health by using conscious and unconscious 
influences of mind over bodily processes. 
Manipulative and body-based practices include chiropractic, 
osteopathy, and massage. Meditation, hypnosis, 
music, and prayer fall into the area of mind–body practice. 
Somewhat related to mind–body medicine are socalled 
energy-modulating modalities, which are said to 
reorder bioelectric fields of the body. Examples include 
therapeutic touch, Qi Gong treatment, and the use of 
magnets. The most recognizable and widely employed 
alternative medical practices are biologically based therapies 
like botanical medicines, dietary supplements, vitamins, 
minerals, and orthomolecular medicine. 

Estimates are that between 30% and 60% of women 
use so-called alternative interventions for the symptoms 
of menopause, including “natural” estrogens, plant estro-
gens (which should more correctly be termed “phyto-
SERMs,” because they function as selective estrogen 
receptor modulators), herbal medicines, and acupuncture. 
Botanicals, herbals, and many steroid products are sold 
over the counter, and some do in fact exert significant 
hormonal activity. The use of botanicals to alleviate the 
symptoms of menopause is extremely popular. This popularity 
is fostered by the notion that plant sterols might 
provide all the benefits of estrogen replacement therapy 
without the attendant risks of neoplasm or venous thrombosis. 
Unfortunately, many plant products recommended 
for menopause have performed poorly in clinical trials. 

Nonetheless, they continue to be promoted heavily in 
advertising campaigns and enjoy great popularity engendered 
by the erroneous assumption that tradition and 
folklore are proofs of success and safety. 

Botanical Medicines 

PROBLEMS WITH BOTANICAL MEDICINES 

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 
1994 classifies most botanical medicines as food supplements 
and removes them from regulatory oversight and 
scrutiny by the FDA. Adulteration, contamination, and 
poor quality control in their harvesting, manufacture, 
and formulation yield products of questionable efficacy 
and safety. The FDA has determined that more than 25% 
of Chinese patent medicines are adulterated with hidden 
pharmaceutical drugs. These kinds of deficiencies make 
it difficult for consumers and practitioners to employ 
botanicals with confidence and security. Furthermore, 
clinical trial data obtained using one brand of herbal 
product cannot necessarily be extrapolated to other 
brands using the same plant. Results of studies using 
whole plant material cannot be extrapolated to extracts or 
isolates derived from the same plants, because clearly, 
something may be lost in processing the material. In contrast 
to the regulatory process in the United States, the 
German government has established Commission E, an 
agency to oversee manufacture, distribution, and safety of 
botanical medicines. The agency also publishes a series 
of monographs that describe the botanicals, their clinical 
indications, and their dose ranges (58). 

Although most of the plant medicines recommended 
for menopause appear to be harmless, products may be 
adulterated or contaminated. Practitioners treating 
menopausal women must be acquainted with these products 
and their potential to harm or to heal. 

BOTANICALS AND MENOPAUSE 

Many of the botanicals used for menopause have been 
employed for centuries, if not millennia. Most commonly, 
botanicals are suggested to help with the so-called 
neurovegetative complaints: vasomotor symptoms, sleep 
disturbances, fatigue, mood changes, and sexual dysfunction. 


Botanicals recommended for vasomotor symptoms 
include soy, black cohosh, evening primrose oil, dong 
quai, ginseng, red clover, and belladonna. There are three 
principle types of plant phytoestrogens. The isoflavones, 
particularly genistein and daidzein, are plant sterol 
molecules found in soy, garbanzo beans, and other 
legumes and are the most common human food sources 
of phytoestrogens. Lignans are a constituent of the cell 
wall of plants and become bioavailable through the action 
of intestinal bacteria on cereal grains. The highest 
amounts are found in seeds used as vegetable oil sources, 


most notably flaxseed or linseed. Coumestans are found 
in red clover, sunflower seeds, and bean sprouts and are 
known to have estrogenic effects in grazing animals. Red 
clover is also the richest known source of isoflavones. 

Observational studies have shown that people who eat 
isoflavone-rich diets have decreased rates of coronary 
heart disease and sex steroid–related malignancies. Diets 
rich in isoflavones have beneficial effects on lipids, with 
intake on the order of 47 g/d correlating with a statistically 
significant 9.3% reduction in total cholesterol, a 
12.9% reduction in LDL cholesterol, and a 10.5% decline 
in triglycerides. However, there are no interventional 
studies demonstrating that a shift to plant protein–based 
diets at midlife can alter cardiovascular mortality. 

Although red clover, sunflower seeds, and bean 
sprouts are known to have estrogenic effects in grazing 
animals, evidence of estrogenic effects in humans are less 
convincing. There are at least eight studies in the literature 
at this time on the use of soy-based isoflavones for 
menopausal flushing. All are of very short duration, 3 
months or less, and all use different types of soy containing 
different amounts of isoflavones. Although data are 
limited, it appears that very large amounts of soy in the 
form of intact protein with active isoflavones must be 
eaten each day to control hot flashes. At least 40–80 mg 
of active isoflavones appears to provide about a 50% 
reduction in women with mild to moderate symptoms. 
Evidence for isoflavone isolates, like red clover or soybased 
isoflavone tablets, is less compelling. 

Botanicals taken to improve mood include chaste 
tree, St. John’s wort, and kava. Although no studies have 
been done with menopausal women specifically, chaste 
tree has demonstrated benefits in women with PMS and 
might hold some promise for treating symptoms such as 
mood changes experienced in perimenopause. In aggregate 
studies in more than 1,500 patients, St. John’s wort 
has been shown to ease symptoms of mild to moderate 
depression (59). However, St. John’s wort was not effective 
in treating major depression (60). Saint John’s wort 
can cause profound up-regulation of the cytochrome 
system and can affect the metabolism of many drugs, 
particularly sedatives, narcotics, immunosuppressants, 
and steroids. Kava has sedative properties and has been 
studied in Germany for menopausal complaints—anxiety 
in particular (61). One study demonstrated a profound 
reduction in Hamilton anxiety scores, and a 
separate study showed that kava was as effective as two 
kinds of benzodiazepines. Note that kava can cause 
intoxication and should not be used with other sedatives, 
narcotics, or alcohol. Recent reports from Europe 
have found more than 50 cases of hepatic failure associated 
with kava use. Germany, France, and England have 
now banned its use. 

The herbs valerian, lavender, and passion flower all 
have been used for centuries as sleep remedies. Studies of 
valerian, the quality of which cannot be assessed, report 

MENOPAUSE 185 

mixed results, with subjective improvements in sleep 
quality and latency (62), but minimal or no change in 
sleep as determined by electroencephalography. In a 
study of seven patients currently on medication for sleep 
disorders, inhaled lavender oil caused an improvement in 
sleep times equal to those of the prior drug therapy after 
a washout period. 

Although many botanicals are said to be aphrodisiacs, 
none has been studied adequately in women to allow us 
to recommend it to treat loss of libido during perimenopause 
and menopause. The most common products 
suggested are ginseng, chaste tree, ginkgo, and yohimbe. 
Ginkgo may be helpful in reversing the loss of libido 
associated with the use of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors. 

USING BOTANICALS 

Botanicals should be clearly labeled with the name of the 
herb, part of the plant used, batch or lot number, expiration 
date, and name and address of manufacturer. 
Practitioners should let patients know that they are open 
to discussing the use of alternative therapies. They should 
advise patients to discontinue all herbal medicines at least 
2 weeks prior to elective surgery, because these preparations 
can affect the pharmacokinetics of anesthetic drugs 
(63). Practitioners should inquire about the use of 
herbals, botanicals, and other supplements at every 
patient encounter and update the patient’s medical record 
regularly (64). Commonly used herbs, along with their 
pharmacologic effects and adverse effects, are listed in 
Table 21. 

Mind–Body Alternatives 

The rubric alternative medicine includes a vast array of 
practices other than herbal medicine. Meditation is useful 
for treating anxiety and pain syndromes. Yoga, although 
not proven as a specific treatment for menopause, helps to 
maintain strength and flexibility. Acupuncture has been 
shown to alter afferent neuronal transmission to pain centers 
in the brain, and it clearly has a role in the management 
of pain syndromes and chronic pain. 

Conclusion 

In the broadest sense, alternative medical systems may be 
viewed as bodies of knowledge and practice that strive to 
promote health and well-being. These practices should 
not be dismissed or denigrated outright because of overpromotion, 
distortion, or misrepresentation made by a 
limited segment of the alternative medicine community. 
The judicious use of alternative practices of proven efficacy 
in concert with conventional menopause medicine 
may improve communication, satisfaction, and outcomes 
in health. 


186 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

¦ 
TABLE 21. Commonly Used Herbs, Pharmacologic Effects, and Adverse Effects 
Common Name Putative Pharmacologic Effects Adverse Effects Evidence-Based Support 
Black cohosh 
(Remifemin Menopause, 
20 mg twice daily) 
Relief of vasomotor symptoms, 
anxiety, mild depression, and 
dysmenorrhea 
Gastric discomfort, 
headaches, nausea, 
and dizziness 
Randomized trial showing 
lack of efficacy* 
Soy supplements Selective estrogen receptor 
modulator; relief of hot flushes; 
modest lowering of lipids 
Possible stimulation of 
breast cancer cells 
Effective in reducing hot 
flushes by 50%†; 
mild effect on lipids‡ 
Evening primrose oil Relief of vasomotor symptoms, 
premenstrual syndrome, and 
mastalgia 
Anticoagulant Randomized trial showing 
no effect§ 
Dong quai Relief of vasomotor symptoms Randomized trial showing 
no effect½½ 
Ginseng Relief of vasomotor symptoms 
and loss of libido; reduction 
of stress 
Hypoglycemia; risk of 
bleeding (anticoagulant) 
Randomized trial showing 
no effect# 
St. John’s wort Relief of mild depression Induction of cytochrome 
P450, resulting in increased 
metabolism of drugs 
Effective in mild depresion**; 
not effective in 
major depression†† 
Valerian root Sedative Increased effects of 
benzodiazepines 
No clear evidence of effect‡‡ 

* Jacobson JS, Troxel AB, Evans J et al. Randomized trial of balck cohosh for the treatment of hot flashes among women with a history of breast 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:2739–2745 
( ) 
†Albertazzi P, Pansini F, Bonaccorsi G, Sanotti L, Forini L, DeAloysio D. The effect of dietary soy supplementation on hot flushes. Obstet Gynecol 
1998;91:6–11 
( ) 
‡Anderson JW, Johnstone BM, Cook-Newell ME. Meta-analysis of the effects of soy protein intake on serum lipids. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:276–282 
( ) 
§Chenoy R, Hussain S, Tayob Y, O’Brien PM, Moss MY, Morse PF. Effect of oral gamolenic acid from evening primrose oil on menopausal flushing. 
BMJ 1994;308:501–503 


( ) 
½½ Hirata JD, Swiersz LM, Zell B, Small R, Ettinger B. Does dong quai have estrogenic effects in postmenopausal women? A double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Fertil Steril 1997;68:981–986 


( ) 
# Wiklund IK, Mattsson LA, Lindgren R, Limoni C. Effects of a standardized ginseng extract on quality of life and physiologic parameters in symptomatic 
postmenopausal women: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Swedish Alternative Medicine Group. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 
1999;19:89–99 


( ) 
**Liske E. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga racemosa for gynecologic disorders. Adv Ther 1998;15:45–53 


( ) 
††Shelton RC, Keller MB, Gelenberg A, Dunner DL, Hirschfeld R, Thase ME, et al. Effectiveness of St. John’s wort in major depression: a randomized 
trial. JAMA 2001; 285:1978–1986 
( ) 
‡‡U.S. Pharmacopeia Botanical Monograph series: information for the health care professional and consumer. Rockville, Maryland: US 
Pharmacopeial Convention Inc, 1998. 
References 
FSH rises in perimenopausal women. Clin Endocrinol 
1998;48:809–813 


( ) 
1. McKinlay SM, Brambilla DJ, Posner JG. The normal 
4. Burger HG, Dudley EC, Hopper JL, Groome N, Guthrie JR, 
menopause transition. Maturitas 1992;14:103–115 

Green A, et al. Prospectively measured levels of serum fol


( ) 
2. Rannevik G, Jeppsson S, Johnell O, Bjerre B, Laurell-Borulf 
licle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, and the dimeric inhib-
Y, Svanberg L. A longitudinal study of the perimenopausal ins during the menopausal transition in a population-based 
transition: altered profiles of steroid and pituitary hormones, cohort of women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84: 
SHBG and bone mineral density. Maturitas 1995;21: 103–113 


(button) 
4025–4030 


( ) 
3. Burger HG, Cahir N, Robertson DM, Groome NP, Dudley E, 
5. Burger HG, Dudley E, Mamers P, Groome N, Robertson 
Green A, et al. Serum inhibins A and B fall differentially as DM. Early follicular phase serum FSH as a function of age: 

MENOPAUSE 187 

the roles of inhibin B, inhibin A and estradiol. Climacteric 21. Dennerstein L, Smith AM, Morse C. Psychological well2000;
3:17–24 being, mid-life and the menopause. Maturitas 1994;20:1–11 



(button) 
6. Santoro N, Brown JR, Adel T, Skurnick JH. Characterization 
22. Mitchell ES, Woods NF. Symptom experiences of midlife 
of reproductive hormonal dynamics in the perimenopause. J women: observations from the Seattle Midlife Women’s 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:1495–1501 
Health Study. Maturitas 1996;25:1–10 


( ) 
( ) 
7. Labrie F, Bélanger A, Cusan L, Gomez JL, Candas B. 
23. Schiff I, Regestein Q, Tulchinsky D, Ryan KJ. Effects of 
Marked decline in serum concentrations of adrenal C19 sex 

estrogens on sleep and psychological state of hypogonadal 

steroid precursors and conjugated androgen metabolites 

women. JAMA 1979;242:2405–2407 


( ) 
(button) 
during aging. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:2396–2402 

8. 
Jiroutek MR, Chen MH, Johnston CC, Longcope C. 
Changes in reproductive hormones and sex hormone-binding 
globulin in a group of postmenopausal women measured 
over 10 years. Menopause 1998;5:90–94 
( ) 
9. Zumoff B, Strain GW, Miller LK, Rosner W. Twenty-four 
hour mean plasma testosterone concentration declines with 
age in normal premenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1995;80:1429–1430 
( ) 
10. Meldrum DR, Davidson BJ, Tataryn IV, Judd HL. Changes 
in circulating steroids with aging in postmenopausal 
women. Obstet Gynecol 1981;57:624–628 
( ) 
11. Hällström T, Samuelsson S. Mental health in the climacteric. 
The longitudinal study of women in Gothenburg. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand (Suppl) 1985;130:13–18 
( ) 
12. Gath D, Osborn M, Bungay G, Iles S, Day A, Bond A, et al. 
Psychiatric disorder and gynaecological symptoms in middle 
aged women: a community survey. Br Med J (Clin Res 
Ed) 1987;294:213–218 
( ) 
13. McKinlay SM, McKinlay JB. The impact of menopause 
and social factors on health. In: Hammond CB, Haseltine 
FP, Schiff I, eds. Menopause: evaluation, treatment, and 
health concerns: proceedings of a meeting held in Bethesda, 
Maryland, April 21–22, 1988. New York: Alan R. Liss, 
1989 
14. Matthews KA, Wing RR, Kuller LH, Meilahn EN, Kelsey 
SF, Costello EJ, et al. Influences of natural menopause on 
psychological characteristics and symptoms of middle-aged 
healthy women. J Consult Clin Psychol 1990;58:345–351 
(button) 
15. Koster A. Change-of-life anticipations, attitudes, and experiences 
among middle-aged Danish women. Health Care 
Women Int 1991;12:1–13 
( ) 
16. Holte A. Influences of natural menopause on health complaints: 
a prospective study of healthy Norwegian women. 
Maturitas 1992;14:127–141 
( ) 
17. Kaufert PA, Gilbert P, Tate R. The Manitoba Project: a reexamination 
of the link between menopause and depression. 
Maturitas 1992;14:143–155 
( ) 
18. Dennerstein L, Smith AM, Morse C, Burger H, Green A, 
Hopper J, et al. Menopausal symptoms in Australian 
women. Med J Aust 1993;159:232–236 
( ) 
19. Everson SA, Matthews KA, Guzick DS, Wing RR, Kuller 
LH. Effects of surgical menopause on psychological characteristics 
and lipid levels: the Healthy Women Study. 
Health Psychol 1995;14:435–443 
( ) 
20. Avis NE, Brambilla D, McKinlay SM, Vass K. A longitudinal 
analysis of the association between menopause and 
depression. Results from the Massachusetts Women’s 
Health Study. Ann Epidemiol 1994;4:214–220 
( ) 
24. Wiklund I, Karlberg J, Mattsson LA. Quality of life of postmenopausal 
women on a regimen of transdermal estradiol 
therapy: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:824–830 
( ) 
25. Polo-Kantola P, Erkkola R, Helenius H, Irjala K, Polo O. 
When does estrogen replacement therapy improve sleep 
quality? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;178:1002–1009 
( ) 
26. Limouzin-Lamothe MA, Mairon N, Joyce CR, Le Gal M. 
Quality of life after the menopause: influence of hormonal 
replacement therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170: 
618–624 
( ) 
27. Behl C, Skutella T, Lezoualc’h F, Post A, Widmann M, 
Newton CJ, et al. Neuroprotection against oxidative stress 
by estrogens: structure-activity relationship. Mol Pharmacol 
1997;51:535–541 
( ) 
28. Hashimoto S, Katou M, Dong Y, Murakami K, Terada S, 
Inoue M. Effects of hormone replacement therapy on serum 
amyloid P component in postmenopausal women. 
Maturitas 1997;26:113–119 
( ) 
29. Woolley CS, Weiland NG, McEwen BS, Schwartzkroin PA. 
Estradiol increases the sensitivity of hippocampal CA1 
pyramidal cells to NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic 
input: correlation with dendritic spine density. J Neurosci 
1997;17:1848–1859 
( ) 
30. Sherwin BB. Estrogen effects on cognition in menopausal 
women. Neurology 1997;485(Suppl 7):S21–S26 
( ) 
31. Rice MM, Graves AB, McCurry SM, Larson EB. Estrogen 
replacement therapy and cognitive function in postmenopausal 
women without dementia. Am J Med 
1997;103(3A):26S–35S 
( ) 
32. Resnick SM, Metter EJ, Zonderman AB. Estrogen replacement 
therapy and longitudinal decline in visual memory. A 
possible protective effect? Neurology 1997;49:1491–1497 
(button) 
33. Jacobs DM, Tang MX, Stern Y, Sano M, Marder K, Bell 
KL, et al. Cognitive function in nondemented older women 
who took estrogen after menopause. Neurology 1998;50: 
368–373 
( ) 
34. Wing RR, 
Matthews KA, Kuller LH, Meilahn EN, 
Plantinga PL. Weight gain at the time of menopause. Arch 
Intern Med 1991;151:97–102 
( ) 
35. Lobo RA. Treatment of the postmenopausal woman: where 
we are today. In: Lobo RA, ed. Treatment of the postmenopausal 
woman: basic and clinical aspects. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999: 
655–659 
36. Phillips KA, Glendon G, Knight JA. Putting the risk of 
breast cancer in perspective. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
141–144 
( ) 

188 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

37. Lobo RA. Progestogens. In: Lobo RA, Kelsey J, Marcus 
ER, eds. Menopause—biology and pathobiology. San 
Diego: Academic Press, 2000:429–444 
38. Recker RR, Davies KM, Dowd RM, Heaney RP. The effect 
of low-dose continuous estrogen and progesterone therapy 
with calcium and vitamin D on bone in elderly women. A 
randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;130: 
897–904 
( ) 
39. Utian WH, Shoupe D, Bachmann G, Pinkerton JV, Pickar 
JH. Relief of vasomotor symptoms and vaginal atrophy 
with lower doses of conjugated equine estrogens and 
medroxyprogesterone acetate. Fertil Steril 001;75:1065–
1079 
( ) 
40. Geerlings MI, Ruitenberg A, Witteman JC, van Swieten JC, 
Hofman A, van Duijn CM, et al. Reproductive period and 
risk of dementia in postmenopausal women. JAMA 2001; 
285:1475-1481 
( ) 
41. Henderson VW, 
Paganini-Hill A, Miller BL, Elble RJ, 
Reyes PF, Shoupe D, et al. Estrogen for Alzheimer’s disease 
in women: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Neurology 2000;54:295–301 
( ) 
42. Mulnard RA, Cotman CW, Kawas C, van Dyck CH, Sano 
M, Doody R, et al. Estrogen replacement therapy for treatment 
of mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: a randomized 
controlled trial. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. 
JAMA 2000;283:1007–1015 [erratum JAMA 2000;284:2597] 
43. Dunn LB, Damesyn M, Moore AA, Reuben DB, Greendale 
GA. Does estrogen prevent skin aging? Results from the 
First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES I). Arch Dermatol 1997;133:339–342 


( ) 
44. Looker 
AC, Orwoll ES, Johnston CC Jr, Lindsay RL, 
Wahner HW, Dunn WL, et al. Prevalence of low femoral 
bone density in older U.S. adults from NHANES III. J Bone 
Miner Res 1997;12:1761–1768 
( ) 
45. Grodstein F, Manson JE, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Speizer 
FE, Stampfer MJ. A prospective, observational study of 
postmenopausal hormone therapy and primary prevention 
of cardiovascular disease. Ann Intern Med 2000;133: 
933–941 
( ) 
46. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T, Furberg C, Herrington D, Riggs 
B, et al. Randomized trial of estrogen plus progestin for 
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in postmenopausal 
women. Heart and Estrogen/Progestin 
Replacement Study (HERS) Research Group. JAMA 
1998;280:605–613 
( ) 
47. What you should know about hormones and cardiovascular 
health. WHI HRT Update. Bethesda, Maryland: NHLBI, 
2001. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/whi/hrt-en.htm. 
Retrieved January 8, 2002 
( ) 
48. Mosca L, Collins P, 
Herrington DM, Mendelsohn ME, 
Pasternak RC, Robertson RM, et al. Hormone replacement 
therapy and cardiovascular disease: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation 2001;104:499–503 
( ) 
49. Herrington DM, Reboussin DM, Brosnihan KB, Sharp PC, 
Shumaker SA, Snyder TE, et al. Effects of estrogen replacement 
therapy on the progression of coronary-artery 
atherosclerosis. N Engl J Med 2000;343:522–529 
( ) 
50. 
de Gaetano G; Collaborative Group of the Primary 
Prevention Project. Low-dose aspirin and vitamin E in people 
at cardiovascular risk: a randomized trial in general 
practice. Lancet 2001:357: 89–95 
( ) 
51. Albertazzi P, Pansini F, Bonaccorsi G, Zanotti L, Forini E, 
DeAloysio D. The effect of dietary soy supplementation on 
hot flushes. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:6–11 
( ) 
52. Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative 
reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 
52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women 
without breast cancer. Collaborative Group on Hormonal 
Factors in Breast Cancer. Lancet 1997;350:1047–1059 
53. Schairer C, Lubin J, Troisi R, Sturgeon S, Brinton L, 
Hoover R. Menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin 
replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. JAMA 2000; 
283:485–491 
( ) 
54. Ross RK, Paganini-Hill A, Wan PC, Pike MC. Effect of 
hormone replacement therapy on breast cancer risk: estro-
gen versus estrogen plus progestin. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000; 
92:328–332 
( ) 
55. Archer DF, 
Pickar JH, Bottiglioni F, Menopause Study 
Group. Bleeding patterns in postmenopausal women taking 
continuous combined or sequential regimens of conjugated 
estrogens with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Menopause 
Study Group. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:686–692 
( ) 
( ) 


56. Woodruff JD, Pickar JH. Incidence of endometrial hyperplasia 
in postmenopausal women taking conjugated estro-
gens (Premarin) with medroxyprogesterone acetate or 
conjugated estrogens alone. The Menopause Study Group. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1213–1223 
( ) 
57. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Hormone replacement therapy in women with previously 
treated breast cancer. ACOG Committee Opinion 226. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 1999 
58. Blumenthal M, ed. The complete German Commission E 
monographs: therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, 
Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998 
59. Linde K, Ramirez G, Mulrow CD, Pauls A, Weidenhammer 
W, Melchart D. St. John’s Wort for depression—an 
overview and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. 
BMJ 1996;313:253–258 
( ) 
60. Shelton RC, 
Keller MB, Gelenberg A, Dunner DL, 
Hirschfeld R, Thase ME, et al. Effectiveness of St. John’s 
wort in major depression: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2001;285:1978–1986 
( ) 
61. 
Jamieson DD, Duffield PH, Cheng D, Duffield AM. 
Comparison of the central nervous system activity of the 
aqueous and lipid extract of kava (Piper methysticum). 
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1989;301:66–80 
( ) 
62. Houghton PJ. The scientific basis for the reputed activity of 
Valerian. J Pharm Pharmacol 1999;51:505–512 
( ) 
63. Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan C. Herbal medicines and perioperative 
care. JAMA 2001;286:208–216 
( ) 
64. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Use 
of botanicals for management of menopausal symptoms. 
ACOG Practice Bulletin 28. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
( ) 

(Película: Video_1)
Audiovisual Aids 


n VIDEO 1. Endometrial dating. (Narrated by Edward E. Wallach, MD; courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

(Película: VIDEO_2)
n VIDEO 2. Endometrial ablation: Loop resection (Goldfarb HA. Treatment of severe uterine bleeding: combined 
hysteroscopic and laparoscopic technique [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1996); Roller ball (Goldfarb HA. Treatment of severe uterine bleeding: combined 
hysteroscopic and laparoscopic technique [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1996); and Use of the YAG laser (Jamieson W. YAG laser photoablation of 
the endometrium—an alternative to hysterectomy in selected cases [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1989) 

(Película: Video_3)
n VIDEO 3. Complications of operative laparoscopy. (Childers JM. Complications and management of 
gynecologic operative laparoscopy [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists, 1995) 

(Película: VIDEO_4)
n VIDEO 4. Laparoscopic surgery of adhesions. (Ory SJ. Laparoscopic infertility surgery [CD-ROM]. 
Washington, DC: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1989) 

(Película: VIDEO_5)
n VIDEO 5. Surgery for endometriosis. (Narrated and videotaped by D. Alan Johns, MD. [American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Precis: gynecology. 2nd ed. CD-ROM. Washington, DC: ACOG, 
2001]) 

(Película: VIDEO_6)
n VIDEO 6. Office hysteroscopy. (Siegler AM. Office hysteroscopy [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [CD-ROM], 1986) 

Images 



n IMAGE 1. Clitoromegaly in a patient with 45,X/46,XY karyotype. 
(Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb AF. 
Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 
Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:5.14 with permission) 
n IMAGE 2. Young child with true hermaphroditism. (
((A
AA) 
)) Two-month-old child with frank sexual ambiguity: 
enlarged genital tubercle, a gonad in the left labioscrotal pouch, unfused labioscrotal pouches, and a single 
opening under the enlarged genital tubercle. (
((B
BB) 
)) The gonad proved histologically to be an ovotestis. (Tho SP. 
Sexual ambiguity. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 
Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:2.22 with permission) 

n IMAGE 3. Streak gonad. (Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. 
Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:5.14 with permission) 

n IMAGE 4. Complete androgen insensitivity. The phenotype is that of a normal female with complete breast 
development, scant pubic hair, and a blind vagina with no müllerian system. Serum testosterone levels are in 
the male range (high range), and the karyotype is 46,XY. (Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb 
AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 
1998:5.15 with permission) 

n IMAGE 5. Endometrial dating: early menstruation. n IMAGE 6. Endometrial dating: early menstruation. 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 7. Endometrial dating: early–mid-menstrua-
tion. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 8. Endometrial dating: early–mid-menstrua-
tion. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 9. Endometrial dating: mid-menstruation. n IMAGE 10. Endometrial dating: late menstruation– 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) early proliferation. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 11. Endometrial dating: later proliferative 
phase. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 12. Endometrial dating: late proliferativephase, 15 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD)

n IMAGE 13. Endometrial dating: late proliferative n IMAGE 14. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) phase. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 15. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 18 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 16. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 19 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 17. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 19 n IMAGE 18. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 20 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 19. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 20 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 20. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 21. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 n IMAGE 22. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 23. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 22 n IMAGE 24. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 23 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 25. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 24 n IMAGE 26. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 24 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 27. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 25 n IMAGE 28. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 26 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 29. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, n IMAGE 30. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 26 
26–27 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 31. Arias-Stella reaction (ectopic pregnancy). 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 32. Acanthosis nigricans. (Courtesy of Richard Legro, MD) 

n IMAGE 33. Clinical features of a woman with Cushing’s disease caused by a pituitary adenoma. (
((A
AA) 
)) 
Moon facies and malar flush. (
((B 
BB a
aan
nnd 
dd C
CC) 
)) Obesity with central adiposity and thin legs. (
((D
DD) 
)) Violaceous abdominal 
striae more than 1 cm in width. (Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL. Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, 
pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:529) 

n IMAGE 34. Endometrioma or “chocolate cyst.” (Courtesy of Michael Blumenfeld, MD) 
n IMAGE 35. Endometriosis. The appearance may range from clear vesicles to peritoneal 
defects, to classic “powder-burn” marks. (Courtesy of Michael Blumenfeld, MD) 

n IMAGE 36. Diagnosis of endometriosis. (
((A
AA) 
)) Endometriosis implants are first identified by laparoscopy. 
(
((B
BB) 
)) The diagnosis is confirmed by histologic findings of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine 
cavity. (Thornton MH, Bello SM, Israel R. Endometriosis. In: Mishell DR Jr. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 3. 
Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:14.6 with permission) 
n IMAGE 38. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 37. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 39. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
n IMAGE 40. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Ricardo 
Wallach, MD) 

Azziz, MD) 

n IMAGE 41. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 42. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 43. Bicornuate uterus. (Courtesy of William 
H. Kutteh, MD) 
n IMAGE 44. T-shaped uterus. (Courtesy of Ricardo 
Azziz, MD) 
n IMAGE 45. Filling defect, fibroid. (Courtesy of 
Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 46. Filling defect, synechiae. (Courtesy 
of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 47. Involuted fibroid. (Courtesy of William H. Kutteh, MD) 
n IMAGE 48. Salpingitis isthmica nodosa. (Courtesy of Ricardo Azziz, MD) 

n IMAGE 49. Asherman’s syndrome, uterine factors. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

Linking Instructions 

Click on the specific section, slide, or video listing in Contents for quick access to 
the material. 

Click on highlighted in-text citations to tables, figures, boxes, slides, and videos 
for linking to the cited material. To return to the text, click on the heavy black 
arrow pointing left on the bar at the top of the screen. 

To view MEDLINE abstracts of referenced journal articles, click on the icon at the 
end of the references. To return to the text, click on the heavy black arrow 
pointing left on the bar at the top of the screen. 

Use the software’s search function for quick access to the text you’re seeking. 


Index 


Note: Page numbers followed by letters b, 
f, and t refer to boxes, figures, and 
tables, respectively. 

A 

Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB), 69–73 
etiology of, 69–70, 69b 
evaluation of, 70–71 
in postmenopausal women, 73 
treatment of, 71–72 

Abortion, spontaneous. See Pregnancy 

loss 
Acanthosis nigricans, 89 
Acne 

androgen excess and, 84, 85 
oral contraceptives and, 164 
polycystic ovary syndrome and, 87 
treatment of, 91, 92 

Activin, 53 
Acupuncture, 184, 185 
Addison’s disease, 112 
Adenoma, silent subtype III, 82 
Adrenal gland(s), 105–106 

androgen deficiency, 111 
androgen excess, 106–111 
androgen-secreting tumors of, 88, 89 
autoimmune destruction of, 112 
cortisol deficiency, 112–113 
cortisol excess, 111–112 
disorders of, 105–113 
histology of, 105f 
steroid synthesis in, 106, 107f 

Adrenal hyperplasia. See Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia 

Adrenal insufficiency, 112–113 
diagnosis of, 112 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 95–96 
treatment of, 113 

Adrenal medulla pheochromocytoma, 113 
Adrenarche, 38, 42 
b -Adrenergic blocking agents, 104 
African Americans 

heritable diseases in, 125 
pubertal development in, 42 
Age 
and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 

concentrations, 106, 106f 
and fertility, 124 
and in vitro fertilization, prognosis 

with, 142 
maternal, and chromosome disorders, 20 
of menarche, 38 
of menopause, 169 

Alcohol consumption 
and menopause, 169 
and pregnancy loss, risk of, 159 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Alendronate, for osteoporosis, 180t 
Allele-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization, 24–25, 27f 
Alloimmune factors, and pregnancy loss, 

159 
Alopecia, androgenic, 84, 85, 85f,92 
Alprazolam, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Alzheimer’s disease, 172, 177–178 
Ambiguous genitalia, 35–37 

diagnosis of, 35–37, 37b 
differential diagnosis of, 35, 36f 
etiology of, 35 
21-hydroxylase deficiency and, 108, 

110f 
physical examination for, 37 
therapy for, 37 


Amenorrhea, 67–68 
causes of, 68, 68b 
hypothalamic, 73–79, 74f 
laboratory evaluation of, 68, 69f 
pituitary tumors and, 82 
postpill, 67 
primary, 43, 47, 48, 67 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
secondary, 67 
virilization and, 85 

American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine (ASRM), 142 
classification of endometriosis, 
118f–119f 
ethics committee of, 150, 151, 152 
Anabolic steroids, for gonadal dysgenesis, 
45 
Androgen(s), 83. See also specific 

androgens 
biosynthesis from cholesterol, 84f 
therapy with, in menopause, 182 

Androgen deficiency, adrenal, 111 

Androgen excess, 83–93 
adrenal, 106–111 
differential diagnosis of, 85–90 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
signs and symptoms of, 83f, 83–85 
treatment of, 90–93 

Androgen index, 12 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome, 3, 


48–49 
complete, 49 
differential diagnosis of, 47 
incomplete, 49 


Androgen-receptor antagonists, 91 
Androgen replacement therapy, and 

libido, 12 
Androgen-secreting tumors, 88–89 
Androgenic alopecia, 84, 85, 85f,92 
Android fat distribution, 88 

5a -Androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide, 
13–14 

Androstenedione, 83 
conversion to testosterone, 11 
measurement of levels of, 13 

Aneuploidy, 19, 20 
Angelman’s syndrome, 22–23 
Annealing, 24 
Anorexia nervosa 

and amenorrhea, 73, 79 

and bone density, 77 
Antagon, 137t 
Antiandrogen therapy, for adrenal hyper


plasia, 110–111 
Anticipation phenomenon, 22, 24 
Antidepressants 

for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 79 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 
and prolactin levels, 15 

Antihypertensive agents, and prolactin 
levels, 15 
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
158, 159t 
Antiseizure medications, interaction with 

contraceptives, 163, 164b, 165 
Antithyroid agents, 103, 104 
A.P.L., 137t 
Arcuate nucleus, 54 
ART. See Assisted reproductive tech


nology 
Asherman’s syndrome, 158, 158f 
Ashkenazi Jews, heritable disorders in, 

23, 27–28, 90, 110, 125 
Aspirin 
for antiphospholipid antibody syn


drome, 158 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for hyperthyroidism, 104 


ASRM. See American Society for 

Reproductive Medicine 
Assays, endocrine, 8–18 
Assisted hatching, 145–146 
Assisted reproductive technology (ART), 

141–148 

controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 
with intrauterine insemination, 
compared with, 140–141 

with endometriosis, 121 
ovulation induction in, 138 
success rates with, 142 
team of professionals in, 141–142 

AUB. See Abnormal uterine bleeding 
Autocrine factor, 3, 7 
Autoimmune disorders, and pregnancy 

loss, 158 
Autoimmune ovarian failure, 95 
Autosomal disorders, 21–22 


190 INDEX 

B 

Balding, androgen excess and, 84, 85, 

85f, 92 
Basic fibroblast growth factor, 7 
Benzodiazepines, for hypothalamic 

amenorrhea, 79 

Birth defects 
maternal serum testing for, 10 
risk factors for, 20–21 

Bisphosphonates 
after menopause, 176b 
structure of, 181f 
to treat osteoporosis, 180, 180t 

Black cohosh, 186t 
Blastocyst culture techniques, 151 
Bone loss. See also Osteoporosis 

with hyperprolactinemia, 81 
with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
in menopause, 172–174 

Bone measurements, T-score distribution, 

178–179, 179f 
Botanical medicines, 184–185, 186t 
Breast cancer 

oral contraceptives and, 163 

risks of, 174–175, 175t 
age and, 175t 
versus cardiovascular disease, 175f, 

175–176 

Breast development 
delayed, 43 
precocious, 42, 42f 
Tanner staging of, 39–41, 40f 

Bromocriptine 

therapy with 
for hyperprolactinemia, 80, 81, 133 
and prolactin levels, 60 
for ovulation induction, 137t 
for recurrent pregnancy loss, 160t 
for silent subtype II adenoma, 82 

vaginal route of administration, 80, 
140 
Buspirone, for premenstrual syndrome, 
64, 65t 
Busulfan, and ovarian function, 20 

C 

Cabergoline 
for hyperprolactinemia, 81 
for ovulatory dysfunction, 133, 137t 

Caffeine, and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Calcium 
foods containing, 174t 
supplementation 
for osteoporosis prevention, 179, 180t 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64 

cAMP. See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 


Cancer. See also specific types 
genetic basis of, 23 
heritable, identification of individuals 

at risk for, 30 
polycystic ovary syndrome and risk 
of, 87 

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
protection from, estrogen and, 180–182 
risk of 

versus breast and lung cancer, 175f, 

175–176 
after menopause, 172, 175–176 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 88 

CBAVD. See Congenital bilateral 
absence of the vas deferens 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 142 

Central nervous system, hormone 
replacement therapy and, 
177–178 

Cervical stenosis, 130, 134 
Cervicitis, chronic, 130 
Chaste tree, 185 
Chemotherapy, and genetic disease, 20 
Chinese patent medicines, 184 
Chlamydia 

and pregnancy loss, 159 

testing for, 142 
Chlorambucil, and ovarian function, 20 
Cholesterol, 

and ovarian steroids, 53 
androgen biosynthesis from, 84f 
Chromosomes. See also X chromosome; 

Y chromosome 
disorders of, 20, 21, 156–157 
structure of, 19 


Chromotubation, 132 
Circadian rhythms, and premenstrual 
syndrome, 64 
Citalopram, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Clitoris, of newborn, 37 
Clitoromegaly, 33, 85, 110f 
Clitoroplasty, 37 
Clomid, 137t 
Clomiphene citrate 

as cause of infertility, 134 
challenge test, 16 
contraindications to, 137 
ovulation induction with, 133, 


137–138, 137t 

therapy with 
for adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
for oligospermia, 132 


Clomipramine, for premenstrual syn


drome, 64, 65t 
Cloning, 152–153 
COH-IUI. See Controlled ovarian hyper


stimulation with intrauterine 
insemination 

Colon cancer 
hereditary nonpolyposis, 23 
hormone replacement therapy and 

reduced risk of, 182 

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 35, 108 
diagnosis of, 13, 35 
nonclassic (late-onset), 89–90, 

108–111 
treatment of, 37 


Congenital bilateral absence of the vas 

deferens (CBAVD), 127 
Consent for reproductive technologies, 150 
Contraception, hormonal, 162–167 

and abnormal bleeding, 70 
emergency, 167 
implants, 166–167 
injectable, 165 
intrauterine devices, 165–166 
noncontraceptive benefits, 164b 
oral. See Oral contraceptives 
and other medications, 164b 
transdermal patch, 166 
vaginal ring, 166 


Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with 
intrauterine insemination (COHIUI), 
140–141 

Corona radiata, 53 
Corpus albicans, 60 
Corpus luteum, during luteal phase, 58–60 
Corticosteroids, therapy with 

for adrenal gland disorders, 106, 108t, 
110 

for ovarian factor infertility, 133 
Corticotropin deficiency, 112, 112f 
Corticotropin-releasing factor–pituitary 

corticotropin–adrenal axis, 112f 
Corticotropin-secreting tumors, 82, 111 
Cortisol 

deficiency, 112–113 
excess, 111–112 
levels of 


with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 76 

measurement of, 14 
Cox-1 gene, 114, 114t 
Cox-2 gene, 114, 114t 
Craniopharyngiomas, 82 
Cushing’s syndrome, 89 

causes of, 82, 111 
screening for, 14 
treatment of, 112 


CVD. See Cardiovascular disease 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 3 
Cyclophosphamide, and ovarian func


tion, 20 
Cyproterone acetate, 91 
Cystic fibrosis 

screening for, 24 
sperm abnormalities and, 146 


D 

D-chiro-inositol, 92, 140 

Danazol 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
contraindications to, 117 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for premenstrual syndrome, 65t, 66 

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 83 
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 

(DHEAS), 83 
age and concentrations of, 106, 106f 
measurement of levels of, 13 


INDEX 191 

Denaturation, 24 

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
chip technology, 27f, 27–28, 30 
in genes, 19f 
mitochondrial, mutations in, 22 
molecular genetic techniques involving, 

24–28 
mutations in, causes of, 20 
structure of, 18 


Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(DMPA), 71–72, 165 
Depot progestin, androgen-suppressive 
therapy with, 90 

Depression. See also Antidepressants 
menopause and, 171 
treatment of, St. John’s wort for, 185 

Desensitization, 56 
Desogestrel, in oral contraceptives, 163 
Dexamethasone 

suppression test, 89 
therapy, for adrenal hyperplasia, 110, 


111 
DHEA. See Dehydroepiandrosterone 
DHEAS. See Dehydroepiandrosterone 

sulfate 

Diabetes 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87–88 
and postpartum thyroiditis, 105 
and pregnancy loss, 157 

Diet 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 
therapeutic 

with dysmenorrhea, 116 

with polycystic ovary syndrome, 92 
Dihydrotestosterone, 13, 33, 83 
Dilation and curettage, for abnormal 

uterine bleeding, 72 
Diuretics, for premenstrual syndrome, 
64, 65t 
DMPA. See Depot medroxyprogesterone 

acetate 
DNA. See Deoxyribonucleic acid 
Dong quai, 186t 
Donor(s), ethical issues involving, 151 
Donor gametes, 133, 146. See also Ovum 

donation 

Dopamine agonist therapy 
for hyperprolactinemia, 81 
for ovulatory dysfunction, 133, 137t, 140 

Dosage-sensitive sex reversal, 46 
Dostinex, 137t 
Dot blots, 24–25, 27f 
Down-regulation, 56 
Down syndrome, 20, 21 
Drospirenone, 91, 162–163 
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan, 

178, 178f 
Dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary syndrome 
and, 88 

Dysmenorrhea, 115–116 
with endometriosis, 116 
treatment of, 116 

Dysmorphic children, 30 

E 

Eating disorders, and amenorrhea, 73, 

76, 79 
Ectopic pregnancy, diagnosis of, 17 
Eflornithine hydrochloride, 91 
Ejaculatory failure, treatment of, 132 
Elcometrine, in oral contraceptives, 

162 

Embryo(s) 
“abandoned,” discarding of, 150 
cryopreservation of, 145, 148 
culture of, in in vitro fertilization, 

143–144 
ethical issues related to manipulation 
of, 150 
micromanipulation of, 145–146 

Embryo transfer (ET) 
with endometriosis, 121 
in in vitro fertilization, 144, 145f 

Emergency contraception, 167 
Empty-sella syndrome, 82–83 
Endocrine pathway, 3 
Endometrial ablation, 72 
Endometrial cancer, polycystic ovary 

syndrome and, 87 
Endometrial hyperplasia, 131 
hormone replacement therapy and risk 
of, 183 
treatment of, 134–135 

Endometriosis, 116–121 
classification of, 118f–119f 
diagnosis of, 117 
and infertility, 116, 121, 136 
signs and symptoms of, 116–117 
treatment of, 117–121, 120t, 136 

Endometritis, chronic, 131, 134 
Endometrium 
assessment of, with abnormal uterine 
bleeding, 70 
changes during menstrual cycle, 

60–61 
Epidermal growth factor, 7 
Epsilon-aminocaproic acid, 71 
Eskimos, adrenal hyperplasia in, 

110 

Estradiol 
measurement of, 10 
in perimenopause, 170 
potency of, 6 
transdermal, for premenstrual syn


drome, 66 
Estradiol cypionate, in injectable contraceptives, 
165 

Estriol 
versus estradiol, 6 
measurements of, 10 

Estrogen 
effects on cognition, 172 
effects on reproductive tract, 60 
mechanism of action, 6, 7f 
and menstrual cycle, 51 
in oral contraceptives, 162 
and pubertal maturation, 7 

Estrogen (continued) 

therapy with 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for osteoporosis, 179, 180t 

in transdermal patch, 166 
Estrogen receptors, 6, 7 
Estrogen replacement therapy 

clinical indications for, 177–182 
compliance issues with, 183 
for gonadal dysgenesis, 45 
with hyperprolactinemia, 81 
after menopause, 176–177, 176b 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 95 
and protection from cardiovascular 

disease, 180–182 
risks and contraindications with, 


183–184 
ET. See Embryo transfer 
Ethical issues 

in genomic medicine, 30 

in infertility management, 149–153 
Ethical principles, 149b 
Ethinyl estradiol 

in emergency contraceptive pills, 167 
in oral contraceptives, 162, 163 
Ethnicity and genetic disorders, 125. 

See also Race 
Eugenics, positive, 152 
Eugonadism, 46–47 
Euploidy, 19 
Evening primrose oil, 186t 
Exercise 

and amenorrhea, 73, 76 

therapeutic 
with dysmenorrhea, 116 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 

92 
Exons, 18 

F 

Fertinex, 138t 
Fetal aneuploidy, women at increased 

risk of, identifying, 10 
Fetus, sexual differentiation in, 33–34 
FHA. See Functional hypothalamic 

amenorrhea 
Fimbriolysis, 135 
Fimbrioplasty, 135 
Finasteride, 92 
FISH. See Fluorescent in situ hybridiza


tion 
Fludrocortisone therapy, for adrenal 
insufficiency, 113 
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), 
25–27, 27f 
Fluoxetine, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Flutamide, 91, 92 
Follicle(s) 

atresia of, 51–52, 58 
dominant, development of, 57 
oocyte growth in, 52–53 
structure and classification of, 51, 52f 


192 INDEX 

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
ovulation induction with, 138, 138t 
levels of 

elevated, on cycle day 3, 157 
in hypothalamic amenorrhea, 75 
measurement of, 15–16 
in perimenopause, 170 
in polycystic ovary syndrome, 86 

mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
during menstrual cycle, 57–60, 59f 
mutations in, as cause of premature 

ovarian failure, 94 
Follistatin, 53 
Follistim, 138t 
fos proto-oncogene, 23 
Fragile X syndrome, 22, 23 
Frameshift mutation, 23 
French-Canadian descent, heritable dis


eases in, 125 
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone 
Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea 

(FHA), 73 
behavioral factors in, 76 
diagnosis of, 77 
luteinizing hormone pulse patterns in, 

75, 75f 
pathogenesis of, 74f, 75–76 
treatment of, 77–79 


G 

G protein, 3 
Gallbladder disease, hormone replacement 
therapy and risk of, 183 
Gamete donation, 133. See also Ovum 

donation 
disclosure versus privacy in, 151 
patient selection, 146 


Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), 

147 
Ganirelix acetate, 137t 
Gene(s), 18 

cancer-causing, 23 
mutations of, types of, 23–24 
structure of, 19f 


Gene therapy, 29–30 
Genetic attributes, enhancement of, 152 
Genetic counseling, indications for, 125b 
Genetic diagnosis, preimplantation, 145, 

148 

Genetic diseases 
diagnosis of, 28 
inheritance of, 21–23 
prenatal diagnosis of, 28–29 
screening for, 125 

Genital tuberculosis, 131 

Genitalia, ambiguous, 35–37 
diagnosis of, 35–37, 37b 
differential diagnosis of, 35, 36f 
etiology of, 35 
21-hydroxylase deficiency and, 108, 110f 
physical examination for, 37 
therapy for, 37 

Genomic imprints, 22 

Genomic medicine, 28–30 
Germline mosaicism, 23 
Gestational trophoblastic disease, diag


nosis of, 17 
Gestodene, in oral contraceptives, 163 
GIFT. See Gamete intrafallopian transfer 
Ginkgo, 185 
Ginseng, 186t 
Glucocorticoids, for hyperthyroidism, 104 
Glucose intolerance, with polycystic 

ovary syndrome, 88 
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing hor


mone 
Gonadal dysgenesis, 43–46 
Gonadarche, 38 
Gonadotropin(s), exogenous 

estradiol level after, 10 
with infertility, 130, 133, 134 
and multiple gestations, 151 
ovulation induction with, 138–139, 143 
preparations of, 138t 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
analogues of, 4 
hypothalamic secretion of, 54–57 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
pulsatile administration of, 133, 139–140 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH) agonists, 4–5 
ovarian stimulation with, 143 
synthesis of, 5 
trade name for, 137t 
treatment with 


for androgen excess, 90 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for precocious puberty, 43 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 
prior to endometrial ablation, 72 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH) pulse generator, 73–74 
Gonads, sexual differentiation of, 32, 32f 
Gonal-F, 138t 
Granulosa cell(s), 53, 58, 60 
Granulosa cell tumors, 10, 89 
Graves’ disease, 100 

neonatal, 103f, 104 
treatment of, 103–104 
Growth factors 
in intraovarian signaling systems, 
53–54 
in reproductive cycles, 7–8 
Growth hormone, therapy with, for 

gonadal dysgenesis, 45 
Growth-hormone secreting tumors, 82 
Guanine nucleotide-binding protein 

(G protein), 3 
Gynoid obesity, 88 

H 

HAIR-AN syndrome. See 
Hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, 
and acanthosis nigricans 
syndrome 

hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin 

Health care provider, ethical issues con


cerning, 151 
Hilar cells, 52 
Hilus cell tumors, 89 
Hirsutism, 83f, 83–84 

evaluation of, 91 
hormone levels in, 12, 13–14 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels in, 

12 

testosterone levels in, 12 
idiopathic, 90 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
during pregnancy, 90 
treatment of, 91–92, 93, 110–111 
virilization and, 85 

HLA. See Human leukocyte antigen 
hMG. See Human menopausal 
gonadotropin 

Hormone(s). See also specific types 
action of, 3–8 
duration of exposure versus dose, 6 
measurements of, 8–18 
ovarian, 53, 54f, 55f 
in pubertal development, 38 

Hormone replacement therapy. See also 

Estrogen replacement therapy 
clinical indications for, 177–182 
compliance issues with, 183 
versus phytoestrogens, 182 
risks and contraindications with, 

183–184 
HPA axis. See Hypothalamic–pituitary– 
adrenal axis 
HPO axis. See Hypothalamic–pituitary– 
ovarian axis 

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 
false-positive test results, 18, 18f 
measurement of levels of, 17–18 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
for ovulation induction, 137t 

Human genome mapping project, 28–30 
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) sharing, 
and pregnancy loss, 159 

Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) 
composition, 138t 
ovulation induction with, 138 

Human parathyroid hormone, 179 
Humegon, 138t 
Hybridization, 24 
Hydrocortisone therapy, for adrenal 

insufficiency, 113 
Hydrosonography, 130–131 
11-Hydroxylase deficiency, 35, 37 
21-Hydroxylase deficiency, 35, 

106–108, 109f 
and ambiguous genitalia, 108, 110f 
diagnosis of, 110 

17a -Hydroxyprogesterone 
elevated levels of, 35 
measurement of levels of, 12–13 

Hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, 
and acanthosis nigricans (HAIRAN) 
syndrome, 89 


INDEX 193 

Hyperemesis gravidarum, hyperthyroidism 
with, 104 
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 

43–46 
Hyperinsulinemia, 084 
Hyperprolactinemia, 14, 79–83 

causes of, 15, 79, 79b 
evaluation of, 80 
treatment of, 80–81, 140 


Hyperthecosis, 89 

Hyperthyroidism, 102–104 
causes of, 102 
diagnosis of, 103 
postpartum, 104–105 
in pregnancy, 104 
signs and symptoms of, 102b 
treatment of, 103–104 

Hypogonadism, 43 
chromosomal causes of, 21 
hypergonadotropic, 43–46 
hypogonadotropic, 46 

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 46 
Hypophysectomy, transsphenoidal, 81 
Hypothalamic amenorrhea, 73–79 

behavioral factors in, 76 
diagnosis of, 77 
luteinizing hormone pulse patterns 

with, 75, 75f 
pathogenesis of, 74f, 75–76 
treatment of, 77–79 


Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) 
axis, 38 
Hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian (HPO) 

axis, 38, 42 
Hypothalamus, function of, 74 
Hypothyroidism, 100–102 

causes of, 100–101 
congenital, 101, 101f 
diagnosis of, 101 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 

95–96 
postpartum, 104–105 
and pregnancy loss, 157 
signs and symptoms of, 102b 
treatment of, 101–102 


Hysterectomy 
psychologic impact of, 171 
therapeutic 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71, 

72 
for endometriosis, 120 
for premenstrual syndrome, 66 

Hysterosalpingography, 130, 130f, 131, 
131f, 136, 142 

Hysteroscopy 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 70, 72 
for uterine factor infertility, 131, 134, 

135f 

Ibuprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
IGF. See Insulinlike growth factor 
IGF-binding proteins, 54 

In vitro fertilization (IVF), 141, 142–148 
candidates for, 142 
COH-IUI compared with, 141 
complications of, 144–145 
embryo culture in, 143–144 
embryo transfer in, 144, 145f 
with endometriosis, 121 
insemination in, 143 
multiple pregnancies with, 144–145, 

151 
oocyte retrieval in, 143, 144f 
ovarian stimulation and monitoring in, 

143 
precycle tests in, 142 
salpingectomy with, 135 
success rate reporting in, 150 
success rates of, 146–147 
with unexplained infertility, 136 


Incidentaloma, 82 
Infections, diagnosis of, genome 
sequencing and, 30 
Infectious agents, and pregnancy loss, 
159 

Infertility, 124–153 
with adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
cervical factor, 130, 134 
with endometriosis, 116, 121, 136 
evaluation of, 16, 124–132, 142b 
genetic causes of, 29t 
history and physical examination with, 

125, 126b 
male factor, 126–128, 132–133 
management of, 132–136 


ethical issues in, 149–153 

future directions in, 148–149 
ovarian factor, 128–130, 133–134 
peritoneal factor, 132, 136 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
tubal factor, 131–132, 135 
unexplained, 136 
uterine factor, 130–131, 134 

Inheritance 
of genetic diseases, 21–23, 28 
nonclassic patterns of, 22–23 

Inhibin, 53, 57, 57f 
Insulin resistance 
in polycystic ovary syndrome, 85, 87, 
92–93 

and pregnancy loss, 157 
Insulin-sensitizing agents, 140 
Insulinlike growth factor (IGF), 7 
Interferon-d , and pregnancy loss, 159 
Intracrine factor, 3 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection, 145, 

146, 146f 
Intrauterine devices (IUDs), hormonereleasing, 
165–166 

Intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
with cervical factor infertility, 130, 134 
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 

with, 140–141 
with male factor infertility, 133 


Introns, 18 
Iron-deficiency anemia, hormonal contraception 
and decrease in, 164 
Iron therapy, with abnormal uterine 

bleeding, 71 
Isoflavones, 184 
Isotretinoin, 92 
IUDs. See Intrauterine devices 
IUI. See Intrauterine insemination 
IVF. See In vitro fertilization 

J 

jun proto-oncogene, 23 

K 

Kallmann’s syndrome, 46, 56 
Kava, 185 
Kennedy’s disease, 49 
Ketoconazole, androgen-suppressive 

therapy with, 91 
Ketoprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 20, 21 

L 

Labioscrotal fusion, 37 
Laparoscopy 

diagnostic, 142 
with peritoneal infertility, 136 
with tubal infertility, 132 


operative 
for endometriosis, 120 
for gamete intrafallopian transfer, 

147 

Laser vaporization 
for endometriosis, 120 
for hair removal, 91 

Lavender, 185 
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy 

(LHON), 22 
Leiomyomas, and pregnancy loss, 158 
Leuprolide acetate, 137t 
Levonorgestrel 

in emergency contraceptive pills, 167 
implants, 166–167 
intrauterine devices, 165–166 

Levothyroxine, 101–102, 104 
Leydig’s cell hypoplasia, 35, 46 
LH. See Luteinizing hormone 
LHON. See Leber’s hereditary optic neu


ropathy 
Libido, hormonal changes and, 12 
Liddle test, 14, 82 
Lignans, 184–185 
Liver disease 

as contraindication to estrogen therapy, 
183 
oral contraceptives and, 163 
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, 
53 
Lubs syndrome, 49 


194 INDEX 

Lung cancer, risks of, versus cardiovas


cular disease, 175f, 176 
Lupron, 137t 
Luteal phase, 58–60 

inhibin levels in, 57, 57f 
premenstrual syndrome in, 61–66 

Luteal phase defect 
diagnosis of, 11, 128 
and pregnancy loss, 157 

Luteinization, 58 

Luteinizing hormone (LH) 
measurement of levels of, 16–17 
mechanism of action of, 3–5, 4f 
and ovarian steroidogenesis, 53 
pulse patterns, with hypothalamic 

amenorrhea, 75, 75f 
Lyonization, 33 

M 

McCune–Albright syndrome, 3, 42 
Macular degeneration and hormone 
replacement therapy, 182 
Magnesium supplementation, for premenstrual 
syndrome, 64 
Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser 

syndrome, 47 
Meditation, 185 
Mediterranean descent, heritable diseases 

in, 125 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
in oral contraceptives, 162 
treatment with 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for premenstrual syndrome, 65t, 

66 
Mefenamic acid, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Megestrol acetate, in oral contraceptives, 

162 
Meiosis, 20, 33f 
MELAS. See Mitochondrial myopathy, 

encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, 
and strokelike symptoms 

Menarche 
age of, 38 
delayed, 43, 46 

Menopause, 169–186 
alternative therapies for, 184–185, 

186t 
atrophic changes in, 174 
and bone loss, 172–174, 173f 
cardiovascular changes in, 172 
and cognition, 172 
estradiol levels after, 10 
follicle-stimulating hormone levels 

after, 15, 16 
management of, 174–184 
nomenclature for, 169t 
physiology of, 169–174 
premature. See Premature ovarian 

failure 
psychophysiologic effects of, 171–172 
testosterone production after, 11 
vasomotor symptoms of, 171 

Menstrual cycle, 51 
anovulatory, ovulatory, and luteal 
insufficiency, 78f 
dysfunction in, hypothyroidism and, 

101 
follicular phase of, 11, 57 
gonadotropin regulation of, 57–60, 59f 
luteal phase in, 58–60 

inhibin levels in, 57, 57f 

premenstrual syndrome in, 61–66 
ovulation in, 58 
steroid production during, 53 

Menstruation 
abnormal, 67–73 
disturbances, in perimenopause, 171 
pain with (dysmenorrhea), 115–116 

Mental health, menopause and, 171 
MERRF. See Myoclonus epilepsy with 

ragged red fibers 
Mestranol, in oral contraceptives, 162 
Metformin, 140 

for ovarian factor infertility, 133 

for polycystic ovary syndrome, 92–93 
Methimazole, 103, 104 
Methotrexate therapy, for ectopic preg


nancy, 17 
Metrodin, 138t 
Mind-body medicine, 184, 185 
Minoxidil, 92 
MIS. See Müllerian-inhibiting substance 
Miscarriage(s). See also Pregnancy loss 

diagnosis of, 17 

use of term, 156 
Missense mutation, 23 
Mitochondrial inheritance, 22 
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, 

lactic acidosis, and strokelike 

symptoms (MELAS), 22 
Mitosis, 19 
Mitotane, for Cushing’s syndrome, 112 
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 21 
Molar pregnancy, 18 
Molecular genetic tools, 24–28 
Moliminal symptoms, 61, 64 
Monosomy, 19, 20 
Müllerian aplasia, 47–48 

diagnosis of, 47 
treatment of, 48 
Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS), 
33, 34 
Multiple pregnancy 
with controlled ovarian hyperstimula


tion, 141, 141f 
with in vitro fertilization, 144–145, 151 
with ovulation induction, 137, 139 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
with reproductive technologies, 

150–151 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 131 
Mycoplasma hominis, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 
Myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red 
fibers (MERRF), 22 

Myoma(s) 
and infertility, 130, 134 
intrauterine submucosal, 131f 

Myomectomy, therapeutic 
with abnormal uterine bleeding, 72 
with uterine factor infertility, 134 

Myotonic dystrophy, 23, 24 

N 

Naltrexone, for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 
79 
Natural killer cells, and pregnancy loss, 

159 
Neosalpingostomy, 135 
Nitrogen mustard, and ovarian function, 

20 
Nonsense mutation, 23 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 

(NSAIDs) 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for hyperthyroidism, 104 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 

Normegestrol, in oral contraceptives, 162 
Norplant, 166–167 
Novarel, 137t 
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antiinflam


matory drugs 
Nuclear antigens, and pregnancy loss, 
158 

O 

Obesity 
android pattern of, 88 
gynoid pattern of, 88 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87, 92 

Online Mendelian inheritance in Man 
database, 28 

Oocyte(s) 
cryopreservation of, 148–149 
growth of, 52–53 
micromanipulation of, 145–146 
retrieval, in in vitro fertilization, 143, 

144f 
Oophorectomy, for endometriosis, 120 
Oral contraceptives 

adverse effects of, 163–164 
combination, 162–164 
contraindications to, 163 
interaction with other medications, 

163, 164b 
noncontraceptive benefits of, 164b 
progestin-only pill, 164–165 
therapy with 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
androgen-suppressive, 90 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
with in vitro fertilization, 143 
after menopause, 176b 
for premenstrual syndrome, 66 


INDEX 195 

Ornithine decarboxylase, inhibition of, 91 
Osteopenia, 178 
Osteoporosis, 172, 173f, 178–180 

hyperthyroidism and, 103 
risk factors for, 178 
screening for, 178–179 
treatment of, 179–180 


agents for, 180t 
with corticosteroids, 106 


Ovarian cancer, mutations in transforming 
growth factor b signaling 
pathway and, 8 

Ovarian cysts, and abnormal bleeding, 70 

Ovarian drilling 
in treatment of hirsutism, 93 
in treatment of infertility, 133 

Ovarian failure 
autoimmune, 95 
diagnosis of, 16 
premature, 93–96, 94b, 94f 
radiation and, 20 

Ovarian hyperstimulation, controlled, 
with intrauterine insemination, 
140–141 

Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
classification of, 139t 
management of, 139b 
ovum donation and, 148 
risk of 

with ovulation induction, 137, 
138–139 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
Ovarian reserve, testing of, 16, 128–130, 

129f 
Ovarian tissue, cryopreservation of, 149 
Ovariectomy, for premenstrual syndrome, 

66 

Ovaries, 51–54 
androgen-secreting tumors of, 88–89 
differentiation of, 33 
intraovarian signaling systems, 53–54 
steroidogenic pathway in, 53, 54f, 55f 

Ovulation 
detection of, 16 
follicular development during, 10 
induction of, 133, 136–141 

agents used for, 137–140, 137t 
for control of anovulatory bleeding, 

71 
with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 

in menstrual cycle, 58 
progesterone levels after, 11 
suppression of, to treat premenstrual 

syndrome, 64 
Ovulation-predictor kits, 16–17, 128 
Ovulatory dysfunction, 77, 78f, 128–130 

classification of, 136–137 
treatment of, 133–134 


Ovum donation, 147–148 
compensation for, 151 
and ovarian hyperstimulation syn


drome, 148 

Ovum donation (continued) 
to postmenopausal women, 152 
to recipients with Turner’s syndrome, 

142 
risks in, 151 
success rates with, 95 


Oxandrolone, for gonadal dysgenesis, 45 

P 

Para-aminomethylbenzoic acid, 71 
Paracrine factor, 3, 7 
Parlodel, 137t 
Paroxetine, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Passion flower, 185 
PCOS. See Polycystic ovary syndrome 
PCR. See Polymerase chain reactions 
Pelvic inflammatory disease 

and peritoneal infertility, 132 
and tubal infertility, 131 
Pergolide mesylate, for hyperprolac


tinemia, 81 
Pergonal, 138t 
Perimenopause, 169, 169t, 170–171 
Pheochromocytoma, adrenal medulla, 113 
Phospholipids, autoantibodies to, and 

pregnancy loss, 158, 159t 
Phytoestrogens, 182, 184–185 
Pioglitazone, 140 
Pituitary disorders, 79–83, 111 
PMDD. See Premenstrual dysphoric 

disorder 
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome 
POF. See Premature ovarian failure 
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), 

85–88 
clinical features of, 86–87 
diagnosis of, 17, 85–86 
differential diagnosis of, 12, 85, 110 
with eugonadism, 47 
infertility associated with, treatment 

of, 133 
insulin resistance in, 85, 87, 92–93 
long-term sequelae of, 87–88 
management of, 95–96 
tests for, 86, 87t 

Polymerase chain reactions (PCR), 24, 26f 
Polymorphisms, 28 
Polyps, endometrial, 134, 158, 158f 
Postcoital test, 130, 142 
Posthumous reproduction, 152 
Postmenopausal women 

abnormal uterine bleeding in, 73 
ovum donation to, 152 
treatment for, 176b 


Postpartum thyroid disease, 104–105 
Prader–Willi syndrome, 22 
Precocious puberty, 42f, 42–43 
Preconceptional counseling, 143b 
Preconceptional screening, 125b, 142b 
Pregnancy 

abnormal, diagnosis of, 17–18 
estradiol levels during, 10 


Pregnancy (continued) 
hirsutism and virilization during, 90 
hyperthyroidism in, 104 
multiple. See Multiple pregnancy 
progesterone levels during, 11 
prolactin levels during, 15 
radiation exposure during, 20 
testosterone levels during, 12 
thyroid hormone deficiency in, 102 

Pregnancy loss, 156–160 
alloimmune abnormalities and, 159 
autoimmune causes of, 158 
chromosomal abnormalities and, 21, 

156–157 
congenital uterine abnormalities and, 

157 
definition of, 156 
endocrinologic causes of, 157 
evaluation for, 159–160 
genetic causes of, 156–157 
recurrent 


diagnosis and management of, 160t 
etiology of, 156–159 
follow-up for, 160 

risk of recurrence of, 156 
Pregnyl, 137t 
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis, 145, 148 
Premature ovarian failure (POF), 93–96, 

94f 
diagnosis, 93–94 
etiology of, 93–95, 94b 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
therapy for, 95 


Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
(PMDD), 61, 62, 62b 

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 61–66 
diagnosis of, 62, 62b 
symptom diary in, 61, 63f 
symptoms of, 61–64, 62t 
treatment of, 64–66, 65t 

Profasi, 137t 

Progesterone 
effects on reproductive tract, 60 
measurement of, 10–11 
secretion during luteal phase, 60 
therapy with, for premenstrual syn


drome, 64 
Progestin(s) 
in combination oral contraceptives, 
162–163 
in estrogen replacement therapy, 

176–177, 176b, 177b 
in transdermal patch, 166 
treatment with 


for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
Progestin challenge test, for premature 
ovarian failure, 95 
Progestin-containing intrauterine 

devices, 71 
Progestin-only pill, 164–165 
Progestin replacement therapy, for poly


cystic ovary syndrome, 95 


196 INDEX 

Prolactin 
measurement of levels of, 14–15 
regulation dysfunction. See Hyperpro


lactinemia 
Prolactinomas, 79–81, 90 
Propylthiouracil, 103, 104 
Prostaglandins, 113–115 

biosynthesis of, 114f 
mechanism of action, 114–115 
receptors and signal transduction, 115t 
role in reproduction, 115b 
structures of, 113f 

Protein hormones. See also specific 
hormones 

measurement of levels of, 14–18 

mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
Proto-oncogenes, 23 
Pseudohermaphroditism, 35 
Psychiatric disorders, versus premenstrual 

syndrome, 61–62 

Puberty, 38–41 
abnormalities of, 42–49 
delayed, 43, 46, 46b 
dyssynchronous, 47–48 
estrogen in, 7 
follicle-stimulating hormone levels in, 

15 
hormonal levels in, 38 
precocious, 42f, 42–43 
sequence of, 38, 39t 
Tanner staging of, 39–41, 40f, 41f 
testosterone levels in, 11 
timing of, 38, 39f 

Pubic hair development 
delayed, 47 
precocious, 42 
Tanner staging of, 41, 41f 

Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 64 

Q 

Qi Gong treatment, 184 

R 

Race 
and bone mass, 173 
and genetic disorders, 125 
and puberty, timing of, 38 

Radiation, and genetic disease, 20 
Radioactive iodine therapy, 104 
Radioiodine, 103 
Raloxifene, 182 

biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 
in treatment of osteoporosis, 179–180, 

180t 
ras proto-oncogene, 23 
5a -Reductase inhibitors, 91–92 
Reifenstein’s syndrome, 49 
Reproductive freedom, right to, 149–150 
Reproductive process, components of, 

124 
Reproductive years, estradiol measurements 
during, 10 

Repronex, 138t 
RET proto-oncogene, 23 
Retinoids, 92 
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) 

in genes, 19f 
structure of, 18 
Rifampin, interaction with oral contra


ceptives, 163 
Risedronate, for osteoporosis, 180t 
RNA. See Ribonucleic acid 
Robertsonian translocation, 21 
Rofecoxib, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Rokitansky syndrome, 46 
Rosiglitazone, 140 

S 

St. John’s wort, 185, 186t 
Saline ultrasonography, 130–131, 132 
Salivary measurements, of steroid levels, 

9–10, 14 
Salpingectomy, with in vitro fertilization, 

135 
Salpingitis isthmica nodosa, 131 
Selective estrogen receptor modulators 

(SERMs), 3 
biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 


Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 
65t 

Semen analysis, 126–127, 127t, 142 
SERMs. See Selective estrogen receptor 

modulators 
Serophene, 137t 
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, 89 
Sertraline, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Sex-determining region of Y chromosome 
(SRY), 33, 34 
Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), 

10 
Sex hormone-binding protein, 5 
Sex reversal, dosage-sensitive, 46 
Sex selection, 151, 152 
Sexual abuse, and abnormal bleeding, 70 
Sexual differentiation 

in fetus, 33–34 

gonadal, 32, 32f 
Sexual dysfunction, diagnosis of, 12 
SHBG. See Sex hormone-binding 

globulin 

Signal transduction pathways, 3 
of growth factors, 7–8 
tissue specific, 7 

Silver’s syndrome, 42 
Single nucleotide polymorphisms, 28 
Smads, 8, 9f 
Smoking 

and menopause, 169 
and pregnancy loss, risk of, 159 
Society for Assisted Reproductive 
Technology, 142 
Somatomedins, 54 

Sonohysterography, 70, 130–131 
Southeast-Asian descent, heritable 

diseases in, 125 
Southern blot analysis, 24, 25f 
Sperm 

cryopreservation of, 148 
donor, insemination with, 133 
intracytoplasmic injection of, 145, 

146, 146f 
Spironolactone, 91, 92 
SRY. See Sex-determining region of Y 

chromosome 
Stem cell research, 150 
Sterilization reversal, 135 
Steroid hormones. See also specific 

hormones 
adrenal secretion of, 106, 107f 
effects on female reproductive tract, 

60–61 
measurements of, 8–10 
mechanism of action, 5f, 5–7 


nonclassic, 6–7, 8f 

updated model of, 7f 
ovarian, 53, 54f, 55f 
secretion by corpus luteum, 58, 60 
therapy with, for antiphospholipid 

antibody syndrome, 158 

Stress 
and hypothalamic amenorrhea, 76 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Subdermal contraceptive implants 
(Norplant), 166–167 
Surrogacy, ethical issues involving, 151, 

152 
Swyer syndrome, 21, 45 
Synechiae, intrauterine, 131f, 134, 158, 

158f 

T 

Tamoxifen 
biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 

Tanner staging of puberty, 39–41, 40f, 

41f 
Tay-Sachs disease, 23 
Testes, differentiation of, 33 
Testosterone, 83 

measurement of levels of, 11–12 

and sexual differentiation in fetus, 33 
TET. See Tubal embryo transfer 
TGFb . See Transforming growth factor b 
Theca cells, in corpus luteum, 58 
Theca externa, 51, 52f 
Theca interna, 51, 52f 
Thelarche, premature, 42 
Therapeutic touch, 184 
Thiazolidinediones, 92–93, 140 
Thrombophilic problems, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 
Thrombosis, risk of 
hormone replacement therapy and, 
183 
oral contraceptives and, 163 


INDEX 197 

Thromboxane A2, 115 
Thyroid antigens, and pregnancy loss, 
158 
Thyroid disease(s), 100–105. See also 

Hyperthyroidism; Hypothyroidism 
diagnosing, 100 
postpartum, 104–105 
signs and symptoms, 102b 

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 100 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
tumor secreting, 82 

Thyroxine (T3), 100 

Tibolone 
for osteoporosis, 180t 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t, 

66 
Tranexamic acid, 71 
Transdermal contraceptive patch, 166 
Transforming growth factor b (TGFb ), 

7, 8, 9f 
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, 81 
Triiodothyronine (T3), 100 
Trimegestone, in oral contraceptives, 

162 
Triplet repeat expansion, 23–24 
Trisomy, 19, 20, 21 
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), 20, 21 
Trophoblastic disease, evaluation of, 

18 
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
Tubal embryo transfer (TET), 147 
Tubal occlusive disease, 131 
Tuberculosis, genital, 131 
Tuberculous endometritis, 134 
Tumor necrosis factor-a , and pregnancy 

loss, 159 

Tumor suppressor genes, mutations of, 23 

Turner’s syndrome, 43–44, 44f, 45 
egg donation recipients with, 142 
karyotype for, 21 

U 

Ultrasonography, diagnostic, 130, 

131–132 
Uniparental disomy, 22 
Ureaplasma urealyticum, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 

Uterine abnormalities 
and infertility, 130, 130f, 131f 
congenital, and pregnancy loss, 157, 

157f 

Uterine bleeding, abnormal, 69–73 
etiology of, 69–70, 69b 
evaluation of, 70–71 
in postmenopausal women, 73 
treatment of, 71–72 

Uterus, congenital absence of, 46, 47 

V 

Vagina 
congenital absence of, 46, 47–48 
hemiobstructed, 48 

Vaginal atresia, 48 
Vaginal ring, contraceptive, 166 
Valerian, 185, 186t 
Vas deferens, congenital bilateral 

absence of, 127 
Vascular endothelial growth factor, 7 
Virilization, 85 

with 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 110f 
during pregnancy, 90 

Visual impairment 
menopause and, 182 
pituitary tumors and, 82 

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), 64 

W 

Waist-to-hip ratio, 88 

Weight gain, at menopause, 172 

Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene, 45 

World Health Organization 
classification of ovulatory disorders, 
136–137 
criteria for normal sperm morphology, 
126–127, 127t 
definition of osteopenia and osteoporosis, 
178 

X 

X chromosome 
abnormalities of, and polycystic ovary 
syndrome, 95 
fragile X syndrome, 22, 23 
privation of, 43–44, 45 

Y 

Y chromosome 
microdeletions of sections of, 128, 146 
physical map of, 34f 
sex-determining region of, 33, 34 

Yoga, 185 

Yuzpe regimen, 167 

Z 

Zona granulosa, 51, 52f 
Zona pellucida, 51, 52f, 53 
Zygote intrafallopian transfer, 147 


Ultrasound of Congenital 
Fetal Anomalies 

Ultrasound of Congenital 
Fetal Anomalies 
Differential Diagnosis and Prognostic Indicators 
Dario Paladini MD 
Head, Fetal Cardiology Unit 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
University Federico II of Naples 
Naples 
Italy 
Paolo Volpe MD 
Head, Fetal Medicine Unit 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Hospital Di Venere 
Bari 
Italy 

© 2007 Informa UK Ltd 
First published in the United Kingdom in 2007 by Informa Healthcare, Telephone House, 69–77 Paul Street, London, 
EC2A 4LQ. Informa Healthcare is a trading division of Informa UK Ltd. Registered Office, 37/41 Mortimer Street, 
London W1T 3JH. Registered in England and Wales Number 1072954. 
Tel: +44 (0)20 7017 5000 
Fax: +44 (0)20 7017 6336 
Website: www.informahealthcare.com 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of the 
publisher or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of any 
licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP. 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that all owners of copyright material have been acknowledged in this 
publication, we would be glad to acknowledge in subsequent reprints or editions any omissions brought to our attention. 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that drug doses and other information are presented accurately in this 
publication, the ultimate responsibility rests with the prescribing physician. Neither the publishers nor the authors can 
be held responsible for errors or for any consequences arising from the use of information contained herein. For detailed 
prescribing information or instructions on the use of any product or procedure discussed herein, please consult the 
prescribing information or instructional material issued by the manufacturer. 
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Data available on application 
ISBN 10: 0 415 41444 X 
ISBN 13: 978 0 415 41444 9 
Distributed in North and South America by 
Taylor & Francis 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW, (Suite 300) 
Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA 
Within Continental USA 
Tel: 1(800) 272 7737; Fax: 1(800) 374 3401 
Outside Continental USA 
Tel: (561) 994 0555; Fax: (561)361 6018 
E-mail: orders@crcpress.com 
Distributed in the rest of the world by 
Thomson Publishing Services 
Cheriton House 
North Way 
Andover, Hampshire SP10 5BE, UK 
Tel: +44 (0)1264 332424 
E-mail: tps.tandfsalesorder@thomson.com 
Composition by C&M Digitals (P) Ltd, Chennai, India 
Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt Ltd 

Dedications 
To my father and Carmen 
To my father, Pia and my daughters, Grazia and Francesca 
v 

Contents 
Preface ix 
Foreword by Yves Ville xi 
Acknowledgments xiii 
1. Anatomic survey of the fetus and its relationship to gestational 
age – what can be seen and cannot be seen 1 
2. Central and peripheral nervous system anomalies 11 
3. Craniofacial and neck anomalies 63 
4. Cystic hygroma and non-immune hydrops fetalis 103 
5. Congenital heart disease 113 
6. Thoracic anomalies 183 
7. Anomalies of the gastrointestinal tract and abdominal wall 207 
8. Urinary tract anomalies 231 
9. Skeletal dysplasias and muscular anomalies: a diagnostic algorithm 267 
10. Chromosomal and non-chromosomal syndromes 301 
Appendix 337 
Index 353 
vii 

Preface 
‘All you were craving to find in a textbook and could not’: this could represent the philosophy of this 
volume. We tried to answer the questions which remained unanswered during our training in fetal medicine 
some 20 years ago. In fact, this book was conceived with the purpose to provide some help to the 
operators confronted everyday with the challenging task of ultrasound diagnosis of fetal malformations. 
In our early experience with fetal ultrasound, we have felt on our skin the unpleasant sensation of looking 
at something unusual or wrong without been able to tell what it is, unable to put a name to it. The 
most frequently asked questions with which the fetal medicine trainee/expert is confronted with everyday 
are: ‘Is the finding real or merely an artefact’? ‘Is the diagnosis correct’? ‘Is it hereditary’? ‘Is it correctable’? 
‘Which other lesions should it be differentiated from’? ‘Which are the management options 
and what is the prognosis?’ However, to be able to find the description of an abnormal ultrasound finding 
in a textbook, one generally has to search by the definite diagnosis…which has not been made yet! 
This uneasy feeling was the first factor that pushed us to design this volume in its present format, i.e. 
with an ample part dedicated to fetal anomalies ‘by scanning view’. We have tired to describe, for all 
major ultrasound planes – organ after organ – what can be considered as a normal view and what can 
not; in other words how each particular ultrasound view can differ from its normal appearance and what 
are the corresponding diagnoses. From ultrasound sign to final diagnosis is the mission of this book, for 
it is in this way the diagnostic process goes and not the other way round. To further ease the consultation 
process, we have included plenty of illustrated diagnostic flowcharts. 
Another wish of our training days was to actually see the malformed babies, and not just imagine them 
on the basis of the ultrasound findings. However, despite the number of textbooks published on fetal 
anomalies since those days, in very few are we able to find a detailed echoanatomic correlation. Relatively 
few images of specimens are given to illustrate the real aspect of major malformations altering the external 
aspect of the fetus. This, we felt, was another issue we strongly wanted to deal with in detail. As a result a 
whole imaging archive, covering years and years of pictures shot just after termination of pregnancy to 
illustrate rare and less rare abnormalities has been included in the present volume, taking care to portray 
the anomaly/abnormal feature as it appears on ultrasound. 
Finally, everybody working in prenatal diagnosis knows that this represents a multidisciplinary field in 
which genetics, neonatology, human dysmorphology, fetal medicine, pediatric and cardiac surgery comes 
together in order to provide the unfortunate couple with a reliable estimate of the diagnosis, the cause of 
the anomaly, the possible treatments if available, the chances of survival, and the recurrence risk in subsequent 
pregnancies. This is why, in the second part of each chapter, the single malformations are treated in 
detail, providing the key information regarding all the above mentioned items in a structured, readerfriendly 
way. 
At the end, if the reader was found in this book at least some of the items he/she was craving to find in a 
textbook and could not, it would mean that our training, and trainers have taught us something. 
Dario Paladini 
Paolo Volpe 
ix 

Foreword 
FETAL IMAGING: A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE 
The first years of this century probably qualify as being mutational for fetal imaging, and this outstanding 
review of the ability and performance of fetal ultrasound imaging is being timely published. 
Screening and diagnosis are the two faces of fetal imaging. They differ mainly because of their indications, 
the level of expertise they require and, to a certain extent, the complexity of the technology supporting 
the imaging modality. These largely determine the availability of the investigation, its reproducibility 
and accuracy. The number of, and gestational age at which these examinations are performed are not driven 
only by technical and developmental factors, but also by economic and social considerations, as well as 
legal aspects surrounding termination of pregnancy. As a result, screening has moved towards earlier gestations 
while diagnostic accuracy is increasing at later gestations, when [TOP] is either not an options or has 
stopped being relevant to the management of the pregnancy. Ultrasound screening in pregnancy can be seen 
as the offer to check the largest number of pregnancies, by the largest number of operators for simple and 
reproducible criteria in order to make important choices on the management of pregnancy and delivery. 
Most established screening programs claim figures of around 40–70% sensitivity (for a 5% false-positive 
rate) for different conditions such as congenital heart defects and Down syndrome. However divergent 
their directions can be, both screening and diagnosis are demanding an ever increasing knowledge of fetal 
development and mastering of the technology. 
The impact of 3D ultrasound has gradually developed over and above that of a new look at already welldocumented 
fetal structures. Outside a small group of pioneers, promotion of 3D technology has perceived 
as an expensive and obsessive campaign to demonstrate that poor 2D images obtained with an inconveniently 
large transducer could be put together into a grumpy fetal face, to be presented as a breakthrough in 
fetal imaging. However, over the last 5 years this ultrasound modality has overcome these technical, as much 
as cultural challenges. Image quality has gained respect from the most demanding operators and the commercial 
often has become diverse and competitive. At the same time, 3D-champions have moved away from 
pretty faces and into virtual dissection of the relevant fetal anatomy. This approach is now continuously raising 
the level of expertise of diagnostic ultrasound and perhaps more importantly, it is proving to be a 
remarkable incentive and tool for education. 
At the beginning of this century, a multiplanar approach of ultrasound was mostly considered eccentric 
or unnecessary, and rarely was this concept seen as either innovative or logical. In the old days, registrars 
were often described as having either surgical or obstetric skills. However, many of us have noticed that we 
now also see ultrasound skills burgeoning in first year trainees and a five-year follow-up often proves as 
right. It is not by chance that ultrasound has gradually moved away from being an exclusive and select 
apprenticeship, to become a discipline that can be learned while providing the culture and the tools of quality 
assessment we have long been missing. The frontier between education and research is often subtle, 
especially owing to the critical importance of subjectivity and reproducibility, two extreme and antagonistic 
components of ultrasound examination. Education is therefore likely to remain the most significant individual 
contribution each one of us can make to the improvement of perinatal care. 
xi 

xii FOREWORD 
Screening and diagnosis address two different issues. However there is a continuum between them, so 
much so that it is often difficult to draw a clear separation line. One aspect can benefit from the other when 
this continuum transforms into a progressive, pragmatic and didactic approach of diagnosis. The diagnosis 
path is absent from most textbooks. The essence of this book, ‘from the ultrasound sign to the diagnosis’, 
clearly exposes these principles and makes it an invaluable help in the ultrasound room, as well as the being 
starting material for a through investigations of any particular anomaly or risk factors. The extensive use of 
illustrated flowcharts to highlight differential diagnoses, as well as identification of the abnormalities from 
specific ultrasound features, will become significant assets in prenatal diagnosis. 
Another strong point of this volume is the continuous effort to include 3D images for most diagnoses, 
and especially those that are most likely to benefit from this development, including cranial sutures, skeleton, 
fetal brain and heart. In fact, what was long seen as alien with the most uncertain future within the 3D 
family has become the most spectacular and dynamic field of research and development. The fetal heart 
remains the greatest fantasy in the ‘brain’ holding the transducer. STIC and all its by-products provide the 
best examples of both didactic and antiphobic tools that can help overcome the challenge fetal echocardiography 
remains to most sonologists and sonographers. The important distinctive feature of this book, in 
comparison with other textbooks presenting 3D ultrasound images, is that these are only included if they 
are an objective added value to the diagnosis or its demonstration to colleagues of other specialties 
involved. 3D rendered images of craniofacial and brain anomalies, or cast-like reconstructions of cardiac 
defects are shown only if they are useful and not just to demonstrate that 3D ultrasound can also make the 
diagnosis: there is no reference to 3D if the diagnosis can be made confidently by 2D ultrasound. 
Whether 3D will make important breakthroughs in ultrasound screening remains questionable. Fetal 
heart examination is likely to represent the most sensitive indicator of the effectiveness of screening policies. 
Although gestational age is a critical factor for performance, which makes different countries very unequal, 
a technique that is both highly educational and accessible to telemedicine is more likely to succeed. 
Finally, ultrasound-anatomical correlates presented side by side with 2D and/or 3D ultrasound images, 
and relevant details of specimens from termination of pregnancy from extensively documented cases are a 
great teaching tool. Rare chromosomal and non-chromosomal syndromes are also introduced and 
described using the same methodology, and are more likely to make an impact on the readers than the usual 
long and dry list of features usually encountered in these abnormalities. 
The only book worth sitting in our ultrasound rooms has long been the Smith’s Recognizable Patterns Of 
Human Malformation by Kenneth Lyons Jones for its ability to gather the critical number and description 
of the most common anomalies to be identified in utero. However the ultrasound part of the mutational era 
I was referring to in the introduction of this preface is best illustrated by this book that will soon become a 
classic of this century. 
Professor Yves Ville 
Editor in Chief of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Service de Gynecologie et Obstetrique 
CHI Bissy 
Université Paris Ouest St Bissy 
France 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank our colleagues and friends doctors Gianluca Campobasso, Valentina De Robertis, Gabriella 
Sglavo and Michele Vassallo for their valuable and fundamental help in retrieving all pictures and clinical files. 
We would also like to thank our friend, geneticist, Mattia Gentile. 
Finally, we would like to thank the following colleagues and units for providing us the MRI scans contained in this 
book: 
–Prof Marco Salvatore and Dr Mario Quarantelli 
Biostructure and Bioimaging Institute 
National Research Council 
Naples, Italy 
–Prof Maurizio Resta 
Dept of Neuroradiology 
SS Annuziata Hospital 
Taranto, Italy 
xiii 

In this first chapter of a book dedicated to the ultrasound 
diagnosis of fetal anomalies, we have decided 
to underscore the evolving nature of some lesions, paying 
attention to the gestational age at which the different 
abnormalities can be detected. In particular, Table 1.1 
shows the earliest detection period, the period in which 
the anatomic structure is confidently visualized and the 
anatomic structures that can be visualized only late in 
gestation (or only after birth) for developmental reasons. 
Another important premise regards the gestational age 
at which the anatomic scan should be performed. It is 
important to understand that different health politics and 
sociocultural factors influence this aspect of prenatal diagnosis: 
available funds, health politics, legislation regarding 
termination of pregnancy (not allowed; allowed only 
before viability; allowed also in the 3rd trimester, if severe 
anomalies are present). According to the way in which 
these factors interact, the ultrasound screening for congenital 
anomalies is carried out routinely or only on demand 
and in the 1st or the 2nd trimester. However, in most 
countries in which the national health system or insurance 
provide economic coverage for the anomaly screening, 
this is carried out in midtrimester, usually at 18–21 weeks’ 
gestation. A significant exception is Israel, where due to 
various factors, the anomaly scan is often anticipated to 
the end of the 1st trimester, by transvaginal ultrasound. 
Chapter 1 
Anatomic survey of the fetus and its 
relationship to gestational age – what 
can be seen and cannot be seen 
THE 12–14 WEEKS 
EXAMINATION (TABLE 1.2) 
Congenital anomalies can be divided into those clearly 
detectable at this gestational age and those which are 
not, with the latter group being detected only by experienced 
operators. 
Fetal head. The ossification of the calvarium is evident, on 
the transthalamic view, from 12 weeks of gestation 
onwards. Hence, anencephaly (Figure 1.1) can be reliably 
diagnosed at this gestational age. However, care should 
Table 1.1 This shows for each anatomic structure the 
earliest gestational age (blue +) at which it is possible 
to visualize it and the ideal gestational age (black +) for 
its visualization (the latter is identified on the basis of 
the best compromise between ease of recognition and 
diagnostic accuracy) 
12–14 19–21 >28 
Anatomic structure weeks weeks weeks 
Calvarium ++ + 
Cerebral midline 
and falx ++ + 
Cerebellum NP ++ 
Corpus callosum NP ++ + 
Gyri and sulci NP NP ++ 
Spine (NTD) + + 
Heart (4-chambers 
and outflows) + + 
Stomach + + 
Abdominal wall ++ + 
Kidney and bladder + + 
Limbs (long bones) ++ + 
Extremities ++ + 
NP, organs for which development is completed only 
relatively late in gestation; as a consequence their assessment 
earlier in gestation may not be possible. 
1 

be taken here, considering that the aspect of this lesion 
early in gestation is different from the classic 2ndtrimester 
aspect: in fact, at the end of the 1st trimester, the 
cerebral hemispheres are still present, although in direct 
contact with the amniotic fluid (exencephaly). By the 2nd 
trimester, the cerebral parenchyma has been destructed 
by repeated trauma against the uterine walls and by contact 
with the amniotic fluid; this transforms the exencephaly 
into anencephaly. The only anomalies that may 
sometimes give the same impression, early in gestation, 
are the skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe 
hypomineralization of the calvarium, such as achondrogenesis, 
osteogenesis imperfecta type II or hypophosphatasia 
(see Table 9.3 in Chapter 9): in this case, the 
skull may not be evident, but this is due to the lower calcium 
content. Another important issue to be considered is 
that at this gestational age, and until 18 weeks, the lower 
part of the cerebellar vermis has not yet developed. As a 
consequence, there is a physiologically wide communication 
between the fourth ventricle and the cisterna magna. 
Therefore, a false diagnosis of Dandy–Walker variant can 
be made if the normal times of the cerebellum development 
are not taken into consideration. This diagnosis 
should not be made until 18 weeks’ gestation, unless an 
evident cystic posterior fossa is detected. 
Another malformation that may be confidently diagnosed 
in the 1st trimester is holoprosencephaly. In fact, 
the falx is already present and evident on ultrasound at 
12 weeks of gestation, and therefore its absence, which is 
one of the features typical of alobar and semilobar holoprosencephaly, 
can be reliably detected (see Chapter 2). 
If we now consider the anomalies of the fetal neck, 
then nuchal translucency, cystic hygroma and 
hydrops should be taken into account. With regard 
to the cystic hygroma (Figure 1.2a), it should be considered 
that cases detected in the 1st trimester are etiologically 
different from those detected in the 2nd 
trimester, in terms of incidence and prevalence and 
type of chromsomal aberrations (see Chapter 4). 
Cystic hygroma represents a relatively simple diagnosis 
at 12–14 weeks’ gestation. Paradoxically, the more 
severe cases may fail to be diagnosed: in these cases, 
2 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 1.2 Congenital anomalies confidently detectable at 12–14 
weeks’ gestation. (a) Cystic hygroma, on the axial transthalamic view: 
the image demonstrates the conspicuous lymphangiectasia of the posterior 
neck region (arrowheads). (b) Omphalocele, with the liver 
(arrow) inside the sac; sagittal view. (c) Complete posterior urethral 
valves. The low magnification view demonstrates the huge megacystis 
that fills most of the abdomen; due to the extremely severe distension, 
the bladder (Bl has ruptured, producing urinary ascites (asc). 
a
b
c 
Figure 1.1 Congenital anomalies confidently detectable at 12–14 
weeks’ gestation: anencephaly, at 13 weeks. (a) Midsagittal lowmagnification 
view of the fetus, showing the absence of the calvarium 
(arrows); (b) surface rendering showing the classic ‘frog’ face 
aspect, due to the concurrent absence of the calvarium and the 
moderate macrophthalmia, often present in anencephaly. 
a b 

the outer cutaneous contour may be in close contact 
with the uterine wall, due to the oligohydramnios and 
the large retronuchal swelling, and therefore the hypoechoic 
hygroma may escape diagnosis if its thin septa 
are not recognized (see Figure 4.2a). Finally, it should 
be underlined that the hygroma, especially if non-septated, 
may be transient and regress almost completely 
by the 2nd trimester, sometimes evolving into a nuchal 
edema. In these cases, the feto/neonatal outcome may 
also be good, but a significant percentage of cases are 
associated with Noonan syndrome or Noonan-like 
phenotype.1 As far as nuchal translucency (NT) is concerned, 
illustration of this important marker of chromosomal 
anomalies is beyond the scope of this book. 
We think it useful only to underline here that measurement 
of NT is not an integral part of the 12–14 weeks 
scan. Screening of chromosomal anomalies by NT measurement 
with or without biochemistry should be 
requested by the parent or proposed by the examiner 
prior to the ultrasound examination. Should such 
screening be required, it must be performed according 
to the protocol set up by the Fetal Medicine 
Foundation.2 This screening procedure includes not 
only relatively simple sonographic measurements but 
also pre- and post-test counseling sessions. 
Trunk and abdomen. Most thoracic (pulmonary) 
anomalies appear only in the 2nd or even the 3rd (some 
cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia) trimester. 
Only a moderate to severe hydrothorax can be detected 
at 12–14 weeks’ gestation. With regard to congenital 
heart disease, only very experienced operators are able 
to detect cardiac lesions at this gestational age, by 
transvaginal or transabdominal ultrasound. However, 
it should be recalled here that an enlarged NT with a 
normal karyotype represents an indication for early 
fetal echocardiography, since it is associated in up to 
30% of the cases with a cardiac defect. Among abdominal 
and wall malformations, both omphalocele (Figure 
1.2b) and gastroschisis can be recognized early in gestation, 
because of the favorable fetal lie: in fact, at 
12–14 weeks’ gestation, the limbs are more frequently 
abducted, giving a good view of the abdominal wall. 
However, care should be taken in diagnosing an 
omphalocele at 12 weeks’ gestation, since the physiologic 
herniation of the bowel in the cord regresses only 
at the end of the 11th week. Therefore, if an omphalocele 
containing only bowel loops is suspected at that 
gestational age, it is safer to wait 1 or 2 weeks in order 
to get a confirmation of the diagnosis. 
An anomaly that is extremely difficult to recognize 
early in gestation is bilateral renal agenesis. This difficulty 
arises because the kidneys can be visualized, but 
not always as confidently as they should. In addition, 
the important sign that always leads to this diagnosis in 
the 2nd trimester, namely severe oligohydramnios, 
develops only after 16 weeks’ gestation, because until 
that time the amniotic fluid is produced uniquely by 
ultrafiltration and the contribution of the fetal urine to 
its maintainance is marginal. 
On the contrary, a megacystis from complete urethral 
valves or urethral atresia (Figure 1.2c) is strikingly 
evident at 12 weeks, regardless of the rather normal 
amount of amniotic fluid, due to the severe enlargement 
of the bladder in the fetal abdomen: often, the whole 
abdomen of the fetus is occupied by the megacystis. For 
further details, see the description of this anomaly in 
Chapter 8. 
Osteomuscular system. At 12 weeks’ gestation, all long 
bones are visible on ultrasound. Therefore, the lethal 
skeletal dysplasias, characterized by severe micromelia 
(see Figure 9.8 in Chapter 9) and often hypomineralization, 
are generally recognizable. 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 3 
THE MIDTRIMESTER ANOMALY SCAN (TABLE 1.2) 
As already mentioned, in most countries, the survey 
of the fetal anatomy needed to perform a screening 
of congenital anomalies is carried out in the 2nd 
trimester, usually between the 18th and 21st weeks 
of gestation. In this regard, the ideal time for the 
sonographic assessment of fetal anatomy should be 
at 24–26 weeks’ gestation, to give an optimal balance 
between the amount of amniotic fluid and the 
volume and developmental stage of the fetal organs. 
In most cases where the timing of the anomaly 
scan is shifted, this is due to the fact that in those 
countries where there is a legal time limit for termination 
of pregnancy, this is usually set at 22–24 
weeks’ gestation, which represent the limit of 
fetal viability. Usually, the examination protocol 
includes: 
• a biometric assessment usually consisting of biparietal 
diameter, head circumference, abdominal circumference, 
and femur length 
• anatomic assessment that, depending on different 
national guidelines, consists of visualization of all or 
part of the following structures: 
– head: skull, cerebral hemispheres, falx, cerebellum 
and cisterna magna, lateral ventricles, orbits, lips, 
and facial profile 
– thorax: 4-chamber view (with or without outflows) 
and the lungs 

– abdomen: stomach, liver, bowel, kidneys and 
bladder, and abdominal wall 
– limbs: presence of the four limbs and of the extremities 
– spine 
• evaluation of the fetal adnexa, placenta and amniotic 
fluid 
Pretest information. Prior to the scan, the woman 
should be informed about the potential diagnostic 
accuracy of the examination, of its screening nature, 
and of the technical and practical limitations of the 
ultrasound examination. In addition, it is useful to 
inform the couple that the scan will not have a predefined 
duration, but that this depends on several factors, 
including acoustic window limitations (e.g. maternal 
obesity) and fetal lie. 
Acoustic window impairment. The diagnostic accuracy 
of midtrimester screening for the detection of congenital 
anomalies will be illustrated below. Here, we wish to 
underline how important it is, for medicolegal reasons, 
to describe in the report and to express in the pre- and 
post-test counseling the existence of any factor that may 
reduce the diagnostic accuracy of the ultrasound examination. 
These include maternal and fetal limitations. 
Maternal causes of impaired acoustic window. The most 
important factor that may greatly reduce the diagnostic 
potential of a transabdominal ultrasound examination is 
the presence of maternal obesity, which, unfortunately, is 
becoming a real problem due to the increased prevalence 
of this condition in the populations of the developed countries. 
The impairment of the acoustic window exhibits a 
positive linear correlation with the thickness of the 
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue.3 It is common 
experience, however, that in some cases resolution and 
penetration are also significantly reduced in the absence of 
evident maternal overweight, probably due to individual 
differences in subcutaneous adipose tissue water and fat 
content. Another factor that may limit the diagnostic 
accuracy of the midtrimester scan is an increased tone or 
contracture of the abdominal musculature, usually due to 
maternal anxiety. The presence of striae rubrae from dysmetabolic 
conditions or of large abdominal scars or burns 
can also have a significant impact on the quality of the 
ultrasound examination. Finally, the most frustrating condition 
to be confronted with in the course of an ultrasound 
examination is, in our experience, a previous 
abdominoplasty. In this case, several concurrent factors 
contribute to the limitation of diagnostic accuracy: the 
extensive cleavage of the whole abdominal subcutaneous 
tissue from the underlying muscular fascia associated with 
a long cutaneous surgical wound scar, residual abdominal 
fat, and a dramatic increase in abdominal firmness represent 
a frustrating although not insurmountable problem. 
Fetal causes of impaired acoustic window. The most 
common cause of (fortunately transient) impairment of 
the acoustic window is represented by an unfavorable 
fetal lie: an anterior spine, especially if associated with a 
transverse lie, makes assessment of the heart and the craniofacial 
area often impossible. However, in these cases, it 
is often sufficient to rescan the woman after 20–60 
minutes to let the fetus change its position and remove the 
cause of the acoustic window impairment. Fetal crowding 
is also a potential cause of acoustic window impairment, 
with the degree of impairment increasing with the number 
of fetuses. Another factor that can significantly limit the 
diagnostic accuracy of the midtrimester scan is an abnormal 
amount of amniotic fluid. In particular, severe oligohydramnios, 
from premature rupture of membranes 
or renal anomalies, and severe polyhydramnios, from 
fetal anomalies, twin-to-twin-transfusion syndrome, or 
4 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 1.2 Average gestational age at diagnosis for 
most common anomalies 
<18 18–21 >28 
Congenital anomaly weeks weeks weeks 
Anencephaly +++ -(+) - 
Hydrocephaly + ++ +++ 
Microcephaly NP + +++ 
Holoprosencephaly ++ +++ - 
Agenesis of the 
corpus callosum NP + +++ 
Dandy-Walker 
complex NP +++ + 
Spina bifida + +++ + 
Congenital heart 
disease ++ +++ ++ 
Diaphragmatic 
hernia + ++ ++ 
CAML and 
sequestration NP +++ + 
Esophageal atresia NP ++ ++ 
Duodenal atresia NP ++ +++ 
Ileo-jejunal atresia NP + +++ 
Omphalocele +++ +++ + 
Gastroschisis +++ +++ + 
Bilateral renal 
agenesis NP +++ - 
ARPKD + ++ + 
Multycystic kidney + +++ + 
Posterior urethral 
valves +++ + - 
Limb reduction 
defects +++ +++ - 
NIHF ++ +++ - 
Tumors (all sites) NP + +++ 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; 
CAML, cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung; NIHF, 
non-immune hydrops fetalis; NP, assessment not possible. 

idiopathic, can be responsible for an impairment of the 
acoustic window for different reasons: in oligohydramnios, 
the natural contrast agent represented by the amniotic 
fluid is absent and, in addition, the limbs are often 
adducted, and these two factors usually limit the assessment 
of the fetal limbs and heart. With severe polyhydramnios, 
the increased fetal movements and the 
significant increase in the distance between the transducer 
and the fetal body are the two main limitations. 
The abdominal acoustic windows. It is useful to know 
that the normal anatomy of the human abdominal wall 
provides a few preferential ‘channels’ to exploit in the 
case of an impaired acoustic window. These preferential 
points of access are characterized by a reduced amount 
of subcutaneous adipose tissue with a consequently 
reduced transducer–fetus median distance. Two of these 
anatomic regions are the periumbilical area, where 
there is virtually no adipose tissue and which may be 
exploited if no air is left between the transducer and the 
actual maternal umbilicus, and the lateral regions of the 
abdomen (i.e. iliac fossae), where the mean thickness of 
the abdominal adipose tissue is less than in the hypogastric 
area (between the symphysis and the umbilical 
area). To take advantage of this type of approach, the 
patient may be asked to roll onto one side (which one 
depends on the position of the fetus) in order to better 
expose the lateral abdominal area to the operator. 
Often, using this type of approach, the increased muscular 
resistance offered by some patients (see above) also 
tends to be reduced. A third preferential point of access 
is the suprapubic area/fold. In general, at 20–22 weeks 
with the fetus in the vertex position, the fetal head may 
be approached through the suprapubic area, while the 
craniofacial anatomy may be assessed through the periumbilical 
area. A useful hint may be to use the maternal 
bladder as a wedge: a full bladder will push the uterus 
(and the fetus) upwards, towards the umbilical area; on 
the contrary, an empty bladder may allow the fetal head 
to descend into the pelvis, where it can be explored 
through the suprapubic window. 
The 3rd-trimester examination. This ultrasound scan 
usually aims at the recognition of growth restriction. A 
second endpoint is the detection of late-onset congenital 
anomalies. 
Evolving and late-onset malformations (Figure 1.3 and 
Table 1.3). The term ‘evolving’ may indicate two conditions: 
(i) that a malformation may potentially arise late 
in gestation (late onset), because it is due to an arrest in 
the development/growth of a given anatomic structure 
(microcephaly or semilunar valve stenosis); or (ii) that it 
is already present at midtrimester but has the potential 
to progress toward more severe stages in the 3rd 
trimester (diaphragmatic hernia, semilunar valve 
stenoses, or upper renal obstructive lesions). As a result, 
the midtrimester anomaly can be unremarkable in all 
conditions covered by the former definition. A partial 
list of the most common evolving lesions is given in 
Table 1.3. 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 5 
Figure 1.3 Evolving (late-onset) malformations: a few examples of 
evolving lesions are shown. (a) Microcephaly: compare the reduced 
head area (<3 standard deviations) with the normal abdominal area. 
(b) Aortic coarctation: the axial 3-vessel and trachea view shows the 
severely hypoplastic aortic arch (tubular hypoplasia). (c) Left-sided 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia: the presence in the thorax of the 
stomach is evident. (d) Jejunal atresia: extremely severe dilatation of 
jejunal loops. (e) Aneurysm of the vein of Galen: on the transventricular 
view, the huge midline vascular lake, consistent with the diagnosis 
of aneurysm of the vein of Galen, is highlighted on power 
Doppler. 
a
b c 
d e 
3D ULTRASOUND 
Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound has become an integral 
part of the ultrasound assessment of a large number 
of fetal anomalies. It represents for the new century 
what Doppler velocimetry represented for the 1980s 

6 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 1.3 The most common (but not all) late-onset 
(>24 weeks’ gestation) malformations 
In a significant Also only 
Congenital number of after 
anomaly Always cases birth 
Hydrocephalus + 
Microcephaly + + 
Agenesis of the 
corpus callosum + 
Semilunar valve 
stenosis + + 
Aortic coarctation + + 
Cardiomyopathy+ + 
Premature closure 
of DA + 
Patent DA + 
Diaphragmatic 
hernia + + 
Esophageal atresia + + 
Duodenal atresia + + 
Ileojejunal atresia + 
Meconium ileus + + 
ARPKD + 
ADPKD + + 
Vesico-ureteral 
reflux + + 
Achondroplasia + 
Arthrogryposis 
(FADS) + 
Vein of Galen 
aneurysm + 
Tumors (all sites) + 
ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; DA, 
ductus arteriosus. 
and 1990s – an enormous contribution to the field of 
fetal medicine. Unfortunately, the clinical use of 3D 
ultrasound has been in part obstructed by its use (misuse?) 
to display portraits of the fetal face. The heavy 
marketing campaign launched some years ago by all 
producers of 3D ultrasound equipment has led to a 
misunderstanding in the population that since 3 is 
‘better’ than 2, then 3D ultrasound should see more and 
better than 2D ultrasound. While this may be partly true 
in those cases in which a fetal malformation has been 
detected, and only for some organ systems, as explained 
in the various chapters, the use of 3D ultrasound in the 
screening setting so far has not been validated at all. In 
this section, we will illustrate briefly the approach to 3D 
ultrasound, from the volume acquisition procedure to 
offline navigation and reconstruction. Of all the currently 
available techniques and imaging modes, we will 
illustrate only those petinent to the diagnosis of fetal malformations. 
In addition, it should be pointed out that the 
names and the techniques used by the various producers 
of 3D ultrasound systems differ. Since all 3D ultrasound 
images in this book have been obtained with General 
Electric–Kretz equipment, the terms and the procedures 
described here relate to the equipment and technologies 
developed by this manufacturer. 
Volume acquisition procedure. The volume acquisition 
procedure is based on the particular technology of volumetric 
transducers. The acquisition of the volume is based 
on the movement of the array housed inside the transducer: 
when the procedure is activated, this array performs 
a slow, single sweep, automatically recording one 
single 3D dataset. This volume consists of a high number 
of 2D frames (or slices). Once the volume has been 
acquired, it can be processed directly on the ultrasound 
system or, more comfortably, offline, on a PC, with the 
help of dedicated software. 
Quality of the volume. The quality of the acquired 
volume depends first of all on all the usual limitations 
due to the physics of ultrasound (maternal obesity, 
fetal lie, etc.), which obviously apply to 3D ultrasound 
too. In addition, the quality of the volume is conditioned 
by the presence/absence of fetal movements during 
the acquistion time: the more movements that 
occur, the less adequate is the acquired volume. 
Another important factor affecting the quality of the 
volume is involuntary movement of the hand holding 
the transducer during the acquisition. However, an 
easy and fast way to assess the quality of an acquired 
volume consists in assessing how many abnormal 
‘waves’ are present on the b window (the upper-right 
end-side one) on the multiplanar screen (Figure 1.4). 
Multiplanar imaging. This image modality represents the 
key approach to the study of fetal anatomy in normal 
and abnormal conditions. In the three windows, the 
three orthogonal planes are displayed (Figure 1.5): using 
the cursors, it is possible to navigate the volume, reproducing 
all possible views on the three planes; in addition, 
to better assess the relationships between different 
anatomic structures, it is possible to move the dedicated 
caliper on one plane and evaluate the corresponding 
changes on the other two planes. 
Surface mode. From the acquired dataset, it is possible 
to retrieve all the information needed to reconstruct the 
surface appearance of a given structure (surface mode). 
The combination of various filters and thresholds allows 

one to obtain the desired mixture of contrast, light, and 
transparency (Figure 1.6). 
Maximum mode. If the degree of transparency is 
increased, and the maximum-mode option is activated, 
the soft tissues become transparent and the fetal skeleton 
is displayed (Figure 1.7). 
Volume Contrast Imaging C (coronal). This application 
allows quick display on screen of the plane 
coronal to the one the operator is insonating in 2D. In 
gynecologic ultrasound it is able to provide impressive 
images of the normal and abnormal uterine cavity. In 
obstetrics, its use is of crucial importance for the assessment 
of cranial sutures (Chapter 3), thoraco-abdominal 
topographic anatomy (Figure 6.10), and of limb 
abnormalities (Figure 1.8). 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 7 
Figure 1.4 Overall quality of the volume. It is possible to assess 
the overall quality of the acquired volume by looking at the b window 
(top right). The number of the vertical artefacts (arrows) corresponds 
to the number of gross fetal movements. In this case, 
from the regular rhythm of the artefacts it can be deduced that the 
STIC volume was acquired during a period of fetal breathing. 
Figure 1.6 Three-dimensional ultrasound – surface mode. Using 
the surface mode, and adjusting threshold and filters, it is possible to 
display the surface of the fetal face. This example is the same as in 
Figure 1.5, a 32-week-old fetus of Afro-American origin: note the 
typical ethnic features. 
Figure 1.7 Three-dimensional ultrasound – maximum mode. 
This image modality allows one to ‘see through’ the soft tissues, 
displaying the fetal bones. This example shows the upper spine 
with the occipital bone (Occ) and the scapulae (S) on the left and 
the lower spine with the iliac wings (Sa) on the right. 
a b 
c 
Figure 1.5 Three-dimensional ultrasound – multiplanar imaging. 
Once the 3D volume is opened, the three orthogonal planes are 
shown. By moving the small caliper (yellow in a, red in b, blue in 
c), it is possible to assess in detail the anatomic structure of interest. 
This example illustrates the multiplanar rendering of a normal 
fetal face at 32 weeks of gestation. 
a b 
c 

Inversion mode. This is one of the latest developments. 
It can be used to assess sonolucent structures (vessels, 
cavities, etc.). In fact, its algorithm inverts the color code 
assigned to black and white pixels (voxels in 3D). The 
final output is a cast-like image of the studied structure; 
originally developed for the heart, it can also be applied 
to cystic structures (Figure 1.9). 
Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This image 
modality is a new way of displaying diagnostic information 
contained in a static or dynamic 3D dataset. In 
particular, it allows 2D slices to be displayed from any 
given volume, on any of the three orthogonal planes 
similar to CT or MR scans (Figure 1.10). This display 
mode can be advantageously used to demonstrate 
brain or cardiac fetal anomalies and to evaluate ovarian 
tumors or endometrial cavity abnormalities in 
gynaecologic ultrasound. 
High definition flow. The algorithm of this particular 
power Doppler application has been designed to penetrate 
very small vessels with extremely reduced dimensions 
and low blood velocities. It is of great advantage 
not only to assess the cerebral blood supply in normal 
and abnormal condition, but to display virtually all 
parenchymal circulation (Figure 1.11.) 
B-flow. B-flow imaging is a new technique which 
employs digitally encoded sonographic technology to 
provide direct visualization of blood flows in gray scale. 
It displays simultaneously both tissue morphology and 
blood flow using the same gray-scale schemes. This leads 
to a higher frame rate and better spatial resolution in 
comparison with power and color Doppler. In addition, 
it shows good depiction of small vessels and, due to its 
non-Doppler derived origin, it is not angle dependent 
(Figures 5.23, 5.56c and 5.57). 
Other image modalities. Many possible combinations 
of rendering modes are available. The Cardio-STIC 
technique developed for the study of the fetal heart is 
described in Chapter 5. 
8 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 1.9 Three-dimensional ultrasound – inversion mode. This 
image modality allows one to create cast-like reconstructions of 
hollow anatomic structures. (a) Lateral cerebral ventricles in earlyonset 
severe hydrocephalus. Note the oval ‘defect’ represented by 
the choroid plexus. (b) Four-chamber view of a normal heart. The 
arrows indicate the leaflets and the chordae tendinae of the atrioventricular 
valves. 
Figure 1.8 Volume contrast imaging C (Coronal). (a) Occipital 
cephalocele at 19 weeks gestation. The VCI-C shows the parietooccipital 
sutures and the small cephalocele (arrows). (Occ, occipital 
bone; Pa, parietal bones) (b) normal hand bones and soft tissues at 
24 weeks of gestation. 
a b a
b 
OUTLINE OF THIS BOOK 
The rationale behind this book is the concept that, in 
everyday practice, what raises the suspicion of a fetal 
anomaly is an abnormal view – that is, the ‘non-normal 
appearance’ of a conventional scanning view. This is 

ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 9 
why, in each chapter, the first part does not consist of 
the classic nosologic approach, but rather of a section 
dedicated to the various ultrasound views necessary to 
assess each organ. Then, the abnormal aspect of each 
view is illustrated, and the anomalies possibly responsible 
for the abnormal aspect of the ultrasound view 
are illustrated. In several cases, the first part of the 
chapter is further enriched with diagnostic flowcharts 
that may help in the differential diagnosis by sign. For 
example, these flowcharts illustrate all anomalies to 
be ruled out in the case of non-visualization of the 
fetal stomach (Figure 7.7) or bladder (Figure 8.8), or, 
Figure 1.10 Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). Carcinoma of the right choroid plexus at 35 weeks gestation. The image shows the 
large malignant tumor (T) infiltrating the brain posteriorly (arrowheads) with secondary hydrocephalus (lv, lateral ventricles; arrow, 4th ventricle). 
The multislice, tomographic imaging allows assessment on the single panel of images the extension of the tumor and its relationship 
with the surrounding anatomic structures. 
a b 
Figure 1.11 High definition flow (HD flow). The HD flow is able to show very small vessels with low velocity. (a) Pulmonary arterial and 
venous blood flow at 28 weeks gestation (Ao, descending aorta arrows; pulmonary veins). (b) Transvaginal transfontanellar view of cerebral 
blood vessels at 24 weeks gestation. (BA, basilar artery; PCA, pericallosal artery; SS, sagittal sinus) 

10 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
in the case of micromelia, which additional signs 
should be sought to make a differential diagnosis 
among all skeletal dysplasias possibly associated with 
micromelia (Figure 9.8). The philosophy behind this 
approach – from sign to diagnosis – is mantained in 
all chapters. 
The second part of each chapter is dedicated to the 
illustration of the various abnormalities. Again, to 
maintain the practical approach, for each anomaly a 
summarizing box is given at the beginning, and the 
various headings then include; Definition, Etiology 
and pathogenesis, Ultrasound diagnosis, Risk of 
chromosomal anomalies, Risk of non-chromosomal 
syndromes, Obstetric management, Postnatal therapy, 
and Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Of particular 
interest, under the Ultrasound diagnosis heading, 
important subheadings give the differential diagnosis 
with anomalies featuring similar ultrasound signs and 
the ultrasound prognostic indicators. 
In conclusion, we did not intend to write an extensive 
textbook on fetal anomalies – there are already excellent 
ones available – instead, our idea was to produce a versatile 
text that might be consulted in everyday practice 
and that might help in difficult situations. 
REFERENCES 
1. Nisbet DL, Grifin DR, Chitty LS. Prenatal features of Noonan 
syndrome. Prenat Diagn 1999; 19: 642–7. 
2. Snijders RJM, Noble P, Sebire N, Nicolaides KH. UK multicentre 
project on assessment of risk of trisomy 21 by maternal age and 
fetal nuchal-translucency thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation. 
Lancet 1998; 352: 343–6. 
3. De Vore GA, Medearis AL, Bear MB, et al. Fetal echocardiography: 
factors that influence imaging of the fetal heart during 
the second trimester of pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 1993; 12: 
659–63. 

Timing of examination. Ultrasound screening for fetal 
brain malformations is performed at 19–22 weeks’ gestation. 
For the assessment of the fetal brain, the 2nd trimester 
anomaly screening scan includes the following axial planes: 
transthalamic, transventricular, and transcerebellar.1–3 
This has become the standard approach. However, major 
developmental events occur in the second half of the gestational 
period, including neuronal proliferation, migration 
and organization; and the same is true for acquired lesions, 
such as hemorrhage and tumors, which usually occur late 
in gestation. Therefore, although it is possible to detect most 
fetal brain anomalies in the 2nd trimester, migration, proliferation 
and organization4,5 disorders as well as acquired 
lesions can become apparent only in the 3rd trimester. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes. The screening 
examination for anomalies of the central nervous system 
(CNS) is performed by abdominal ultrasound, mainly 
using transverse scanning planes that are easily obtained. 
Coronal and sagittal views are more difficult to obtain, and 
often require a transvaginal scan, but they may become 
necessary in a targeted examination (fetal neurosonogram) 
in patients with an increased risk of CNS anomalies.6,7 
Transvaginal ultrasound with high-frequency transducers 
has been used in the 1st trimester of pregnancy to study the 
development of the fetal brain, monitoring its typically fast 
morphologic changes, and to detect the presence of some 
early-detectable brain malformations (anencephaly, alobar 
holoprosencephaly, etc.). Later in gestation, when the fetus 
is in the vertex position, the vaginal approach can be 
extremely helpful in the evaluation of complex malformations 
and of normal and abnormal midline structures. In 
fact, due to the proximity between the transducer and the 
fetal head and to the consequent use of higher-frequency 
transducers in comparison with transabdominal scanning, 
the fetal brain can be better evaluated, and coronal and 
sagittal views are much more easily obtained, in a similar 
fashion as neonatal transfontanellar ultrasound.6 
Brain anomalies by scanning view. The axial scans used 
in the midtrimester screening of brain malformations are 
as follows. 
Axial transventricular view and related malformations. 
This is the most cephalad axial scan plane of the fetal 
head. It allows visualization of the sonolucent lateral ventricles 
with the echoic choroid plexuses, filling the ventricular 
bodies and atria (Figure 2.1a) and of the Cavum Septi 
Pellucidi (CSP). To exclude the presence of ventriculomegaly, 
the width of the atria is measured at the level of 
the glomus of the choroid plexus. The measurement is 
made perpendicular to the ventricular axis by positioning 
the calipers on the inner sides of the echogenic ventricular 
walls (inner to inner borders) and should be less than 
10 mm. The site for the measurement, at the level of the 
glomus, is chosen because, regardless of the etiology, 
dilatation of the lateral ventricle generally involves the 
caudal portion (atrium and posterior horn) first.2 The 
10 mm cutoff applies throughout gestation; any measurement 
of 10 mm or more indicates the presence of ventriculomegaly 
(Figures 2.1b and 2.2). As mentioned above, the 
body of the choroid plexus typically occupies most of the 
ventricle; a separation of the choroid plexus from the 
medial ventricular wall by 3 mm or greater may represent 
another sign indicating the presence of ventriculomegaly 
(Figure 2.1b); in a few cases, this sign has also been associated 
with an abnormal outcome, even in the presence of 
normal atrial size. Morphologic evaluation of the cerebral 
ventricles allows the operator to detect midline defects 
such as holoprosencephaly (single or partially separated 
ventricles: Figure 2.1c) and to suspect agenesis of the corpus 
callosum (colpocephaly: Figure 2.1d). Alobar holoprosencephaly 
is in fact characterized by a single common 
ventricle, whereas in semilobar holoprosencephaly the 
ventricles are separated only posteriorly, where a rudimentary 
horn is present. The rarer lobar variant is characterized 
by completely separated lateral ventricles except in 
Chapter 2 
Central and peripheral nervous 
system anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
11 

the foremost portion, where there is fusion of the anterior 
horns. In corpus callosum agenesis, colpocephaly may be 
present; in addition, there is an increased distance between 
the ‘parallel’ bodies of the lateral ventricle, and the third 
ventricle is enlarged and upwardly displaced in 50–60% of 
cases. Some destructive brain lesions are detected on this 
axial scan, too: hydranencephaly, which is characterized 
by a large endocranial cyst, and porencephaly, which is 
characterized by a parenchymal cyst that commonly communicates 
with the ventricular system. Anomalies associated 
with absence of the CSP are reported below. 
Axial transthalamic view and related malformations. The 
axial transthalamic view is the classic plane in which the 
biparietal diameter (BPD) and the fetal head circumference 
(HC) are measured. On this view, the CSP, the thalami 
and the symmetry of the cerebral hemispheres can be 
assessed (Figure 2.3a). Hence, the various midline malformations 
associated with absence of the CSP can be 
detected on this view (and on the transventricular view). 
These include holoprosencephaly and complete agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, both featuring absence of the CSP 
and abnormal lateral ventricles. Severe hydrocephaly and 
septo-optic dysplasia are also associated with absence of 
the CSP. In addition, some neuronal proliferation and 
migration disorders can be detected on the transthalamic 
view. These include microcephaly, which is characterized 
by a marked reduction of the fetal head circumference, 
and hemimegalencephaly, in which the two cerebral 
hemispheres are of different size, although a certain 
degree of asymmetry can also be present in some intracranial 
neoplasms (Figure 2.3b). In the same plane, some 
skull deformities, due to craniosynostoses or to 
other anomalies of the CNS, can also be recognized 
(Figure 2.4). 
Axial transcerebellar view and related malformations. 
This view is used to assess the posterior cranial fossa 
and the related structures, namely the cerebellum, the 
cisterna magna and the fourth ventricle (Figure 2.5a). 
The nomograms for the transverse cerebellar diameter 
are given in the Appendix. As for the cisterna magna, the 
distance between the posterior margin of the cerebellar 
vermis and the internal occipital bone surface should be 
measured. The normal range is 3–10 mm. It should also 
be taken into consideration that the cerebellar vermis has 
12 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.1 Transventricular scans of the fetal brain showing (a) the distal lateral ventricle and the echogenic choroid plexus within it; 
the arrows indicate the glomus of the choroid plexus. (b) Mild dilatation of the distal lateral ventricle with separation of the choroid plexus 
from the medial wall of the ventricle; (c) a single ventricular cavity (arrow); (d) a mild dilatation of the posterior part of the lateral ventricle 
(colpocephaly) (arrows) while the anterior part is normal (arrowhead). 
a b 
c d 

not completed its macroscopic development in the early 
second trimester; as a result, a premature scan can mislead 
the operator and cause misinterpretation of a normal 
pattern: an ample fourth ventricle and the still incomplete 
cerebellar vermis closure, which is normal in the early 
second trimester, can be misinterpreted as a vermian 
defect.8–9 Therefore, the screening examination for the 
detection of posterior fossa abnormalities should not be 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 13 
Normal 
Biventricular 
hydrocephalus 
Triventricular 
hydrocephalus 
Intraventricular 
hemorrhage 
Agenesis of corpus 
callosum 
Aneurysm of vein of 
Galen 
Figure 2.2 Ventricular anomalies evident 
on axial transventricular scans. 
Figure 2.3 Transthalamic scans of the fetal 
brain showing (a) the thalami (large 
arrows), the cavum of the septum pellucidum 
(small arrow), and the symmetry of 
the hemispheres; (b) the asymmetry of the 
hemispheres due to an intracranial hyperechoic 
tumor. 
a b 

Figure 2.4 Anomalies evident on 
the axial transthalamic scan. 
14 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Anomalies of the skull 
(Transthalamic view) 
Normal 
Macrocrania1 
Microcephaly 
Scaphocephaly2 
Acro(turri)cephaly3 
Hypomineralization
1: due to hydrocephaly/tumors 
2: due to fronto-parietal synostosis 
3: due to coronal suture synostosis, 
in Apert syndrome 
performed before 19–21 weeks’ gestation. On the axial 
transcerebellar plane, the cisterna magna, the cerebellum, 
and the fourth ventricle are displayed, and it is therefore 
possible on this view to demonstrate the anomalies of 
these structures, such as abnormal width of the posterior 
cranial fossa (Chiari II malformation, Dandy–Walker 
continuum) and/or the presence of a ‘cyst’ in the 
posterior fossa, (Dandy–Walker continuum, arachnoid 
cyst) (Figures 2.5b and 2.6). In the classic Dandy–Walker 
malformation, there is complete or partial agenesis of the 
cerebellar vermis, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle, 
and an abnormally wide posterior fossa. In the case of an 
arachnoid cyst, the cerebellar vermis is present, but is usually 
compressed and displaced, as are the cerebellar hemispheres. 
The study of the vermis should be performed 
with particular attention being paid to its inferior portion: 
if the cerebellum is insonated with an excessive downward 
angle, the plane will cut through the fourth ventricle 
rather than the vermis itself, erroneously suggesting an 
enlarged cisterna magna or even partial agenesis of the 

Figure 2.5 (a) Axial transcerebellar scan 
of the fetal head showing the cerebellar 
hemispheres, the vermis (arrow), and the 
cisterna magna (CM). (b) In this image, the 
cerebellum is V-shaped because of a large 
defect in the inferior vermis connecting the 
cystic fourth ventricle to the area of the cisterna 
magna (arrow). 
Normal 
Dandy–Walker 
malformation 
Dandy–Walker 
variant 
Megacisterna magna 
Spina bifida 
(Arnold–Chiari II) 
Incorrect alignment 
(angled too much toward 
the fourth ventricle) 
Figure 2.6 Anomalies evident on the axial 
transcerebellar scan. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 15 
a 
a b 

16 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
cerebellar vermis. (Figure 2.7). A likely explanation of 
this artefact may be the following: the fluid-filled vallecula 
cerebelli tends to expand slightly in the anterior 
aspect and has a very thin membranous roof that is 
impossible to visualize with the resolution currently available 
with ultrasound equipment. The juxtaposition of the 
vallecula with the adjacent cerebellar hemispheres creates 
the false impression of a continuum between the cisterna 
magna and the fourth ventricle, mimicking a 
Dandy–Walker variant9. In doubtful cases, and in those 
in which a posterior fossa cyst is detected, a midsagittal 
view will resolve the issue (see below) (Figure 2.8). The 
most important structure that needs to be carefully evaluated 
is the cerebellar vermis and its anatomy, since this 
is involved in a significant number of posterior fossa 
anomalies. Unfortunately, it is difficult to make a correct 
evaluation of vermian integrity when a cyst is present, 
particularly if its mass effect is significant. 
Three-dimensional ultrasound navigation of the fetal 
brain. Axial views are extremely useful in the context of 
screening, but have significant diagnostic limitations. 
While examining the fetal brain, one of the most important 
views is probably the midsagittal section of the fetal head: 
this view provides unique information on important 
midline intracranial structures such as the corpus callosum 
and the cerebellar vermis (Figure 2.8). Several authors have 
advocated the use of this scanning plane in the evaluation 
of fetal brain anatomy.6,7,9,10 Unfortunately, scanning in this 
plane is particularly difficult with two-dimensional ultrasound. 
Several approaches have been described, but they all 
require considerable manual skills, time, and, frequently, a 
transvaginal examination. Three-dimensional ultrasonography 
is now widely available, and one of its advantages is 
the possibility to obtain a volume and ‘slice’ it along different 
directions from those used to acquire it. With this technique, 
obtaining midsagittal and other informative sagittal 
and coronal views has become much easier. Once the volume 
has been acquired, multiplanar imaging allows navigation 
at will within the volume, enabling reconstruction 
of virtually all scanning planes (Figure 2.9a). It should be 
noted that the structures displayed best will be those perpendicular 
to the insonating beam when the volume is 
acquired. Finally, a new image modality allowing 2D slices 
to be displayed from any given volume similar to CT or 
MRI scans is represented by tomographic ultrasound 
imaging (TUI) (Figure 2.9b). 
Midsagittal view of the fetal head and related malformations. 
The midsagittal view allows visualization of 
Correct 
Incorrect 
Figure 2.7 (a) This transcerebellar 
scan is too oblique downward. A 
direct connection (the arrow indicates 
the vallecula) seems to appear between 
the cisterna magna and fourth ventricle, 
producing a false-positive image of 
partial absence of cerebellar vermis. 
(b) Schematic diagram showing correct 
and incorrect axial views through the 
posterior fossa. 
Figure 2.8 Midsagittal view of the fetal head showing (a) the corpus callosum (CC), the third ventricle (3v), the cerebellar vermis (V), and 
the cisterna magna (arrows); (b) the fastigium, the primary fissure of the cerebellum (arrow), the brainstem (BS), the tentorium (T), and the 
corpus callosum (arrows). (c) The Primary fissure (PF), always visible at 21 weeks’ gestational, delineates the posterior part from the anterior 
part of the vermis. The posterior vermis shows characteristic fissures (SF: secondary fissure) and its volume is greater than the volume of the 
anterior vermis. The fastigium (F)and primary fissure represents two main anatomical landmarks of the vermis (BS: brain stem) 
a b 
a b 
P 
S 
c 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 17 
the corpus callosum with the cavum septi pellucidi, 
the third ventricle, the brain stem, the cerebellar vermis, 
the fourth ventricle and the cisterna magna 
(Figure 2.8a,b). It therefore allows detection and 
characterization of agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
and vermian abnormalities. Knowledge of vermian 
morphology is essential when assessing for vermian 
anomalies. At 21–22 weeks the primary fissure is usually 
present. The primary fissure delineates the anterior 
from posterior lobes of the vermis; the volume of 
the posterior lobe is greater than the volume of the 
anterior lobe (Fig. 2.8b,c). 
Figure 2.9 (a) Multiplanar 
analysis of an ultrasound volume 
of the fetal brain 
obtained from the sagittal 
plane (a); the two orthogonal 
planes, coronal and axial are 
simultaneously displayed. 
From this position it is possible 
to navigate into the volume 
to demonstrate the 
different anatomical details. 
(b) Tomographic ultrasound 
imaging (TUI) of the fetal 
brain; the TUI panel allows 
demonstration of the extension 
of a cerebral tumor. 
a 
b 

18 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Right and left parasagittal views. Proximal parasagittal 
views allow study of the lateral ventricles with the choroid 
plexuses. Outermost parasagittal views allow visualization 
of the insula and the parietal and temporal operculum. 
Coronal views. The midcoronal views allow visualization 
of the anterior horns, the corpus callosum, the cavum septi 
pellucidi (Figure 2.10a), the thalami, the caudate nuclei, the 
lateral ventricular bodies, and the atria with the choroid 
plexuses. Posterior coronal views allow visualization of the 
occipital horns, and the posterior fossa (cerebellar hemispheres, 
cisterna magna, and tentorium) (Figure 2.10b). 
Anterior coronal views show the anterior horns of the lateral 
ventricles and the interhemispheric fissure. 
Figure 2.10 (a) Midcoronal 
view of the fetal head. The 
frontal horns (FH), genu and 
cavum septi pellucidi (arrow), 
are shown. (b) Posterior coronal 
view of the fetal brain 
showing the occipital horns 
(OH) and the cerebellum 
(arrow). 
CEREBRAL VENTRICULOMEGALY 
Incidence. High: 0.3–1.5 per 1000 births; probably higher in utero. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Axial transventricular view. Uni- or biventricular dilatation = 10 mm. It can be isolated or 
associated with other congenital (DWM, corpus callosum agenesis) or acquired (hemorrhage, infections) CNS 
anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Moderate to high: 1.5–12% for isolated ventriculomegaly; 9–36% if 
ventriculomegaly is associated with other malformations; almost absent if ventriculomegaly is associated with 
acquired lesions. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Variable, and depending on the etiology and associated lesions; poor if associated with syndromes or 
other CNS anomalies. 
Definition. Ventriculomegaly may be the consequence of 
a variety of conditions that can result in a dilatation 
of the cerebral ventricular system. The incidence of congenital 
enlargement of the cerebral ventricles ranges 
between 0.3 and 1.5 per 1000 live births in different series.9 
However, this may be an underestimate, as most available 
surveys are based upon clinical data, and enlarged ventricles 
are presumably asymptomatic at birth in many cases. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Ventriculomegaly may be secondary 
to brain destruction (congenital infection or 
a vascular mechanism), malformations, hydrocephalus, 
or a combination of two processes (i.e. hydrocephalus 
and malformation). It may also be related to a brain 
neoplasm or to a genetic abnormality not associated with 
a brain malformation. The well-known classic criteria for 
the diagnosis of hydrocephalus in the postnatal period 
cannot be completely extended to the fetus. Indeed, 
in utero, hydrocephalus may be present even with a 
normal head circumference, and the underlying cause of 
an altered flow of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cannot be 
identified in all cases. However, fetal progressive, severe 
ventricular enlargement can be presumed to be indicative 
of hydrocephalus. The mean ventricular size measurement 
is not reliable as a means of distinguishing between 
the different causes of ventriculomegaly. However, even 
if there is no statistically significant difference, the mean 
value is lower for fetuses with underlying genetic causes 
(excluding cerebral malformations) than for those in 
which hydrocephalus is due to destructive causes; indeed, 
a discrete number of fetuses with borderline ventriculomegaly 
have a chromosomal anomaly. 
a b 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 19 
The presence of uni- or bilateral ventriculomegaly 
seems to be of some discriminatory value. Ventriculomegaly 
tends to be unilateral in cases of destruction 
and bilateral in cases of malformation, and this difference 
is statistically significant.11 In apparently isolated 
ventriculomegaly, we must distinguish between borderline 
and moderate to severe ventriculomegaly. The term 
borderline ventriculomegaly is commonly used to indicate 
cases characterized by an atrial width of 
10–15 mm. Some authors have reported a different rate 
of abnormal neurologic outcome in fetuses with atria 
> 12 mm compared with those with atria measuring 
10–12 mm (a mild form of borderline ventriculomegaly). 
In fact, an isolated borderline ventriculomegaly 
of 10–12 mm might be considered as a 
variant of the norm.12 The higher incidence of this 
anomaly in male fetuses is related to the fact that their 
mean atrial size is slightly greater than that of females. 
Borderline ventriculomegaly may resolve even before 
birth, and has no consequence in a vast majority of 
cases. However, it has been suggested that in a distinct 
minority of cases, this finding can be the earliest manifestation 
of brain lesion from heterogeneous causes, 
including primary cerebral maldevelopment (i.e. 
lissencephaly). Severe ventriculomegaly is usually 
referred to as hydrocephalus and is defined on the basis 
of an atrial width of more than 20 mm. When the atrial 
width is between 15 and 20 mm the ventriculomegaly is 
defined moderate. Aqueductal stenosis, regardless of its 
cause, is responsible for the progression of ventricular 
dilatation. Although it is generally a multifactorial disease, 
there can be an X-linked transmission characterized 
by mental retardation, spastic paraplegia, and 
adducted thumbs. Aqueductal stenosis can also be 
acquired, following intrauterine infection or intraventricular 
hemorrhage. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. We report the most common 
sonographic patterns of ventriculomegaly. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with CNS malformations. 
As stated above, ventriculomegaly is associated 
with typical malformation patterns of the CNS. In the 
Chiari II malformation (Figure 2.11a), ventriculomegaly 
is associated with a small posterior fossa, a small dysmorphic 
cerebellum, an effaced cisterna magna, and a spinal 
defect with myelomeningocele; for a conclusive diagnosis, 
the latter defect must be detected. The association of ventriculomegaly 
with the presence of a dilatation of the 
fourth ventricle and complete or partial agenesis of the 
cerebellar vermis are the typical sonographic signs of the 
Dandy–Walker continuum (Figure 2.11b). The ‘teardrop’ 
appearance of the lateral ventricles (colpocephaly) 
(Figure 2.11c) with ‘parallel bodies’ which are shifted laterally, 
and upward displacement of the third ventricle 
suggest agenesis of the corpus callosum, the presence of 
which must be confirmed on coronal and sagittal views. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with cerebral destruction. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with destructive lesions can 
be unilateral or bilateral. The most common causes are 
hypoxia, infection, or vascular lesions. When ventriculomegaly 
is associated with hyperechogenic foci located in 
the brain and periventricular cysts, a fetal infection should 
be suspected. If multiple nodular subependymal calcifications, 
which sometimes group together to form periventricular 
hyperechogenic bands (Figure 2.12a), are 
present, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection should be suspected. 
In addition, free-floating particles, consisting of 
exudate and shedded ependymal cells, may be detected 
within the cerebral ventricles (Figure 2.12b), which 
are often dilated, as this particulate matter frequently 
obstructs ventricular foramina, leading to secondary 
obstructive hydrocephalus. In such cases, a differential 
diagnosis with intraventricular hemorrhage should be 
made: maternal serology for CMV and other infectious 
agents and the findings at earlier ultrasound examinations 
often resolve the differential diagnostic issue. In the case 
of hypoxia-induced hemorrhage, ventricular dilatation 
Figure 2.11 (a) Chiari II malformation: dilatation of the lateral cerebral ventricles, small posterior fossa (arrows) and obliteration of the cisterna 
magna (arrows). (b) Dandy–Walker malformation with ventriculomegaly, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle (arrow), and enlarged 
posterior fossa. (c) Axial scan showing the teardrop configuration of the lateral ventricle due to mild enlargement of its posterior part 
(colpocephaly). 
a b c 

20 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
occurs in severe forms only, and is generally associated 
with intraventricular fibrin strands and/or blood clots 
(grade 3). If this is the case, then a hyperechoic hemorrhagic 
lesion (grade 4) is often found in the parenchyma; 
this will successively become hypoechoic, due to the 
liquification of the blood clot, and eventually disappears, 
leaving a poroencephalic cyst filled with CSF and in 
communication with the ventricular system. 
Isolated ventriculomegaly. The diagnosis of isolated 
ventriculomegaly is made when no other associated 
sonographically detectable anomaly of the CNS can 
be found. An atrial width of 10–15 mm is defined as 
borderline ventriculomegaly (Figure 2.13a). As mentioned 
above, some authors distinguish a mild form of borderline 
ventriculomegaly, with atria of 10–12 mm, from borderline 
ventriculomegaly, with atria of 13–15 mm. An abnormal 
neurologic outcome is significantly less frequent in the former 
group. Isolated borderline ventriculomegaly may also 
be unilateral. It should be noted that ventricular asymmetry, 
defined as a difference in atrial size greater than 2mm, 
without dilatation may be observed in normal fetuses. 
Severe ventriculomegaly. This is usually referred to 
as hydrocephalus, and is defined by an atrial width 
of more than 20 mm (Figure 2.13b,c). In the fetus, 
ventriculomegaly is more frequently the result of a 
non-communicating hydrocephalus (where the obstruction 
is located inside the ventricular system, as in aqueductal 
stenosis), whereas a communicating hydrocephalus 
(where the obstruction is located outside the ventricular 
system) is significantly less frequent (Table 2.1). 
The reverse is the case in postnatal life. The typical sonographic 
pattern of aqueductal stenosis is triventricular 
Figure 2.12 (a) Cytomegalovirus 
infection: a periventricular hyperechogenic 
band (arrow). (b) Axial scan 
of the fetal brain, showing hyperechoic 
clots within the frontal horn of the 
proximal lateral ventricle (arrow) and 
in the third ventricle (arrow). 
Figure 2.13 (a) Axial scan of the 
lateral ventricles showing mild ventriculomegaly: 
the arrow indicates the atrium 
of the distal lateral ventricle. (b) Severe 
ventriculomegaly: overall enlargement 
of both lateral ventricles with dangling 
choroid plexus (arrow). (c) Severe tetraventricular 
hydrocephaly (LV, lateral 
ventricle; 3°, third ventricle; 4°, fourth 
ventricle). (d) Triventricular hydrocephalus: 
coronal scan of the fetal brain 
showing dilatation of the third ventricle 
and lateral ventricles with a typical 
‘Mickey Mouse’ configuration. 
a
a b 
c 
b 
d 

hydrocephalus with enlargement of the third and the lateral 
ventricles (Figure 2.13d). It has been suggested that (at least 
in some cases) aqueductal stenosis could result from 
an excessive pressure exerted on the midbrain by a voluminous 
communicating hydrocephalus. Alternatively, 
hydrocephalus may also result from an imbalance in the 
production and resorption of CSF (Table 2.1). Excessive 
production of CSF (i.e. in papilloma of the choroid plexus) 
is rare; in most cases, CSF resorption disorders are responsible 
for ventricular dilatation (Table 2.1). 
• Differential diagnosis. Borderline ventriculomegaly 
must be differentiated from colpocephaly, caused by 
agenesis of the corpus callosum. The sonographic findings 
useful for a correct differential diagnosis are 
described above. 
• Association with other malformations. The rate of 
association with other cerebral anomalies (holoprosencephaly, 
corpus callosum agenesis, and Dandy– 
Walker malformation) and extracerebral anomalies 
(myelomeningocele) ranges from 45% to 80%. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is moderate to 
high. In particular, the rate of association with aneuploidy 
is 1.5–12% in the case of isolated ventriculomegaly, 
but is higher (9–36%) if ventriculomegaly is 
associated with other malformations. Only in the case of 
ventriculomegaly associated with destructive lesions, is 
the risk of associated chromosomal anomalies low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes are:13 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ lissencephaly, microcephaly, cardiac 
anomalies, facial anomalies, and polydactyly 
• Goldenhar syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
facial asymmetry, preauricular tag, vertebral anomalies, 
and cleft lip and palate 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic 
kidneys, and other CNS anomalies 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ lymphedema of the limbs, lissencephaly, microcephaly, 
proptosis, intrauterine growth retardation, 
arthrogryposis, and other CNS anomalies 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia, cataract), 
CNS anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, 
cerebellar anomalies, microcephaly, and cephalocele) 
• Crouzon syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
craniofacial dysostosis and hypoplastic jaw bone 
• Gorlin syndrome: look for .ventriculomegaly + facial 
anomalies, macrocephaly, and multiple neoplasms 
• Kartagener syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
situs inversus 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 21 
Table 2.1 Classification of hydrocephalus 
A. Mechanical obstruction 
1. At the foramen of Monro 
(i) Neoplasia 
(ii) Ventriculitis 
(iii) Ventricular hemorrhage 
(iv) Primary aplasia of foramen 
2. At the third ventricle 
(i) Stenosis 
(ii) Neoplasia – either by direct invasion or by 
compression 
(iii) Obstruction by congenital cysts 
(a) Choroid plexus 
(b) Neuroepithelial 
3. At the aqueduct (most common site of 
obstruction) 
(i) ‘Congenital’ stenosis/atresia, including 
membranous 
(ii) ‘Acquired’ stenosis/atresia (postnecrosis, 
hemorrhage) 
(iii) Direct occlusion by vascular malformation 
(iv) External compression 
(a) Arteriovenous malformation – vein of 
Galen 
(b) Cysts in cisterna ambiens 
4. At the cerebellar foramen 
(i) Without caudal displacement 
of the cerebellum 
(a) Neoplasia 
(b) Dandy–Walker malformation 
(c) Retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 
(ii) With caudal displacement of the cerebellum 
(a) Acute cerebellar tonsillar herniation 
(b) Arnold–Chiari malformation 
5. At the level of the subarachnoid space 
(i) Non-canalization as a primary anomaly 
(ii) Acquired fibrotic obstruction 
(a) Organized subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(b) Organized necrotic debris or protein 
exudates 
(iii) Abnormalities of arachnoid granulations/villi 
(a) Congenital absence of granulations 
(b) Acute hemorrhagic block 
B. Hypersecretion 
Choroid plexus papillomas 
C. Hydrocephalus associated with bony dysplasia 
D. Functionally impaired CSF resorption 
(i) Altered CSF colloid osmotic pressure 
(ii) Increased venous pressure 
(iii) Large arteriovenous shunts 

22 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Obstetric management. When ventricular dilatation is 
detected in utero, it is important to assess the extent of 
ventriculomegaly (biventricular, triventricular, etc.), its 
degree (borderline, moderate, or severe), and whether 
it is associated with any cerebral or/and extracerebral 
anomaly. Except for cases associated with infectious 
lesions, fetal karyotyping should be offered to the parents. 
The contribution of fetal magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) to the etiologic diagnosis of ventriculomegaly has 
not been the subject of many studies, and it is difficult to 
establish its role on the basis of the small and heterogeneous 
series investigated. In the case of isolated borderline 
fetal ventriculomegaly, the appropriate management 
remains controversial.9 Although it is unclear whether or 
not this finding represents an independent risk factor for 
chromosomal anomalies, it seems sensible to offer karyotyping. 
A congenital infections screen is also commonly 
recommended, although to date no significant association 
has been demonstrated. Moreover, it should also be kept 
in mind that isolated borderline ventriculomegaly may be 
the harbinger of severe cerebral lesions that can be predicted 
only in later pregnancy, such as migration disorder; 
this is why fetal brain MRI has recently been suggested 
after 22–24 weeks’ gestation to diagnose subtle cerebral 
maldevelopment in these fetuses. 
Postnatal treatment. Aqueductal stenosis may be treated 
with a ventriculoperitoneal or ventriculoatrial shunt 
placed for decompression of hydrocephalus after delivery; 
unfortunately, shunt obstruction is common and a new 
operation may be needed. An endoscopic procedure represents 
a valid alternative, which has yielded good results. 
Prognosis. Isolated fetal ventricular dilatations may 
undergo spontaneous resolution in about 25–30% of 
cases; in 50–60% of cases the dilatation remains stable, 
whereas in the remaining 14–20% it progressively 
increases.14 It is difficult to establish a prognosis for these 
forms of ventriculomegaly, as published studies have 
often been based on small case series and very heterogeneous 
patient cohorts. Despite these limitations, some 
prognostic factors can be outlined. The outcome of prenatally 
detected ventriculomegaly is worse than that of 
ventriculomegaly detected in the neonatal period.15 There 
is a high rate of spontaneous abortion, in utero fetal 
demise, stillbirth, and neonatal death (up to 60–70%), 
especially if ventriculomegaly is associated with other 
brain anomalies.16 The mortality rate is much lower if the 
lesion is isolated, with a reported survival rate of about 
80%, with 60% of these having normal neurologic development. 
Early detection and progressive increase of the 
ventriculomegaly are the two factors indicating a poor 
prognosis.15 In these cases, only30–40%of survivorsshow 
normal neurologic development. An important factor 
influencing prognosis is the cause of the ventriculomegaly – 
for example, X-linked hydrocephalus is known to have 
an unfavorable prognosis. Considering only borderline 
ventriculomegaly, the mortality and morbidity rates are 
much lower.9 Isolated borderline ventriculomegaly has an 
abnormal outcome in 20% of cases, with perinatal death 
occurring in 4% and chromosomal aberrations complicating 
another 4% of cases. The association with malformations 
undetected at a 2nd trimester sonogram is 9% 
(about 50% are CNS anomalies). The risk of an abnormal 
neurologic outcome is very low or absent in cases of 
mild forms of borderline ventriculomegaly (atrial width 
of 10–12 mm). In isolated cases of mostly mild unilateral 
ventricular dilatation, the prognosis is generally good 
(86–90% of cases), except for the cases in which other 
malformations are associated or when the dilatation progresses 
rapidly.17 Prognosis is commonly excellent for 
fetuses with ventricular asymmetry without dilatation. 
HOLOPROSENCEPHALY (HPE) 
Incidence. 1 in 6000–16 000 births, but much higher in aborted fetuses (1 in 250). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal, axial, and coronal views. Alobar and semilobar HPE: completely or partially 
fused thalami, single or partially fused ventricles, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi, corpus callosum dysgenesis, 
midline facial abnormalities. Lobar HPE: fusion of the frontal horns, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi, corpus 
callosum dysgenesis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomy 13 is associated in up to 40% of cases, especially if other 
anomalies are associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: 15–20%. 
Outcome. Very poor in alobar and semilobar forms, better in lobar form. 
Definition. The term ‘holoprosencephaly’ refers to a 
group of complex abnormalities of the forebrain deriving 
from a failed cleavage of the prosencephalon that yields 
an incomplete division of the cerebral hemispheres and of 
the telencephalon from the diencephalon. The most 
widely accepted classification of holoprosencephaly 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 23 
recognizes three major varieties: the alobar, semilobar, 
and lobar types, according to the severity of the malformation 
(Figure 2.14). However, there are no precise 
boundaries between the three variants, and intermediate 
cases may be identified. Recently, another variant of HPE 
has been described: the middle interhemispheric variant 
(syntelencephaly), characterized by failure of cleavage of 
the posterior frontal and parietal regions of the brain. 
Whereas more anterior and occipital areas of the brain 
are fully cleaved; the interhemispheric fissure may be 
present both anteriorly and posteriorly (Figure 2.15).18 
Holoprosencephaly is almost invariably associated with 
facial abnormalities.13,19,20 The incidence of holoprosencephaly 
is 1 in 6000–16 000 births, and is higher in 
aborted fetuses (1 in 250).13 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Holoprosencephaly is 
the result of a ventral induction disorder, and is characterized 
by a defect in the development of the midline 
embryonic forebrain. The etiology is heterogeneous. 
In most cases, chromosomal, genetic, and teratogenic 
(retinoic acid) causes are found. Several cases showing 
mendelian inheritance patterns have been detected. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The alobar variety (Figure 2.16a) 
is characterized by (i) a single primitive cerebral ventricle 
(the holosphere) surrounded by a varying amount of 
residual holospheric mantle that can give rise to three 
morphologically different varieties (pancake (remnants 
only against the frontal basicranium), cup (with a peel of 
frontal cerebrum), and ball (complete parenchymal lining 
of holosphere without dorsal pouch) types); (ii) the 
absence of midline structures, including the falx cerebri, 
the interhemispheric fissure, the septum pellucidum, the 
corpus callosum and the third ventricle; and (iii) fusion of 
the thalami on the midline. The semilobar variety (Figure 
2.16b) is characterized by (i) the presence of rudimentary 
lateral ventricles with sketchy posterior horns, and a more 
developed cortex; (ii) partial development of the interhemispheric 
fissure and of the falx cerebri, which is present only 
posteriorly; (iii) partial fusion of the thalami; and (iv) 
hypoagenesis of the septum pellucidum and corpus callosum. 
The lobar variety (Figure 2.16c) is characterized by (i) 
partial fusion of the frontal horns, which show ample communication 
with the third ventricle and (ii) hypoagenesis of 
the septum pellucidum and corpus callosum. 
All of the above anomalies involve midline anatomic 
structures and, as such, can be diagnosed on the midsagittal 
view of the fetal head. However, some of these 
anomalies can also be recognized on the axial and coronal 
views. In particular, on the transthalamic view, 
absence of the cavum septi pellucidi and midline anomalies 
(fusion of the thalami, absence of falx cerebri, etc.) 
are detected. The transventricular view, in which the 
lateral ventricles are displayed, shows mild to overt ventriculomegaly. 
In the alobar form, the roof of the ventricular 
cavity (the tela chorioidea) may bulge between the 
cerebral convexity and the skull to form a cyst referred to 
as the dorsal sac, which communicates with the rudimentary 
ventricle (Figure 2.17). This can be displayed on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal head. In the lobar type, separation 
of the hemispheres is almost complete, except for 
the most anterior part. As a consequence, sonographic 
diagnosis of lobar HPE is more difficult than that of the 
other types and is based on the recognition of the partially 
Normal 
Third 
ventricle 
Alobar Semilobar Lobar 
Figure 2.14 Graphical representation of the three variants of holoprosencephaly, showing the different forms of the cerebral hemispheres 
with respect to the normal brain. 
Figure 2.15 Middle interhemispheric type of holoprosencephaly 
(syntelencephaly). (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing the 
abnormal morphology of the ventricular system (big arrows), with 
rudimentary frontal horns (small arrows) and interhemispheric 
separation of the anterior frontal and occipital lobes (IF, interhemispheric 
fissure). (b) Postnatal sagittal T1-weighted MRI scan 
showing the splenium and genu normally formed (arrows), while 
the callosal body is absent. 
a b 

24 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
fused frontal horns and on associated absence of the septum 
pellucidum. This diagnosis requires a midcoronal 
plane to demonstrate the absence of the cavum septi pellucidi 
and the central fusion of the frontal horns, which 
communicate with the third ventricle. MRI is useful in the 
lobar form, because it can better demonstrate the fusion of 
the fornices as a linear structure running down inside the 
third ventricle. Recently, another ultrasonographic sign 
has been used to differentiate between lobar HPE and 
septo-optic dysplasia: in lobar HPE, the anterior cerebral 
artery is pushed anteriorly alongside the frontal bone by 
an abnormal bridge of cortical tissue between the two 
frontal gyri. This sign of a ‘snake under the skull’ on the 
sagittal view of the brain can be found in all three types of 
holoprosencephaly (Figure 2.18).21 
In the case of HPE, sonographic assessment of 
the fetal face is recommended, considering that HPE 
is almost invariably associated with midfacial abnormalities. 
The spectrum of facial anomalies, caused by 
an abnormal development of the midline structures, 
ranges from cyclopia to mild dysmorphisms. The more 
severe the facial anomalies, the more pronounced the 
brain lesion (‘the face predicts the brain’ approximately 
80% of the time), but the reverse is not always true: 
about 15–20% of alobar HPE cases are associated with 
only minor dysmorphisms. The most frequent facial 
anomalies are usually classified in the following main 
types: cyclopia, with a single midline orbit or absent eyes; 
arhinia, with or without a proboscis; ethmocephaly, with 
evident ocular hypotelorism and a proboscis located 
between the eyes; cebocephaly, with less pronounced ocular 
hypotelorism and a nose with a single nostril (Figure 
2.19a,b); a median cleft lip and palate (Figure 2.19c), with 
premaxillary agenesis; isolated premaxillary agenesis; and 
slight anomalies that cannot be detected by ultrasound 
(e.g. a single central incisor). 
• Differential diagnosis. Alobar HPE should be distinguished 
from hydranencephaly: the presence of a dorsal 
sac, the fused thalami and the evidence of a thin 
cerebral cortex and of facial anomalies may orient the 
diagnosis towards HPE. It is also important to differentiate 
HPE from some forms of severe hydrocephalus 
in which an acquired communication between the 
lateral ventricles has occurred due to a disruption of 
the falx. The presence of the contralateral choroid 
Figure 2.16 (a) Alobar holoprosencephaly: axial scan at the level of the thalami showing the single ventricle, absence of midline 
structures, and fused thalamus (T); the arrowheads indicate the rim of the cortex. (b) Semilobar holoprosencephaly: ultrasound image 
showing the two cerebral hemispheres partially separated posteriorly; the rudimentary lateral ventricles with sketchy posterior horns 
(arrowheads) and a more developed cortex are present. (c) Lobar holoprosencephaly: axial scan showing the brain almost completely 
divided into two distinct hemispheres, with the only exception being at the level of the frontal horns of the lateral ventricles (arrows); the 
interhemispheric fissure is evident (arrowhead). 
Figure 2.17 Alobar holoprosencephaly. 
(a) Sagittal scan of the fetal 
brain demonstrating the communication 
between the ventricular cavity (V) 
and the dorsal sac (S). The cortex 
(arrowheads) covers the anterior and 
inferior part of the ventricular cavity 
(‘cup type’). (b) Postnatal magnetic resonance 
image showing the disposition 
of the cortex. 
a b c 
a b 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 25 
plexus dangling across the ruptured falx, normally 
separated thalami, and the lack of midline facial 
anomalies are suggestive of hydrocephaly. The most 
difficult differential diagnosis regards lobar HPE and 
septo-optic dysplasia. This differentiation is difficult 
because both malformations share the absence of the 
cavum septi pellucidi and the same appearance of the 
frontal horn. Hints that may suggest the presence of 
lobar HPE are the abnormal course of the anterior 
cerebral artery (‘the snake under the skull’) and the 
presence of fused fornices better demonstrable on 
MRI. 
• Associated anomalies. The most frequently associated 
anomalies involve the CNS (microcephaly, 
macrocephaly, and Dandy–Walker malformations) 
the heart, the skeleton, and the gastrointestinal tract 
(omphalocele). When these associated anomalies 
are detected, the risk of chromosomal and genetic 
anomalies is very high. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (especially 
trisomy 13): up to 40% if other malformations are 
associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 15–20% of cases. The most common syndromes 
are:13 
• Grote syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly + 
octodactly, absent tibiae, cardiac anomalies 
• Steinfield syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly + 
median cleft lip, renal anomalies, short forearms, absent 
thumbs, cardiac anomalies, and absent gallbladder 
• Holoprosencephaly-fetal akinesia syndrome: look for 
. holoprosencephaly + microcephaly, micrognathia, 
multiple contractures, and talipes equinovarus 
• Velocardiofacial syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly 
+ median cleft lip, cleft palate and cardiac 
defects 
Figure 2.18 (a) Sagittal scan of the fetal brain showing the abnormal pathway of the anterior cerebral artery crawling under the skull 
(arrow). (b) The normal course of the anterior cerebral artery and pericallosal artery. 
Figure 2.19 (a) Cebocephaly: three-dimensional surface rendering of the fetal face showing marked hypotelorism (arrowheads) 
and a single-nostril nose (arrow). (b) Postmortem photograph confirming the marked hypotelorism and the single-nostril nose. 
(c) Three-dimensional surface rendering of the fetal face showing the median cleft/lip palate often associated with holoprosencephaly. 
a b 
a b c 

26 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Meckel-Gruber syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic 
kidneys, and other CNS anomalies 
The empiric recurrence risk is 5–6%. If HPE occurs in 
the context of a syndrome, the recurrence risk is that 
of the syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Should HPE be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping should always be performed. 
In addition, the high risk of syndromic holoprosencephaly 
strongly supports the need for accurate familial 
analysis and a careful search for additional structural 
anomalies. The disclosure of a specific syndrome is 
important not only to formulate an appropriate prognosis 
but also to calculate the recurrence risk. After 
24 weeks’ gestation, conservative management must 
be adopted for the alobar or semilobar types, due to the 
extremely high neonatal mortality rate. 
Postnatal therapy. No therapy is possible for neonates 
affected with the severest forms of HPE, considering the 
invariably poor prognosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In the severest 
forms (alobar and semilobar), the neurologic deficit 
is already evident in the neonatal period, in the form 
of generalized hypotonia, seizures, feeding problems 
and mental retardation. In the few survivors, 
severe neurologic anomalies are often responsible 
for death during the first year of life. In the lobar type, 
the prognosis is less well defined, but mental retardation, 
olfactory and visual anomalies are often 
present. 
AGENESIS OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM 
Incidence. From 0.3–0.7% in the general population to 2–3% in the developmentally disabled population. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal view. Complete or partial absence of the corpus callosum. Axial views: 
colpocephaly, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi (in complete agenesis). Coronal views: lateral convexity and 
increased distance between the frontal horns. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. From good to poor. However, 15–28% rate of significant neurodevelopmental delay also in isolated forms. 
Definition. Developmental abnormalities of the corpus 
callosum (CC) include hypoplasia, hyperplasia, agenesis, 
and dysgenesis. Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) 
can be complete (CACC) or partial (PACC); the latter is 
also referred to as hypogenesis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The corpus callosum represents 
the major commissure between the two cerebral 
hemispheres; it extends from the frontal lobe anteriorly to 
above the collicular plate posteriorly. In the fetus, the 
leaves of the septum pellucidum enclose the space of the 
cavum of the septum pellucidum, which is located under 
the anterior portion of the corpus callosum. The other 
telencephalic commissures include the hippocampal commissure 
and the anterior commissure. The prevalence of 
corpus callosum anomalies varies significantly in the different 
studies, depending on the population and the diagnostic 
criteria: it ranges from 0.3–0.7% in the general 
population22 to 2–3% in the developmentally disabled 
population. Formation of the corpus callosum begins 
with the development of the genu during the 11th week 
of gestation; the body, isthmus, and splenium develop at 
a later stage. If the normal developmental process is disrupted, 
the corpus callosum may be completely or partially 
(hypogenesis) absent. Since the development 
process starts from the anterior part and progresses from 
front to rear, when the corpus callosum is hypogenetic, it 
is usually the posterior portion (i.e. the posterior body 
and the splenium) that is affected. The exception to this 
sequence is the late formation of the small frontal part 
(i.e. the rostrum), which is the last part to develop, at 
18–20 weeks’ gestation. Knowledge of the organogenetic 
sequence helps to differentiate developmental damage 
(hypogenesis) from acquired damage (destruction). The 
latter mechanism usually occurs in association with 
hypoxic ischemic injury and infectious causes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Since the corpus callosum shares 
with the septum pellucidum a common anatomic and 
embryogenetic formation, absence of the corpus callosum 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 27 
is commonly associated with a hypoplastic or absent 
cavum septi pellucidi. Hence, at the midtrimester anomaly 
scan, ACC may be suspected when the cavum of the 
septum pellucidum is not visualized on the axial 
transthalamic view. The suspicion of ACC is further supported 
by the recognition of other indirect signs (Figure 
2.20).22,23 These include colpocephaly (dilatation of the 
atria and occipital horns), due to the absence of the splenium 
and hypoplasia of the cingulus which is often associated; 
increased separation of the hemispheres with a 
prominent interhemispheric fissure resulting from 
absence of the main cerebral commissure; parallel bodies 
of the LV which are shifted laterally and an abnormal 
third ventricle, which extends upward between the LV 
into the interhemispheric fissure (in 50–60% of cases). A 
definitive diagnosis relies on recognition of the direct 
signs, which consist of the demonstration of the absence 
of the corpus callosum on midsagittal and coronal views 
of the fetal brain. In particular, the midsagittal plane will 
demonstrate complete or partial absence of the corpus 
callosum (Figure 2.21a,b) and, in advanced gestation or 
postnatally, an atypical radiating appearance of the 
medial hemispheric sulci into the third ventricle (Figure 
2.21d). On this view, the absence of the pericallosal 
artery can be demonstrated on color Doppler (Figure 
2.21c,d). A mid-coronal section of the fetal brain will 
show an increased distance between the frontal horns and 
their abnormal aspect characterized by a lateral convexity 
(Figure 2.22b), which is due to the medial compression 
exerted by the white fibers that fail to cross the hemispheres 
(Probst bundles). Callosal defects are due to a 
developmental anomaly of these fibers. In particular, 
white fibers can form or axons may not develop properly; 
if axons are indeed formed, but unable to cross the midline 
because of the alteration of a recognition protein, 
large aberrant longitudinal fiber bundles will run along 
the medial walls of the hemispheres. These fiber bundles 
– the Probst bundles – running parallel to the medial 
walls of the lateral ventricles, invaginate their medial borders, 
producing a crescent shaped frontal horns (Figure 
2.22b) on coronal images. Since the development of the 
corpus callosum occurs simultaneously with the formation 
of the cerebral cortex, when the commissural axons 
fail to form in the cerebral cortex it is not surprising that 
this anomaly is observed in patients with malformations 
of cortical development, such as lissencephaly, heterotopia, 
polymicrogyria, and schizencephaly. The absence 
of Probst bundles in patients with cortical dysgenesis and 
microcephaly supports the hypothesis that insufficient 
axon formation could be a possible cause of ACC in 
patients with cortical dysgenesis and microcephaly. 
Interhemispheric cysts (Figure 2.23a) associated with 
ACC are often considered as mere extensions of the ventricular 
system. These cysts have a variable appearance 
and can be divided into two main categories: one in which 
the ‘cysts’ are herniations of the ventricular system, representing 
the dorsal expansion of the roof of the third ventricle 
and the other in which they are clearly separated 
from the ventricles. Another median anomaly that may be 
associated with ACC is an intracranial lipoma, visible 
only in the 3rd trimester as a hyperechogenic image 
under the inferior part of the interhemispheric scissure 
(Figure 2.23b). As already mentioned, ACC may be partial 
(Figure 2.24a)24 or complete. In the former case, the 
sonographic findings are more subtle than those 
associated with the complete form. When the corpus 
callosum is hypogenetic, it is usually the posterior portion 
that is affected (the posterior body and the splenium) 
(Figure 2.24a); in this situation, the cavum septi pellucidi 
is present, and often the only indirect sonographic sign is a 
Figure 2.20 Agenesis of the corpus callosum: indirect signs. (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing the teardrop aspect of the lateral 
ventricle due to the prevalent dilatation of the atria and occipital horns. (b) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing that the midline echo has 
become a three-line complex due to increased separation of the hemispheres with a prominent interhemispheric fissure. (c) Ultrasound 
image showing the colpocephaly (large arrows) and the upward displacement of the third ventricle (small arrow). 
a b c 

28 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
mild colpocephaly.24 Sometimes, the indirect signs of 
PACC may also be completely absent. A sagittal view is 
the only way to reach the diagnosis, visualizing a small 
corpus callosum that is lacking the posterior part and only 
partially surrounds the third ventricle (Figure 2.24a). 
Fetal MRI (Figure 2.25), is particularly useful in 
demonstrating possible additional cerebral anomalies 
such as late sulcation, migration anomalies, and heterotopia.
24 However, in most cases, the presence of these 
anomalies can be recognized only from the late 2nd 
trimester onwards, with late development of the sulci 
and gyri. 
• Differential diagnosis. Colpocephaly caused by ACC 
must be distinguished from borderline ventriculomegaly. 
However, the presence of other indirect signs 
and the direct evidence of ACC on the midsagittal view 
of the fetal brain is diagnostic. 
• Association with other malformations. ACC is often 
associated with other cerebral and/or extracerebral 
malformations, including a number of syndromes 
and metabolic diseases.22,24,25 The risk of associated 
brain anomalies is extremely high (up to 80%) including 
Dandy–Walker complex (Figure 2.24b), gyral 
anomalies, and neuronal heterotopia. The risk of 
associated extra-CNS abnormalities is high (up-to 
60%), including congenital heart disease and skeletal 
and genitourinary defects. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively 
high (20% of cases): trisomy 13 and 18, deletions 
Figure 2.21 Agenesis of the corpus callosum: direct signs. (a) Sagittal scan of a normal fetal brain showing the entire corpus callosum 
(CC). (b) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: sagittal scan of the fetal brain demonstrating absence of the corpus callosum (arrow). (c) Color 
Doppler scan showing the normal course of the pericallosal artery. (d) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: the semicircular loop of the 
pericallosal artery is absent; the same image reveals sulci and gyri radiating superiorly from the region of the third ventricle. 
a b 
c d 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 29 
Figure 2.22 (a) Coronal scan of a normal fetal brain showing the frontal horns (FH) and a normal genu (CC). The arrow 
indicates the cavum septi pellucidi. (b) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: coronal scan of the fetal brain demonstrating absence of the corpus 
callosum (genu), an increased distance between the frontal horns (arrows), and their abnormal aspect characterized by an external convexity 
due to the medial compression exerted by the Probst bundles. 
Figure 2.23 Coronal scans of the fetal brain demonstrating (a) absence of the corpus callosum and the presence of an interhemispheric 
cyst (arrows) communicating with the third ventricle and (b) the presence of a midline lipoma (arrow). 
Figure 2.24 (a) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum: three-dimensional ultrasound image (midsagittal plane) of the fetal brain 
showing partial formation of the corpus callosum – genu and anterior part of the body are present (CC), whereas the posterior part of the body 
and the splenium are absent. The larger arrow indicates the cavum septi pellucidi. 3v, third ventricle;?, absence of the posterior part of the corpus 
callosum; CV, cerebellar vermis. (b) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum associated with Dandy–Walker malformation: the arrow indicates 
cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle and enlarged posterior fossa; CS, small cavum septi pellucidi; 3, upward displacement of the 3rd 
ventricle; LV, mild dilatation of the posterior part of the distal lateral ventricle. 
a
a 
b 
b 
a b 

30 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
[del(4)(p16), del(l6)(q23), del(X)(p22)], and duplications 
[dup(8)(p21–23), dup(11)(q23–qter)]. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes involving ACC are shown in 
Table 2.2. 
Obstetric management. Should ACC be diagnosed in a 
fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, because of the high risk 
of a chromosomal anomalies. In addition, the high rate 
of association with mendelian inherited syndromes 
dictates an accurate familial analysis and a careful search 
for additional structural anomalies (hematologic diseases, 
asplenia, anophthalmia, cleft lip/palate, albinism, 
bone lesions, congenital megacolon and camptodactyly). 
A tissue sample should usually be preserved for a possible 
molecular diagnosis. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. It is not unusual 
for individuals with ACC to have no neurologic problems, 
despite the absence of callosal fibers, although 
a case series of children with postnatally diagnosed 
ACC reported that most of them suffered from developmental 
delay and often from seizures.26 However, in this 
study, there was a referral bias, since children without 
developmental anomalies were not studied. Several postnatal 
case series suggest a direct relationship between the 
occurrence of associated brain abnormalities and poor 
neurodevelopmental outcome.22,25,26 With isolated ACC, 
caution must be adopted when assessing the fetal/neonatal 
prognosis. In fact, considering the small number of fetal 
cases series reported in the literature, no general conclusions 
can be drawn, although some interesting points can 
be made. The first issue is that other CNS malformations 
(especially gyral anomalies, which are difficult if not 
impossible to visualize on ultrasound) or extra-CNS malformations 
can be present even when ACC is apparently 
isolated on ultrasound/MRI.24 The second point is that, 
regardless of the associated anomalies, significant neurodevelopmental 
delay develops in a consistent proportion 
of cases (15–28%), even if ACC is confirmed 
postnatally to be isolated.22,24–26 The same also applies to 
Table 2.2 Syndromes associated with agenesis of the 
corpus callosum 
Syndrome Transmissiona Gene 
Acrocallosal AR GLI 3 
Aicardi XLD 
Apert AD FGFR2 
ATRX XLR ATRX 
Basal cell nevus AD PTCH2 
CRASH XLR L1CAM 
Fukuyama AR FCMD 
Kallmann XLR/AD/AR KAL1 
Leopard AD PTPN11 
Leprechaunism AR INSR 
Neu–Laxova AR 
Neurofibromatosis AD NF1 
Rubinstein–Taybi AD CREBBP 
Tuberous sclerosis AD TSC1,TSC2 
Walker–Warburg AR POMT/FKRP 
a AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XLD, 
X-linked dominant; XLR, X-linked recessive. 
Figure 2.25 (a) Magnetic resonance image (MRI) sagittal view of the normal fetal brain (T2-weighted HASTE image). The corpus callosum 
is completely formed; it is evident as an intermediate signal due to the incomplete myelination. The black arrow indicates the cavum 
septi pellucidi. (R, rostrum; G, genu; B, body; S, splenium). (b) Complete agenesis of the corpus callosum: MRI (sagittal view, T2- 
weighted HASTE image) of the fetal brain showing complete absence of the corpus callosum and the third ventricle communicating with 
the interhemispheric fissure. (c) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum: MRI (sagittal view, T2-weighted HASTE image) of the fetal 
brain showing the presence of the genu and the anterior part of the body; the posterior part of the body and the splenium are absent and 
cisternal enlargement is evident (black arrow). B, anterior part of the body; G, genu; ?, absence of the posterior part of the corpus callosum. 
Modified from reference 24. 
a b c 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 31 
The classification of cerebellar malformations is 
controversial – no widely accepted agreement has been 
reached, despite many attempts by neuroradiologists, 
geneticists, and neuropathologists. In particular, as far 
as the conditions associated with a defective vermis are 
concerned, the use of the term ‘Dandy–Walker variant’ 
(DWv), its significance, and the relationship of the 
Dandy– Walker malformation (DWm) to other posterior 
fossa cystic malformations represent the most controversial 
topic.27–34 DWM, DWv, and Megacisterna 
magna (MCM) are believed to represent steps on a continuum 
of developmental anomalies of rhombencephalic 
roof and therefore all are classically contained 
within the general context of the DW complex. 
Recently, Tortori-Donati et al. added Blake’s pouch cyst 
(BPC) as separate entity within the DW complex.30 
In addition, other cerebellar hemispheric and vermian 
malformations have been described but are poorly understood, 
with little discussion in the literature other than 
occasional case reports. Thus, the prognosis of patients 
with most cerebellar malformations is uncertain. Finally, 
it is often difficult to clearly distinguish, in an infant with 
signs and symptoms relating to the posterior fossa, 
between cerebellar or vermian atrophy, hypoplasia, or 
malformation. In the fetus, the situation is understandably 
even more confused, due to the difficulties in the prenatal 
assessment of the CNS, both by ultrasound and by 
MRI. However, based on a morphologic ultrasound 
approach, it is at least possible to differentiate posterior 
fossa anomalies into two broad categories: (i) cystic malformations, 
characterized by the presence of an evident 
CSF collection in the posterior fossa resulting from active 
expansion of CSF spaces, and (ii) non-cystic malformations, 
in which either there is no increase of CSF or the 
widening of the spaces is passive, i.e. resulting from defective 
cerebellar development. In most cases, anatomic 
landmarks such as the position of the tentorium and the 
presence of a normal brainstem can be visualized; in addition 
evaluation of vermian biometry, position and morphology, 
including the fastigial point and vermian 
fissures can be performed, using prenatal ultrasound, 
especially in the sagittal plane. 
isolated partial ACC. A final point that should be made is 
that even when the outcome is good, subtle neuropsychologic, 
perceptual, and motor defects can emerge later 
in life, since all individuals with CACC/PACC have some 
neuropsychological symptoms. Considering the presence 
of neurosensorial information transfer defects, no differences 
seem to exist between PACC and CACC in terms 
of the performance accuracy of the somatosensory functions. 
However, the clinical relevance of such deficits 
should not be exaggerated, because the functions of the 
corpus callosum are not completely understood and it 
is difficult to correctly assess the neuropsycologic status 
of individuals with CACC/PACC and normal-range IQs, 
and the role of possible compensatory mechanisms.24 
Nevertheless, a protracted follow-up (until around 
6 years of age) is important to update the neurodevelopmental 
status of these patients, especially with regard 
to social interactions and school performance, in order 
to be able to provide better prognostic information to 
families. 
POSTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA MALFORMATIONS 
CYSTIC POSTERIOR FOSSA 
In the fetus, cystic anomalies are easily recognizable in 
the axial transcerebellar plane, as mentioned at the 
beginning of this chapter. However, their differential 
diagnosis can be particularly difficult because the 
recognition of the subtle anatomic features that differentiate 
them may be challenging or sometimes impossible. 
This is why a midsagittal section of the fetal brain 
is required for accurate anatomic assessment of the 
posterior fossa in normal and abnormal conditions; 
and this plane is of fundamental importance for the 
characterization of vermian anatomy.9,27–34 Some cysts 
are related to massive dilatation of the fourth ventricle, 
others to persistence of embryonic structures, such as 
Blake’s pouch, others to malformative dilatation of 
subarachnoid spaces, and others to true arachnoid 
loculations. 
The mainstay of the diagnosis is represented by the 
assessment of a number of direct and indirect signs (Table 
2.3),28 including the following: the relationship of the cyst 
with the fourth ventricle and subarachnoid spaces; the 
morphology, position and biometry of the vermis and the 
cerebellar hemispheres, association with hydrocephalus; 
the size of the posterior fossa and the position of the tentorium. 
Although the use of the term ‘Dandy–Walker 
variant’ is currently discouraged by several authors, this 
term does refer to a cluster of ultrasound signs in the fetus 
and it is therefore useful to consider these, regardless of 
the underlying etiology: prenatally detectable ultrasound 
signs of Dandy–Walker variant are a normal insertion of 
the tentorium, moderate anticlockwise rotation of the vermis, 
and moderate underdevelopment of the postero-inferior 
part of the vermis.29,31 

32 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The term Dandy–Walker malformation 
(DWM) was suggested to describe a malformation consisting 
of a cystic enlargement of the fourth ventricle 
associated with partial or complete agenesis of the vermis. 
The four characteristic signs identifying classic 
DWM are: (i) complete or partial agenesis of the vermis; 
(ii) cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle; (iii) 
enlarged posterior fossa with upward displacement of 
the tentorium; and (iv) anticlockwise rotation of the 
hypoplastic vermis. Ventriculomegaly develops in up to 
80% of cases, especially in postnatal age.19 The cystic 
dilatation of the fourth ventricle fills the posterior fossa 
and extends into cisterna magna, which is compressed 
between the dilated fourth ventricle and the dura 
mater. 
Subsequent observations of cases characterized by 
hypoplasia/partial agenesis of the postero-inferior 
part of the vermis, rotation of the vermis, and 
enlargement of the fourth ventricle without substantial 
enlargement of the posterior fossa led to the introduction 
of the term Dandy–Walker variant (DWv). 
Unification of DWM and DWv into a spectrum of 
DANDY–WALKER MALFORMATION (DWM) 
Incidence. 1 in 25 000–30 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the midsagittal view of the fetal brain, it is characterized by expansion of the 
posterior fossa, CSF collection (cystic dilatation of the 4th ventricle) determining an upward displacement of the 
tentorium, anticlockwise rotation of the vermis; partial or complete agenesis of the vermis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: up to 35% of cases. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Poor when associated with other malformations and syndromes; less severe if isolated. 
Table 2.3. Anatomical features of cystic anomalies of the posterior fossa characterized at ultrasound examination 
by an appreciably increased CSF collection in the posterior fossa (modified from references28). 
DWM DWv BPC MCM AC 
Cerebellar Hypoplastic Hypoplastic Normal/ Normal Usually 
hemispheres compressed compressed 
Cerebellar vermis Total or partial Mild hypoplasia Normal and Normal Usually 
(inferior) agenesis (inferior) usually compressed 
(commonly (often elevated 
rotated-elevated) rotated-elevated) 
4th ventricle Cystic dilatation Dilatated Dilated Dilated cisterna Usually 
communicating magna compressed 
with the pouch 
Posterior fossa Widened Normal Usually normal Usually normal Usually 
normal 
Tentorium Elevated, high Normally Normally Normally Normally 
(and torcular lying inserted inserted inserted inserted 
herophili 
Ventriculomegaly 80% of cases Infrequent Usually absent Usually absent Often present 
(mainly in in prenatal age 
postnatal age) 
Note: It must be kept in mind that some non cystic malformations of the posterior fossa can give the US impression of a mildly 
increased amount of CSF, due to the passive widening of the spaces, i.e. resulting from defective cerebellar development. AC, 
arachnoid cyst 

variably expressed anomalies of the rhombencephalic 
roof development (the DW continuum) was proposed 
by Barkovich et al.31 However, more recently, the 
same group, following further investigations, has 
questioned whether DWv is indeed a mild form of 
DWM or rather represents a generalized form of cerebellar 
hypoplasia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. These malformations result 
from a defective development of the structures originating 
from the rhomboencephalic roof.30,32,34 Failure 
to incorporate the anterior membranous area (AMA) 
into the choroid plexus leads to persistence of the AMA 
between the caudal edge of the developing vermis and 
the cranial edge of the developing choroid plexus. 
Ballooning of the AMA into a cyst displaces the hypoplastic 
vermis superiorly; counter-clockwise rotation of 
a (regardless of how much) hypoplastic vermis is the 
key feature indicating a developmental arrest of the 
AMA. The posterior membranous area (PMA) can persist 
unopened (in Blake’s pouch cyst) or become patent, 
accounting for the reportedly variable patency of the 
foramen of Magendie.30,32 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The first steps in reaching a 
correct diagnosis of DWM are differentiation 
between a dilated fourth ventricle and extraventricular 
cysts and distinguishing among a variety of cerebellar 
vermian dysgenesis syndromes. DWM is 
characterized by an expansion of the posterior cranial 
fossa, an upward displacement of the tentorium, a 
cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle, and partial or 
complete vermian agenesis. In addition, when present, 
the cerebellar vermis is also rotated counterclockwise 
(Figure 2.26b); as a result of this rotation, the vermis 
is positioned behind the quadrigeminal plate. As far 
as the maldevelopment of the cerebellar vermis is concerned, 
some cases of DWM show a partial agenesis/
hypoplasia, whereas others feature vermian 
dysplasia. It has been reported that in the case of a 
partially agenetic vermis, the presence of a normal or 
almost normal lobulation improves the prognosis.33 
However, the ultrasound evaluation of vermian fissures 
and lobulation remains extremely difficult when 
a ‘cyst’ is present and its mass effect is significant such 
as in case of DWM.34 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of cystic 
malformations of the posterior fossa is difficult, and 
a midsagittal view of the vermis is mandatory for an 
accurate assessment of vermis features and the characteristics 
of the fluid components of the posterior fossa 
(fourth ventricle and cisterna magna). The parameters 
that may allow a differential diagnosis are showed in 
Table 2.3. 
• Association with other malformations. Numerous 
malformations have been reported to be associated 
with DWM. The most commonly associated 
anomalies are other CNS anomalies (in 50–60% of 
cases), including midline anomalies (partial or 
total agenesis of the corpus callosum, holoprosencephaly, 
etc.). An association with facial clefts and 
other extra-CNS anomalies (especially congenital 
heart disease and urinary anomalies) has been 
described, often in the context of chromosomal and 
genetic syndromes. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, with up to 
35% of cases being associated with aneuploidy, mainly 
trisomies 18 and 13. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 33 
4th 
V 
Figure 2.26 Dandy–Walker malformation. (a) Axial scan of the posterior fossa showing a cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle 
(arrows) and a V-shaped cerebellum due to a vermian defect. (b) Sagittal scan of the posterior fossa showing an upward displacement of 
the tentorium (TN), a cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle (thin arrow), and a rotation (curved arrow) of a partially agenetic vermis; the 
big arrow indicates the corpus callosum. (c) Schematic diagram of the same finding. V, cerebellar vermis; 4th, fourth ventricle. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes that can be associated with 
DWM are:13 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for . DWM + eye 
anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract), other CNS 
anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, microcephaly, 
and cephalocele) 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . DWM + 
encephalocele, polydactyly, and polycystic kidneys 
• Aicardi syndrome: look for . DWM + agenesis of the 
corpus callosum and vertebral defects 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . DWM + 
lissencephaly, microcephaly, proptosis, diffuse joint 
contractures, subcutaneous tissue edema, and 
intrauterine growth retardation 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is mandatory, 
because of the high risk of chromosomal 
anomalies. In addition, a thorough anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert because of the high 
risk of association with other CNS and extra-CNS 
malformations. Serial ultrasound monitoring is warranted 
to verify the possible onset of severe hydrocephalus. 
Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center, for definitive diagnosis and adequate 
neonatal management. 
Postnatal treatment. There is obviously no treatment 
of the primary vermian lesion. The virtually ubiquitous 
secondary obstructive hydrocephalus may be treated 
with a cystoperitoneal shunt. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. DWM is associated 
with late-onset hydrocephalus in about 80% of 
cases. If hydrocephalus develops, whether in utero or in 
the neonatal period, there is a mortality rate of over 
60%, with most survivors having a low IQ. In most 
DWM series, approximately 40% of the children were 
intellectually normal, 40% were severely retarded, and 
20% had borderline mental retardation. However, a 
review of DWM outcome has shown that isolated 
forms have a better intellectual prognosis and lower 
mortality.33 
34 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
OTHER CYSTIC MALFORMATIONS OF THE POSTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA 
BLAKE’S POUCH CYST (BPC) 
Definition and anatomy. BPC, or Blake’s pouch cyst, 
consists of a marked caudal protrusion of the fourth ventricle 
resulting from a fingerlike expansion of the PMA 
that does not perforate. The BP is a normal, transient 
embryological structure that initially does not communicate 
with the surrounding sub-arachnoid spaces.30 
Subsequent spontaneous perforation of the pouch forms 
the foramen of Magendie. If the BP fails to perforate, 
CSF accumulates and determines the fingerlike expansion 
of the PMA within the posterior fossa. This, in turn, 
leads to displacement of a normally developed cerebellar 
vermis and frequently in post-natal age to ventriculomegaly/
tetraventricular obstructive hydrocephalus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographically, BPC is characterized 
by a normal but displaced cerebellar vermis, 
a CSF collection in the posterior fossa (Figure 2.27), consisting 
of the expanded and imperforated Blake’s pouch 
widely communicating with the 4th ventricle. Ventriculomegaly/
hydrocephalus is often associated in post-natal 
age30 whereas it is absent in the few cases detected in the 
fetus.27 The tentorium and torcular are usually in normal 
position but in unfrequent cases may be elevated. A normal 
appearance of the cerebellar vermis rules out the diagnosis 
of DWM, in which the vermis is agnetic/hypoplastic and 
rotated counterclockwise. (Table 2.3). 
Prognosis. The prognosis of BPC is generally good. 
This is due to the fact that the cerebellar anatomy is 
unremarkable in this condition, with the vermis simply 
being displaced and cerebellar hemispheres compressed 
by the enlarged BPC. The secondary hydrocephalus, 
when present in post-natal age, requires simple ventriculoperitoneal 
shunting. 
V 
BPC 
B 
Figure 2.27 Small Blake’s pouch cyst. (a) Sagittal view of the 
posterior fossa showing a normal but elevated vermis; note the 
gap between the vermis and the brain stem (BS). T, tentorium, V, 
fastigium. (b) Schematic diagram of persistent Blake’s pouch cyst 
(BPC). V, cerebellar vermis. 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 35 
Definition and anatomy. MCM is defined as a cystic 
posterior fossa malformation characterized by an intact 
vermis, an enlarged cisterna magna, freely communicating 
with the perimedullary subarachnoid spaces, 
absence of hydrocephalus, and a normal size of the 
fourth ventricle (Figure 2.28, Table 2.3). The tentorium 
cerebelli is superiorly displaced in almost 10% of 
cases. MCM can be asymmetrical. Similarly to BPC, it 
results from a defect of the PMA. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. MCM is a cystic posterior fossa 
malformation characterized by an intact vermis, an 
enlarged cisterna magna, absence of hydrocephalus, 
and a normal size of the fourth ventricle (Figure 2.28). 
As such, the appearance is similar to that previously 
described for the BPC, except for the presence of a late 
fenestration, the free communication between the 
MCM, 4th ventricle and subarachnoid space, and consistent 
absence of hydrocephalus in pre/post-natal age 
(Table 2.3). Similarly to BPC, the extent of the CSF collection 
is variable; it may remain purely infravermian 
or it may extend far beyond the normal borders of the 
cisterna magna laterally, posteriorly, and superiorly, 
reaching in some cases the quadrigeminal plate cistern. 
The torcular and the tentorium are usually in normal 
position but in infrequent cases may be elevated. 
Prognosis. This is commonly favorable if MCM is 
isolated. In syndromic conditions, the final prognosis is 
that of the underlying syndrome. 
V 
M 
Figure 2.28 Megacisterna magna at 25 weeks’ gestation. (a) Axial 
scan of the posterior fossa showing enlargement of the cisterna 
magna; the cerebellar vermis appears intact. (b) Sagittal scan of the 
posterior fossa demonstrating increased size of the cisterna magna 
(arrow). The vermian size and morphology are normal for gestational 
age, with a normal fastigial point and primary fissure. The vermis is 
not elevated. (c) Schematic diagram of the same finding. V, cerebellar 
vermis; M, megacisterna magna. 
DANDY–WALKER VARIANT (DWv) 
Definition and anatomy. DWv shares with DWM the 
counterclockwise rotation and hypoplasia of the vermis, 
with the former indicating that also in DWv there 
is an abnormality of the AMA.30 However, the vermis 
is less severely agenetic/hypoplastic than in DWM and, 
in addition, the agenesis/hypoplasia affects mainly the 
postero-inferior aspect of the vermis. Another difference 
from DWM is that in DWv the fourth ventricle 
a b 
c 
MEGACISTERNA MAGNA (MCM) 

is only mildly enlarged, and consequently the upward 
displacement of the tentorium, characteristic of 
DWM, is absent in DWv. As above mentioned unification 
of DW and DWv into a spectrum of variability of 
rhombencephalic roof development was proposed by 
Barkovich et al.;31 subsequently the same authors 
questioned whether DWv is a mild form of DWM or 
rather represents a generalized form of cerebellar 
hypoplasia; they suggest that the term DWv should be 
discarded since it may create confusion. On the other 
hand, in the view of other authors, the term may be 
still useful, in order to grade the severity of the anomalies 
of the posterior fossa in everyday practice, and, in 
addition, retaining this term does not lead to significant 
diagnostic confusion if embryologic concepts are 
correctly applied. These authors believe that the counterclockwise 
rotation of the vermis that is almost 
always associated is the key feature that allows differentiation 
of DWv from other forms of cerebellar 
hypoplasia.30,32 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The above anatomic features 
can be detected with ultrasound. The amount of CSF 
in the posterior fossa is only slightly increased. As 
already mentioned, neither the upward displacement 
of the tentorium nor enlargment of the posterior fossa 
are present in DWv. In addition, there is partialvermian 
agenesis/hypoplasia, mainly involving the 
postero-inferior part of the vermis, and a moderate 
counterclockwise rotation (Figure 2.29). The differential 
diagnosis with other cystic anomalies of the 
posterior fossa is given in Table 2.3. 
Prognosis. As already mentioned, it has been proposed 
that the term DWv be abandonent because it apparently 
represents a cluster of anomalies of the posterior fossa 
shared by completely different genetic and embryologic 
conditions, which have completely different prognoses 
and outcomes. Therefore, the overall prognosis of a vermian 
lesion sonographically consistent with the above definition 
of DWv will not and indeed cannot be described. 
36 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
V 
4V 
Figure 2.29 Dandy–Walker variant. (a) Axial view of 
the posterior fossa showing communication between the 
fourth ventricle and the area of the cisterna magna 
because of a defect/rotation of the vermis; the amount 
of CSF in the posterior fossa is only mildly increased. 
(b) Sagittal view of the posterior fossa showing an 
enlarged fourth ventricle (4V); there is partial agenesis of 
the postero-inferior part of the vermis and it is rotated 
counterclockwise (curved arrow). (c) Schematic diagram 
of the same finding. V, cerebellar vermis 
a b 
c 

A large number of heterogeneous syndromes, some of 
which have a genetic background, fall into this category. 
Pathologically, these conditions are mainly characterized 
by vermian dysgenesis (Joubert syndrome, rhombencephalosynapsis, 
etc.) or by a small posterior cranial 
fossa. Some but not all of the former conditions may 
be detected on ultrasound, while most of those in the 
second group are evident on the axial transcerebellar 
view, due to a very small posterior fossa, as in the Chiari 
II syndrome. However, it should be kept in mind that 
when global decreased cerebellar biometry is present, 
this requires that attention be focused on the brainstem 
anatomy in order to differentiate cerebellar hypoplasia 
from pontocerebellar hypoplasia. Cerebellar hypoplasia 
can be primitive or secondary to a chromosomal anomaly, 
infection, or a polymalformative syndrome. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 37 
RETROCEREBELLAR ARACHNOID CYST 
Definition and anatomy. A retrocerebellar arachnoid 
cyst is a CSF collection that does not communicate 
with the surrounding subarachnoid spaces nor with the 
ventricular system (Table 2.3). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographically, a retrocerebellar 
arachnoid cyst appears as a sonolucent cystic mass. 
Depending on its size, the cyst may compress and displace 
the cerebellum, causing a false impression of a DWM 
(Figure 2.30). In addition, large arachnoid cysts may 
obstruct the circulation of CSF, leading to secondary 
obstructive hydrocephalus. 
Prognosis. The overall prognosis is good, and the 
condition does not need treatment if compression on 
the cerebellum is absent or asymptomatic. In contrast, 
if the cyst is large and symptomatic, it may require 
surgery. 
Figure 2.30 Retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst. (a) Axial view of the posterior fossa showing a sonolucent cystic mass. (b) Sagittal view of the 
posterior fossa showing a large arachnoid cyst. 
NON-CYSTIC POSTERIOR FOSSA MALFORMATIONS 
JOUBERT SYNDROME 
Definition and anatomy. This entity, which is inherited 
with an autosomal recessive pattern, features a developmental 
defect of the cerebellar vermis and abnormal 
pontomesencephalic junction, which result in the wellknown 
‘molar tooth’ sign on axial MRI scans. It is of 
note that Joubert syndrome represents an integrated clinical–
radiologic diagnosis; in fact, the ‘molar tooth’ sign 
is not exclusive to Joubert syndrome but can be found 
also in other syndromes.13,20,31 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is extremely difficult and 
has been reported in a very limited number of cases. On 
the transcerebellar view, the vermis usually appears 
hypoplastic: its superior part is present but the inferior 
one is absent; the absence of the inferior part produces 
a midline cleft that connects the fourth ventricle to the 
cisterna magna, resulting in an umbrella-shaped fourth 
ventricle in axial and coronal planes. The fourth ventricle 
can be slight dilated without the formation of a posterior 
a b 

fossa cyst or hydrocephalus. However, the diagnosis of 
this anomaly is based on the pathognomonic ‘molar 
tooth’ sign on axial MRI scans (Figure 2.31); this results 
from a combination of mesencephalon, vermis, and superior 
cerebellar peduncle abnormalities. 
Prognosis. The poor prognosis is characterized by episodic 
hyperpneic–apneic spells, abnormal eye movements, 
hypotonia, ataxia, developmental delay, and mental 
retardation. 
38 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.31 Joubert syndrome. The ‘molar tooth’ sign (arrow) is 
visualized on axial brain MRI and results from the combination of 
a hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, elongated and thickened superior 
cerebellar peduncles, and a deep interpeduncular fossa. 
RHOMBENCEPHALOSYNAPSIS 
Definition and anatomy. This rare malformation is 
characterized by vermian agenesis associated with fusion 
of the cerebellar hemispheres and peduncles.13,31 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the axial transcerebellar view¸ 
the vermis is absent and the hypoplastic cerebellar hemispheres 
are fused on the midline. The posterior fossa is 
small (Figure 2.32), and associated supratentorial abnormalities 
(absence of the septum pellucidum, abnormal 
gyration, and hydrocephalus) may be present. The diagnosis 
is confirmed by MRI. 
Prognosis. This is commonly poor, with most affected 
patients dying in childhood. 
Figure 2.32 Rhombencephalosynapsis. Axial view of the posterior 
fossa showing an abnormal cerebellum formed of a single 
block with no individualization of vermian structure. 

Definition and anatomy. This malformation is characterized 
by a small posterior fossa with downward displacement 
of the vermis, the brainstem, and the fourth ventricle 
into the foramen magnum or even into the cervical spinal 
canal. An open spinal dysraphism is constantly associated. 
Pathogenesis. Embryologically, during the fourth week, 
closure of the neural tube (day 25, posterior neuropore) 
results in an accumulation of ependymal fluid and dilatation 
of the three cerebral vesicles. If the closure of the 
neuropore fails (myelomeningocele), the physiologic 
dilatation of the rhombencephalic vesicle is impaired, 
and this in turn determines a small posterior fossa. 
Eventually, the brainstem and the cerebellum, which 
have normal growth, are no longer contained in the small 
posterior fossa and herniate through the cervical canal 
behind the upper cervical cord; the cerebellum surrounds 
the brainstem and compresses the collicular plate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the second trimester, the 
ultrasound findings indicating the presence of the 
Chiari II malformation are frontal bossing, which is 
responsible for the lemon sign (Figure 2.33a), and 
obliteration of the cisterna magna, with abnormal curvature 
of the cerebellar hemispheres (the banana sign) 
(Figure 2.33b,c). In addition, moderate to severe ventriculomegaly 
develops in most cases (70%) during the 
2nd trimester, and worsens in the 3rd trimester. 
(Figure 2.33a). In the 3rd trimester, ultrasound examination 
of the fetal posterior fossa is limited by 
increased calvarial mineralization; with this limitation, 
the cerebellum is often not visible, while the classic 
lemon sign is less reliable, being present only in up to 
50% of cases. In these cases, the measurement of the 
clivus–supraoccipital angle may be useful to evaluate 
the shape and size of the posterior fossa.35 These findings 
may be used to assist detection of open dysraphism 
such as myelomeningocele by means of both transverse 
and coronal scans of the vertebral arches. 
Prognosis. See the section below on spina bifida. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 39 
CHIARI II MALFORMATION 
Figure 2.33 Chiari II malformation. (a) Axial view of the fetal head showing moderate ventriculomegaly and frontal bone concavity 
(lemon sign) (arrows). (b) The cerebellum is banana-shaped (arrow) as it wraps around the midbrain. (c) Image showing the inferior 
displacement of the fetal cerebellum; the arrow indicates a fetal clavicle. 
ANOMALIES OF NEURONAL PROLIFERATION AND 
MIGRATION AND OF CORTICAL ORGANIZATION 
Any event that is able to alter neuronal proliferation, 
migration, or cortical organization can cause a cerebral 
cortex malformation. Neuroblast proliferation starts in 
the 7th week of gestation in the subependymal region 
around the walls of the lateral ventricle. This proliferation 
is particularly active between 13 and 26 weeks’ gestation. 
After 26 weeks, the volume of the germinal zone rapidly 
decreases. Neuronal migration to the cerebral cortex starts 
around the 8th week and is completed by 20–24 week’s 
gestation; glial cell migration continues following its completion 
until after birth.4,36 During this period, the neurons 
migrate from the germinal matrix within the periventricular 
zone, on radial glial guides, towards the pial surface. 
Waves of migrating neuroblasts lead to the formation of a 
superficial cortical plate separated from the deep germinal 
layer by an intermediate zone containing concentric 
migrating cells.19,36 The migration waves form an ‘insideout’, 
six-layered cortex in which the first wave of migrating 
neuroblasts forms the deepest cortical layer, while the 
later waves constitute the most superficial layer. At the 
same time, the intermediate zone increases in width and 
forms the white matter. Recently it has been shown that 
not all cerebral cortical neurons are generated in the germinal 
zones of the dorsal telencephalon and migrate radially 
to the developing cortex; in fact a discrete number of 
cortical interneurons are generated in the lateral, medial 
and caudal ganglionic eminences and migrate tangentially 
into the cerebral cortex. In addition, recent reports have 
made it clear that radial glia are much more active participants 
in cortical development. Indeed, radial glia are 
a b c 

40 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Microcephaly is defined as a small head 
circumference, that is more than 3 standard deviations 
below the mean for postnatal or gestational age.13,19 It is 
commonly characterized by a small size of the brain, 
mainly due to hypoplasia of the frontal lobes (microencephaly). 
Microcephaly may be considered as a sign of 
many underlying causes. A new classification of microcephaly 
has been recently proposed; three categories can 
be identified: (a) primary microcephaly, or microcephalia 
vera with normal to thin cortex; (b) Microlissencephaly 
(extreme microcephaly with thick cortex) and (c) microcephaly 
associated with extensive polymicrogyria.36 Its 
incidence varies between 1 in 6250 and 1 in 8500 births, 
and it increases during the first year of life. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Microcephaly is believed 
to result from decreased neuronal and glial proliferation/ 
increased apoptosis. The etiology is heterogeneous. 
Primitive microcephaly should be differentiated from 
microcephaly secondary to environmental insults. Primary 
microcephaly may be inherited with an autosomal recessive, 
or dominant or an X-linked pattern. One hundred 
distinct familial syndromes characterized by microcephaly 
have been documented, with 20–30% of these 
being estimated to be genetic. In addition, microcephaly 
is a common feature in chromosomal disorders. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The main issue regarding the 
prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly is its difficulty, due 
to the fact that microcephaly is of late onset in most 
cases, with the impairment in head growth becoming 
clearly evident in the 3rd trimester or even only after 
birth. At present, the sonographic diagnosis is mainly 
based on biometric parameters. The most important 
diagnostic criterion is a head circumference below 
3 standard deviations from the mean. Other biometric 
parameters, such as head circumference/abdominal 
circumference (HC/AC) ratio and head circumference/ 
femurlengh (HC/FL) ratio, may be useful in doubtful 
cases (Figure 2.34a). Some time ago, a nomogram of 
the normal dimensions of the frontal lobes was proposed 
as a potential tool for the prenatal diagnosis of 
microcephaly, in view of the fact that the anterior lobes 
seem to be primarily involved in this malformation.37 
Microcephaly also leads to a disproportion between 
the skull and the face, which is also due to the fact that 
the frontal lobes are severely hypoplastic; this causes a 
typical sloping forehead, which is present in most cases 
of this defect, especially from the late 2nd trimester 
onwards (Figure 2.34). Among the various signs 
described in some but not all cases of microcephaly are 
large subarachnoid spaces and an absent or reduced 
flow of the anterior cerebral arteries.9 The gyral pattern 
is normal in primary microcephaly and abnormal in the 
other 2 forms of microcephaly. However, the degrees 
of cerebral gyration and sulcation are difficult to assess 
with prenatal ultrasound. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the craniosynostoses, 
in which an indentation of the cranial 
outline is present. 
• Associated anomalies. Microcephaly is often associated 
with abnormal gyration, agenesis of the corpus 
callosum, and holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes most commonly associated with microcephaly 
are:13 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . microcephaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic kidney, and 
other CNS anomalies 
neuronal and glial precursors as well as guides and may, 
as well, have a role in orchestrating the entire migration 
process.36 Myelination, in contrast, starts only after birth. 
Gyration and sulcation occur during neuronal migration 
and continue following its completion until after birth. In 
this section, we describe the main malformations due to 
abnormal neuronal/glial proliferation or apoptosis, abnormal 
migration, and cortical organization. 
Incidence. 1 in 6250–8500 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A head circumference below 3 standard deviations from the mean of the gestational age is 
considered a reliable indicator of microcephaly. Sloping forehead. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Depends on the etiology and on the association with other anomalies. In the isolated form, the severity 
of mental delay increases with the degree of impairment of head circumference. 
MICROCEPHALY 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 41 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .microcephaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia, and cataract), CNS 
anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, and 
cephalocele) 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . microcephaly + 
lissencephaly, congenital heart disease, facial anomalies, 
and polydactyly 
• Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome: look for . microcephaly 
+ genitourinary defects 
• Seckel syndrome: look for . microcephaly + 
intrauterine growth retardation and facial anomalies 
The empiric recurrence risk of microcephaly is 10%. 
In syndromic cases, the recurrence risk is that of the 
underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. When microcephaly is suspected 
or diagnosed, it is necessary to carefully assess the brain 
structures in order to rule out associated brain anomalies. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, because of the strong association 
with extra-CNS anomalies. Karyotyping should also 
be performed, because of the relatively high risk of 
chromosomal anomalies. Finally, the high association 
rate with genetic forms (with an autosomal recessive 
mode of inheritance) strictly supports the need for an 
accurate familial analysis. 
Postnatal treatment. Treatment is only possible for 
microcephaly if it is due to craniosynostosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
of microcephaly depends on the etiology, the associated 
anomalies, and the size of the head. When 
microcephaly is isolated the mental delay increases 
with the severity of the impairment of head circumference. 
However, clinically, patients with microcephalia 
vera are less severely affected than those with the other 
2 forms. The former has a developmental delay and 
mild corticospinal tract signs in infancy; the latter are 
severely hypotonic at birth and rapidly develop 
myotonic seizures. 
Figure 2.34 Microcephaly. (a) The sonographic diagnosis of microcephaly is based mainly on biometric parameters such as an HC/AC 
ratio below the 1st centile. (b) Side view of a 30-week fetus showing a typical sloping forehead. (c) Corresponding photograph after birth. 
a 
b c 

Definition. HME is characterized by an overgrowth of 
one cerebral hemisphere, with gyral disorders and white 
matter gliosis.19 The brainstem and cerebellum may also 
be affected. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. HME can be caused 
by abnormal neuronal and glial proliferation/ 
apoptosis.36 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The sonographic diagnosis is 
based on asymmetry of the cerebral hemispheres, with 
overgrowth of one cerebral hemisphere, dilatation of 
the ipsilateral ventricle and a consequent shift of the 
midline (Figure 2.35). Gyral anomalies are commonly 
associated, but are difficult to identify on ultrasound. A 
detailed anatomic scan must be performed in order to 
detect associated corporeal hemihypertrophy and 
hamartomatous lesions, which may indicate the presence 
of on associated syndrome (see below). It should 
be underlined that HME can be detected only late in 
gestation or after birth. 
• Differential diagnosis. The hemisphere asymmetry 
can be also caused by a brain neoplasm and its mass 
effect. However, in this case, the tumor mass is easily 
detected on ultrasound. 
• Associated anomalies. Lissencephaly is frequently 
associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes most commonly associated with 
HME are:13 
• Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome: look for . 
hemimegalencephaly + hemangiomatosis of one or 
more limbs, soft tissue hypertrophy, cardiac anomalies, 
kidney agenesis, and laryngeal atresia 
• Proteus syndrome: look for . hemimegalencephaly 
+ partial gigantism of hands and feet, hemihypertrophy, 
subcutaneous hamartomatous tumors, and 
macrocephaly 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be 
discussed with the parents, considering the low risk and 
the very poor prognosis of HME itself. In the case of continuation 
of pregnancy, the perinatal management should 
also be discussed with the parents, for the same reasons. 
Postnatal treatment. The only possible treatment 
consists of a hemispherectomy of the affected hemisphere. 
Often, this is the only way to control seizures. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
poor, with epilepsy unresponsive to treatment, severe 
mental retardation, and hemiplegia. 
42 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
HEMIMEGALENCEPHALY (HME) 
Incidence. Unknown, but very low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Based on asymmetry of the cerebral hemispheres with dilatation of the lateral ventricle on 
the affected side and a shift of the midline. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Very poor: severe mental retardation, seizures, and hemiplegia. 
Figure 2.35 Hemimegalencephaly. 
(a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing 
a shift in the midline echo, with overgrowth 
of one hemisphere and ipsilateral 
ventriculomegaly (arrow) already 
present at 22 weeks’ gestational age. 
In this case, the unilateral ventriculomegaly 
was the first sign of hemimegalencephaly. 
(b) Coronal scan of the fetal 
brain showing unilateral mild enlargement 
of the right occipital horn (arrow). 
a b 

Definition. In a recent classification system,36 malformations 
due to abnormal neuronal migration are categorized 
in three main groups: (a) Group A – Lissencephaly/subcortical 
band heterotopia spectrum (includes type I or classic 
lissencephaly); (b) Group B – Cobblestone Complex (formerly 
known as type II lissencephaly); (c) Group C – 
Heterotopias 1) subependymal, 2) subcortical (other than 
band heterotopia), 3) marginal glioneuronal. The term 
‘lissencephaly’ refers to a smooth brain surface with total 
absence of cortical convolutions. It is a synonym of 
agyria. Pachygyria refers to a simplified convolutional 
pattern with a low number of broadened gyri and shallow 
sulci (incomplete lissencephaly). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Within the group of neuronal 
migration anomalies, there is extreme variability in the 
phenotypic expression of lissencephalies, accounting for 
the denomination ‘agyria–pachigyria’ that is widely used in 
everyday practice. Group A includes subcortical band heterotopia 
(characterized by a poorly organized band of 
arrested neurons residing beneath a relatively normal cortex) 
and Type I (classic) lissencephaly (characterized by 
agyria with or without pachygyria; in addition, there is a 
four-layered cortex instead of the classic six-layered one). 
LIS1 and DCX gene mutations are those mainly responsible 
for these pathologic entities. Miller–Dieker syndrome 
with deletions of LIS1 and telomeric genes is included in 
this group. Group B includes the cobblestone complex 
(lissencephaly type II) characterized by an irregularly 
bumpy and knobbed surface of the brain. It is characterized 
by a disorganized unilayered cortex on histopathologic 
examination. Congenital muscular dystrophy 
syndromes such as Fukuyama and Walker–Warburg 
syndromes are included in this group. These syndromes 
result from a deficiency of a protein group that plays a 
fundamental role in muscular contraction and in CNS 
development. POMT, FKRP and FCMD gene mutations 
are the main determinants of this group of pathology. 
Heterotopia (group c) refers to arrested migration of normal 
neurons along the radial glial path between the 
ependyma of the lateral ventricle and the cortex. According 
to the location, it can be classified into subependymal, subcortical 
and marginal glioneuronal heterotopia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Prenatal detection of lissencephaly 
remains a challenge even for the expert, and can be 
achieved only if the ultrasound examination is done from 
the late 2nd trimester onwards. In fact, due to the timing of 
normal neuronal development, lissencephaly cannot be 
reliably suspected before the 22–24th week of gestation, 
when some normal gyri and sulci become well defined.38 
Familiarity with the normal ultrasound pattern of development 
of the fetal sulci (Figure 2.36), and especially of the 
parieto-occipital fissure and the Sylvian fissure/insula 
(Figure 2.37 and 2.38), is of the utmost importance to 
allow suspicion of lissencephaly as early as the late 2nd 
trimester. In fact, the absence or abnormal appearance of 
a particular sulcus at the appropriate fetal age should raise 
suspicion about the possibility of abnormal or delayed 
cortical development. A sulcus or fissure is first seen as a 
small dot on the surface of the brain; later, a V-shaped 
identation forms and finally it deepens and is visible as an 
echogenic line that extends into the brain in a Y-shaped 
configuration. Since mild ventriculomegaly (Figure 2.39) 
can be the first sign of abnormal/delayed brain maturation, 
it has been suggested that a follow-up ultrasound examination 
be performed at 24–26 weeks for the assessment 
of cerebral sulci in fetuses with apparently ‘isolated’ mild 
ventriculomegaly detected at the midtrimester scan (18–21 
weeks). However, currently, if no associated anomalies are 
present, the diagnosis is made prenatally in very few cases. 
Moreover, although there have been recent reports describing 
sonographic criteria for the diagnosis of lissencephaly,39 
it must be stressed that cerebral involvement may vary significantly 
in severity and extension in lissencephaly, and 
only the most severe forms can be suspected on ultrasound; 
milder degrees of cerebral involvement such as subcortical 
band heterotopia are very difficult, if not impossible, to 
diagnose. As reported by several authors, gyral anomalies 
and neuronal heterotopia are the anomalies most commonly 
missed on prenatal ultrasound due to technical limitations 
and/or to the fact that routine ultrasound is not 
usually performed late in gestation, when gyration and sulcation 
mainly occur. MRI represents a valuable diagnostic 
tool, being more accurate than ultrasound in the detection 
of gyral disorders. The optimal time for its use appears to 
be after 22–24 weeks’ gestation. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 43 
LISSENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Unknown in the fetus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In suspected cases, absence of normally present sulci, lack of opercularization of the Sylvian 
fissure, or early abnormal sulcation can be seen. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Poor/very poor in most cases. 

44 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.36 Fetal cerebral sulci. (a,b) Sagittal views of the fetal brain: images of a 30-week fetus showing ultrasound appearance of (a) 
cingulate sulcus (arrows), above the corpus callosum (CSP, cavum septum pellucidum), and (b) convex sulci (arrows). (c,d) Coronal views 
of the fetal brain: images of a 30-week fetus showing the appearance of (c) the calcarine fissure (arrow); (PF: posterior fossa) and (d) the 
cingulate sulcus (arrow) (FH, frontal horns). 
Figure 2.37 Axial views of the 
fetal brain: images showing ultrasound 
appearance of the parieto-occipital fissure 
at (a) 21 weeks’ and (b) 23 weeks’ 
gestational age. 
a b 
c d 
a b 

• Differential diagnosis. Care should be taken in 
diagnosing lissencephaly prior to 24 weeks38 gestation, 
as a smooth cerebral surface is a normal finding 
until 20–22 weeks. 
• Association with other malformations. Lissencephaly 
can be associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
Dandy–Walker malformation, micrognathia, 
omphalocele, polydactyly, congential heart disease, 
and urinary defects, and, frequently polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes most commonly associated with 
lissencephaly are:13 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .lissencephaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract) and 
CNS anomalies (ventriculomegaly, midline anomalies, 
cerebellar anomalies and cephalocele) 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . lissencephaly + 
microcephaly, congenital heart disease, facial anomalies, 
and polydactyly 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . lissencephaly + 
microcephaly, Dandy–Walker malformation, proptosis, 
diffuse joint contractures, subcutaneous tissue 
edema, and intrauterine growth retardation. 
Obstetric management. If abnormal sulcal development 
is suspected, further investigations should include 
MRI and genetic evaluation (fluorescence in situ hybriditation 
(FISH) for 17p13.3 deletion (Miller–Dicker 
region)). 
Postnatal treatment. No treatment is available. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
usually poor, and is characterized by severe mental 
retardation, hypotonia, convulsions, and death during 
the first 5 years of life. The prognosis is less severe in 
the case of heterotopia. However, in these cases, postnatal 
outcome cannot be extrapolated from postnatal 
series, which usually include only symptomatic individuals 
who are referred to the specialist and ignore those 
patients who remain asymptomatic. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 45 
Figure 2.38 Axial views of the fetal brain. (a) Ultrasound appearance of a 19-week fetus showing a smooth Sylvian fossa without any 
angularity (arrow). (b) Ultrasound image of a 23-week fetus showing a plateau-like Sylvian fossa with obtuse posterior angulation (arrows) 
at the site of the developing circular sulcus. (c) Ultrasound image of a 26-week fetus showing further development of the Sylvian fissure. 
The temporal operculum is overgrowing the insula, and forms an acute angle posteriorly (arrows). 
Figure 2.39 Lissencephaly: (a) Ultrasound image showing a smooth brain surface (arrows) in a 32-week fetus with lissencephaly; 
arrhinia was also present. On this midsagittal view of the fetal face, the absence of the nose determines the extremely flat profile (arrowhead). 
(b) Ultrasound image of a 29-week fetus with lissencephaly. Borderline ventriculomegaly is present; in addition, the parietooccipital 
fissure is not identified in the expected location (arrow) and a shallow, flat Sylvian fissure/insula (arrow) with absence of 
angularity at the insular margins can be seen. 
a b c 
a b 

Definition. Schizencephaly is characterized by the 
presence of abnormal clefts (70% of cases) in the part 
of the cerebral mantle that separates the lateral ventricles 
from the subarachnoid spaces. Clefts are lined 
by polymicrogyric gray matter, so that a loss of substance 
due to acquired causes, such as encephaloclastic 
porencephaly, can be ruled out.19 It can be uni- or bilateral, 
symmetric or asymmetric. Of the two types of 
schizencephaly, closed lips schizencephaly shows very 
thin clefts (fused clefts), while open lips schizencephaly 
has clefts filled with CSF and is often associated with 
ventriculomegaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. At present, schizencephaly is 
considered a malformation due to abnormal cortical 
organization (including later neuronal migration). It was 
recently classified together with polymicrogyria as they 
are often observed together in patients.36 Its etiology is 
uncertain, but it may represent an early destructive event 
before completion of neuronal migration at 16–20 
weeks’ gestation or a primary neuronal migrational disorder, 
sometimes associated with a mutation of the 
EMX2 homeobox gene, which is needed for the regular 
formation of the cerebral cortex. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Only open lips schizencephaly 
has been diagnosed in utero. It is characterized by 
the presence of a CSF-filled cleft of one or both cerebral 
hemispheres that extends from the subarachnoid spaces 
to the lateral ventricles (Figure 2.40). The lateral ventricles 
are often dilated and clearly visible on the transventricular 
view. The most common site of the cleft is the 
Sylvian scissure, and it is often associated with septooptic 
dysplasia. 
• Differential diagnosis. Differential diagnosis with a 
large Sylvian porencephalic cyst is extremely difficult. 
However, type I porencephaly differs from schizencephaly 
not only in the smaller size of the lesion but 
also in both the unilaterality and the shape. In fact, 
schizencephaly is commonly wedge-shaped rather 
than round or irregular like the porencephalic cyst. 
Moreover, in schizencephaly, the cortical clefts are 
lined with gray matter. Due to the relatively frequent 
association with septo-optic dysplasia, a differential 
diagnosis with lobar holoprosencephaly and isolated 
septo-optic dysplasia should be made, since both 
share the fusion of the anterior horns and the absence 
of the cavum septi pellucidi: the presence of the cleft is 
typical of schizencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetrical management. In cases of open bilateral 
shizencephaly, termination of pregnancy can be offered 
prior to viability, due to the extremely poor prognosis of 
schizencephaly. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. Unilateral closed 
schizencephaly is occasionally found incidentally in 
adults undergoing MRI for other reasons; in these 
cases, the affected individuals are asymptomatic or 
have minor symptoms. In contrast, open bilateral 
schizencephaly is generally associated with seizures and 
46 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SCHIZENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Characterized by the presence of CSF-filled clefts of cerebral hemispheres that extend from 
subarachnoid spaces to the lateral ventricle. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Variable in closed forms; poor in most cases of open schizencephaly. 
Figure 2.40 Open lips 
schizencephaly. Coronal 
scan of the fetal brain 
showing full-thickness 
cleft of the cortex (small 
arrows), connecting the lateral 
ventricles with the subarachnoid 
space. The big 
arrow indicates the choroid 
plexus. 

severe mental retardation. In fact, the presence of 
bilateral clefts and the association with other cerebral 
anomalies are poor prognostic indicators. The severity 
of the disease varies with the extension of the cortical 
lesion. Bilaterality of the anomaly is correlated with 
more serious psychomotor retardation. When it is associated 
with septo-optic dysplasia, blindness is also present. 
Epilepsy is frequent. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 47 
DESTRUCTIVE LESIONS 
Independently of the cause, the outcome of a cerebral 
insult depends mainly on the age at which it occurs and on 
the severity of the insult itself. The main destructive anomalies 
are hydranencephaly, porencephaly, and multicystic 
encephalomalacia. To understand the meaning and the 
ultrasound pictures of these entities, it is necessary to consider 
that the reaction of the fetal brain to an insult changes 
according to the gestational age at which it occurs: until the 
2nd trimester, the lesion is characterized by a scarce glial 
reaction; therefore, the necrotic tissue is completely reabsorbed 
and the final result is a smooth-walled cyst (porencephaly). 
In the 3rd trimester, the glial reaction becomes 
more intense; consequently, the cyst will have irregular 
walls and small septa (multicystic encephalomalacia). 
Definition. Hydranencephaly is characterized by 
a complete or almost complete absence of the cerebral 
cortex, with the normal brain tissue being replaced by a 
large fluid collection covered by leptomeninges and 
dura.19 The presence of the falx and of the cranial nerves 
demonstrates that the hemispheres have developed but 
have subsequently been destroyed. The incidence at birth 
is 1–2.5 in 10 000. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The most accepted hypothesis 
to explain this particular lesion is interruption of 
the blood supply in early pregnancy. In fact, in animal 
models, this type of lesion can be induced by occluding 
the carotid arteries. Moreover, congenital infections 
such as toxoplasma and cytomegalovirus can have a 
similar effect by causing necrotizing vasculitis with 
consequent destruction of the cerebral tissue. It should 
come in mind that a number of situations can lead to 
an impairment of fetal brain perfusion. These include 
placental, maternal (hypoxia, abdominal trauma, etc.), 
and fetal (infection and coagulation factor deficits) 
causes. Finally, the twin–twin transfusion syndrome 
(TTTS), if severe, may also be responsible for 
hydranencephaly. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydranencephaly is characterized 
by a huge fluid collection filling the whole cranial cavity, 
with no recognizable cerebral cortex (Figure 2.41a). 
The falx is usually present (Figure 2.41b); the meninges, 
thalami, basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum may 
be normal. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes alobar holoprosencephaly 
and severe hydrocephalus. In the former, 
the thalami are fused and residual cortex is visible. 
In severe hydrocephalus, a layer of cortex can usually 
be seen and the falx is always present, even if it may 
have ruptured. Color Doppler can contribute to a correct 
diagnosis by showing absent flow in the anterior 
and middle cerebral artery in hydranencephaly. 
HYDRANENCEPHALY 
Incidence. 1–2.5 in 10 000 newborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A huge fluid collection filling the whole cranial cavity, with no recognizable cerebral cortex. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Very poor. 

• Associated anomalies. In most cases, hydranencephaly 
is an isolated anomaly, although an association with 
renal dysplasia and cardiac defects has been reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
The most common syndrome possibly associated with 
hydranencephaly is Fowler syndrome: hydrocephalus/ 
hydranencephaly + arthrogryposis. 
Obstetric management. Due to the poor prognosis, 
termination of pregnancy should be offered prior to 
viability. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis is uniformly 
poor. Hydranencephaly is associated with severe 
psychomotor delay, nystagmus, optic atrophy, epilepsy, 
and hypothermia. Death usually occurs within the first 
2 years of life. 
48 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.41 Hydranencephaly. (a) 
The image shows the typical features of 
hydranencephaly, with a large cystic 
mass filling the entire cranial cavity. 
(b) A midline falx is present. 
PORENCEPHALY 
Incidence. 1 in 9000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Cystic usually unilateral lesion communicating with the ipsilateral ventricle and/or 
the subarachnoid space. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on the extension of the lesion. There can be psychomotor retardation, hemiparesis, 
and epilepsy. 
Definition. The term ‘porencephaly’ includes every type 
of lesion with cavitary character, i.e. a fluid-filled area 
within the brain that commonly communicates with 
the ventricles, subarachnoid spaces, or both. It involves 
the destruction of previously developed brain tissue, 
with subsequent cavity formation. It may be isolated or 
associated with ventriculomegaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Some authors19 consider 
two types of porencephaly: type I is due to parenchymal 
damage followed by liquification/reabsorption 
(encephaloclastic porencephaly), resulting from an 
insult (ischemia, hemorrhage, etc.) during the 3rd 
trimester. It is more frequent and usually unilateral. It 
has a round or irregular shape. Type II (schizencephalic 
porencephaly), which is usually bilateral, is due 
to an anomaly in the process of neural migration/ 
cortical organization and is completely cystic with 
a smooth wall. It is best considered separately as a 
primary developmental abnormality. Serious hemodynamic 
alterations can be responsible for the formation 
of porencephalic cysts, as in TTTS (usually in the 
recipient twin). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Porencephaly appears as a 
unilateral cystic lesion, usually communicating with the 
ipsilateral ventricle (Figure 2.42a) and/or the subarachnoid 
space. It does not cause any mass effect, being due 
to distruction of brain tissue. The cystic walls and the 
content of the cyst may vary according to the gestational 
a b 

age at which the insult occurs. If it is secondary to 
hemorrhage, it is possible to visualize a hyperechoic 
focus evolving into an anechoic CSF-filled cyst. 
• Differential diagnosis. Type I differs from schizencephaly 
not only in the smaller size of the lesion but 
also in both its unilaterality and shape. In fact, 
schizencephaly is commonly wedge-shaped rather 
than round or irregular. Moreover, cortical clefts are 
lined with gray matter. Porencephaly must also be 
differentiated from multicystic encephalomalacia, 
which results from a diffuse insult to the brain late 
in gestation, with a large portion of cortical tissue 
replaced by multiple and bilateral cystic lesions 
(Figure 2.42c). Unlike porencephaly, these cysts 
have shaggy walls and are separated by hyperechoic 
strands of glial tissue. The difference with arachnoid 
cysts and tumors lies in the mass effect, which is 
present in the latter and absent in porencephaly. 
Moreover, arachnoid cysts do not communicate 
with the lateral ventricles. 
• Associated anomalies. The most frequently associated 
anomaly is ventriculomegaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. Type 
II porencephaly may be associated with orofaciodigital 
syndrome type I:13 porencephaly + facial anomalies 
(including cleft lip and micrognathia), tongue hamartoma, 
and other CNS anomalies. 
Obstetric management. In the bilateral form, it is necessary 
to look for other anomalies, whereas the unilateral 
form is usually isolated, being due either to ischemia or 
to hemorrhage. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. These depend 
on the extent of the lesion; there can be psychomotor 
retardation, hemiparesis, and epilepsy. In type II, due to 
the bilaterality of the lesion and the tendency to be part 
of a syndrome, the prognosis is worse. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 49 
Figure 2.42 Porencephaly. (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing a cystic cavity in the brain that communicates with the ipsilateral lateral 
ventricle, which appears mildly dilated (arrow). (b) At 35 weeks, a large porencephalic cyst fills the entire distal cerebral 
hemisphere. (c) Twin–twin transfusion syndrome: coronal view of the donor’s twin, showing multiple encephaloclastic cysts. 
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE 
Incidence. Rare: 1 in 10 000 pregnancies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Grade 1: not usually detectable. Grades 2 and 3: presence of hyperechoic clots, which can 
fill the entire ventricle or be scattered within it. Grade 4: extension of the hemorrhage to the parenchyma as a 
hyperechogenic area. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Good for grades 1 and 2; worse for grades 3 and 4 (neurologic sequelae can be present in >50% of cases). 
a b c 

Definition. Based on the anatomic location, several types 
of hemorrhage can be distinguished: subdural, subarachnoid, 
intraparenchymal, subependymal, and intraventricular. 
Although rare (1 in 10 000 pregnancies), the 
most frequent form in the fetus is the subependymal/ 
intraventricular hemorrhage; it is also frequent in the 
premature neonate. In fact, in premature infants less 
than 32 weeks and below 1500 g weight, its incidence 
reaches 30–40%. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The initial lesion is a bleeding 
episode in the germinative matrix, which has its 
maximal extension at about the 26th week, regressing 
thereafter. This is a highly vascularized region with thinwalled 
vessels, and because of this anatomic characteristic, 
very rarely can the hemorrhage be stopped or 
restrained. In a premature baby, with an immature 
autoregulatory system for vascular tone and consequently 
for cerebral blood flow, hypoxia and hypercapnia 
can cause an increase in blood flow, thereby 
distending the fragile vascular bed of the matrix. In the 
fetus, a number of conditions can lead to impairment of 
fetal brain perfusion. These can be of placental, maternal, 
or fetal origin. Among maternal causes, the following 
should be considered: history of recent abdominal 
trauma, anticoagulant therapy (e.g. warfarin), coagulation 
disorders, and hyperpyrexia (> 38°C). Fetal predisposing 
conditions include congenital coagulation factor 
deficiency (mainly factors V and X), cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations, and severe TTTS. However, the 
most important determinant of fetal intracranial hemorrhage 
is represented by an autoimmune disease, fetomaternal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FMAIT). FMAIT 
is due to the maternal production of antibodies against 
paternal antigens present on fetal platelets that are not 
recognized by the maternal immune system. Maternal 
exposure to these antigens during pregnancy can lead 
to the production of various classes of immunoglobulins: 
the IgG antibodies are small enough to cross the placental 
barrier and enter the fetal circulation, causing severe 
thrombocytopenia. Unlike hemolytic disease of the newborn, 
FMAIT can also occur in the first pregnancy if 
there is parental incompatibility. Depending on the time 
of onset, the disease is referred to as FMAIT (fetomaternal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia) or NAITP (neonatal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia). The former often leads 
to severe hemorrhage and even intrauterine death during 
midtrimester, while the latter is the most common cause 
of severe thrombocytopenia in neonates. Among the various 
platelet antigens involved in FMAIT, immunization 
against human platelet antigen (HPA)-1a (P1A1) is 
by far the most common, accounting for 80–85% 
of cases. The importance of recognizing this cause of 
fetal cerebral hemorrhage is that it can be effectively 
treated, if disclosed prior to the hemorrhagic episode, 
with intravenous immunoglobulins and intrauterine 
transfusion of compatible platelets. In some cases, the 
cause of the hemorrhage remains unknown. 
A simple classification divides intracranial hemorrhage 
into four grades based on severity: 
• Grade 1: the hemorrhage is limited to the germinative 
matrix 
• Grade 2: the hemorrhage diffuses from the matrix 
into the ventricle, which fills up with blood without 
distension 
• Grade 3: the hemorrhage distends the ventricles 
• Grade 4: there is extension of the hemorrhage to the 
parenchyma 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound appearance varies 
with the size, location and age of the hemorrhage. Grade 
1 hemorrhage is rarely detectable; it can sometimes form 
a subependymal cyst, which represents an occasional 
finding. Grades 2 and 3 hemorrhage can be recognized 
by the presence of hyperechoic clots, which may fill the 
entire ventricle or be scattered within it (Figure 2.43a). It 
can be limited to one ventricle, but is often bilateral; the 
third ventricle may also be involved (Figure 2.43b). The 
ependymal walls appear hyperechoic and irregular due 
to chemical ventriculitis caused by the blood. The presence 
of ventriculomegaly can persist even after 
the disappearance of the clots due to obstruction of the 
ventricular outlets by the clot debris. Grade 4, which 
is the most severe form, is characterized by a clot in the 
parenchyma, which appears as a hyperechoic, usually 
oval area; this often evolves with time into a porencephalic 
cyst. 
Differential diagnosis. The detection of clots inside 
the enlarged ventricles contributes to the identification 
of the hemorrhage as the cause of the ventriculomegaly. 
However, the most important condition 
that needs to be distinguished from hemorrhage is represented 
by cerebral lesions associated with infections 
– also because, in some cases (cytomegalovirus) the 
infection itself may be responsible for intracranial 
hemorrhagic events. The differential diagnosis should 
rely on an accurate maternal obstetric history and 
on the results of blood tests, which will show recent 
seroconversion. 
Obstetric management. The first issue is to reveal the 
cause of the hemorrhage. It is therefore useful to obtain a 
careful clinical history to rule out recent trauma. 
Maternal testing for coagulation disorders/platelet antibodies 
has to be done in order to detect possible FMAIT 
or congenital coagulation disorders. In the case of 
FMAIT, fetal platelets or whole blood transfusion may 
be needed together with, in the former case, intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG), with or without steroids. There 
has been much discussion regarding the best way to 
50 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

deliver a baby with an intracranial hemorrhage, because 
there are no clear data about the advantages of cesarean 
section compared with vaginal delivery in fetuses with 
mild to moderate FMAIT. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is high 
and with a low percentage of neurologic sequelae for 
the first two degrees of hemorrhage, especially grade 1 
(there is a good outcome in 95–100% of cases in grade 1 
and 65–70% in grade 2). In grade 3, significant neurologic 
sequelae may be present in over 50% of cases, reaching 
70–90% in grade 4. Grade 4 hemorrhage is also associated 
with a mortality rate between 30% and 70%. 
Posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus is a common complication 
of large hemorrhages. 
Recurrence. It should be underlined that a couple having 
a first child/fetus affected with FMAIT have a high risk 
(> 80%) of a recurrence in the following pregnancy. 
To avoid recurrence, early monitoring and treatment 
with IVIG may succeed in reducing the severity of the 
recurrence. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 51 
SPACE-OCCUPYING LESIONS 
Figure 2.43 Intraventricular hemorrage. 
(a) Coronal scan of the fetal brain 
showing hyperechoic clot (arrows) in the 
frontal horns of the lateral ventricle; the 
lateral ventricles are dilated, with 
echogenic borders. (b) Axial view 
of the fetal brain showing triventricular 
hydrocephalus due to aqueductal 
obstruction by the debris of the clot. 
The term ‘space-occupying lesion’ refers to different 
kinds of disorders with a mass effect, compressing and/or 
altering normal intracranial anatomy. The best known 
entities are arachnoid cysts (CSF collections enclosed 
within layers of arachnoid), cerebral tumors (teratomas, 
neuroblastoma, craniopharyngioma, etc.), and vascular 
lesions (aneurysms of the vein of Galen). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound aspect varies, 
depending on the type of lesion. 
Arachnoid cysts. These are represented by extra-axial 
sonolucent cysts of variable dimensions, with regular 
walls, with or without septa (Figure 2.44a), and which 
do not communicate with the ventricular system. The 
location may be supra- or, more rarely, subtentorial. 
Compression of the adjacent cerebral structures is evident 
in larger cysts. Secondary hydrocephalus develops 
when the foramen of Monro or the acqueduct are 
blocked by the cyst. Virtually all arachnoid cysts have 
been identified in the 3rd trimester. 
Aneurysm of the vein of Galen. This consists of an 
enlarged midline vascular structure, extending from the 
quadrigeminal plate cistern posteriorly towards the 
occiput, showing typical turbulence on color Doppler 
(Figure 2.44b). It may be associated with secondary hydrocephalus 
due to compression of the aqueduct and with 
high-output heart failure due to the arteriovenous fistula. 
Cerebral tumors. The tumor has a predominantly solid 
or mixed echostructure, with irregular contours. The 
localization is more frequently supratentorial. Tumor 
growth is rapid, often leading to macrocrania, which 
may be associated with signs of disruption of the normal 
intracranial anatomy and possible secondary hydrocephalus 
(Figure 2.45). Polyhydramnios may also be 
associated. According to the site of the tumor, a preliminary 
distinction between choroid plexus papilloma/ 
papillocarcinoma (intraventricular), craniopharyngioma, 
and the other varieties (including teratoma, astrocytoma, 
and others) can be made. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. These depend on 
the type of lesion. In particular, arachnoid cysts may be 
left in place, if asymptomatic, or be surgically removed 
or shunted if there are seizures on epilepsy. With regard 
to the relationship between location and prognosis, 
temporal cysts have the best prognosis, while subtentorial 
cysts in the posterior fossa are associated with the 
worst outcome. Aneurysms of the vein of Galen are 
associated with significant neonatal mortality, especially 
if cardiac failure is already evident in utero. An 
endovascular approach with embolizing agent and 
repeated procedures may provide a good outcome, 
especially if the anatomy of the lesion is favorable and 
if cardiac failure has not yet developed. The prognosis 
of cerebral tumors is generally poor, and depends on 
their histology and size. 
a b 

This term includes different anomalies deriving from 
failed closure of the neural tube between the 3rd and 
the 4th week of development, the best known being 
anencephaly, cefalocele, and spina bifida. 
52 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.44 (a) Arachnoid cyst: axial 
view of the fetal brain showing a large 
fluid collection in the temporal 
fossa; note the smooth contour of the 
cyst and its mass effect. (b) Aneurysm of 
the vein of Galen: color Doppler. 
Ventruculomegaly (V) Secondary to 
obstruction to also evident. 
Figure 2.45 Craniopharyngioma: a rare case of craniopharyngioma detected at 22 weeks of gestation. (a) Coronal view of the fetal head 
demonstrating a huge hyperechoic tumor occupying most of the intracranial cavity and causing macrocrania. (b) The fetus, after termination 
of pregnancy. Note the severe and early macrocrania. (c) At autopsy, after removal of the brain and most of the tumor, the sellar 
origin of the neoplasm is confirmed (AF, anterior fossa; PF, posterior fossa; Sph, sphenoid bone; T, tumor). 
ACRANIA/EXENCEPHALY/ANENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Formerly 1 in 1000, but decreasing due to prenatal diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Absence of the cranial vault. Exencephaly: cerebral hemispheres visible in the amniotic 
fluid. Anencephaly: no cerebral cortex remaining. Frog appearance of the orbits in the 2nd trimester (brain 
destroyed), ‘Mickey mouse’ appearance in the 1st trimester (brain hemispheres still present). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Uniformly fatal. 
a b c 
NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS 
a b 

Definition. These conditions are characterized by 
absence of the cranial vault and the cerebral hemispheres. 
In particular, acrania is absence of the cranial 
vault13 and includes two subtypes: exencephaly and 
anencephaly. The former shows relative normal amounts 
of abnormally developed cerebral tissue whereas the latter 
is characterized by total absence (due to intrauterine 
destruction) of the cerebral hemispheres. Its incidence is 
1 in 1000 births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is due to a closing defect 
of the neural tube in the rostral region. The most widely 
accepted theory is that in most cases, because of a failure 
of development of the cranial vault bones (acrania), the 
encephalic structures, covered only by the meninges 
(exencephaly), are in time subject to extensive destruction, 
with consequent transformation of the encephalon 
into a mass of soft tissue adhering to the base of the cranium 
(cerebral–vascular area) typical of anencephaly 
(Figure 2.46a). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Until a few decades ago, diagnosis 
was made only in the 2nd trimester, with a transthalamic 
scan used to measure the biparietal diameter, and was 
based on absence of the cranial vault with very little cerebral 
tissue being left. The typical appearance of anencephaly 
was the ‘frog’s face’ sign, because of the absence of cerebral 
tissue visible cephalad to the orbits. Currently, the diagnosis 
is often made at the end of the 1st trimester in the form of 
acrania (Figure 2.46b). In fact, in the 1st trimester, the cerebral 
hemispheres have not yet been destroyed by contact 
with the amniotic fluid and traumatic rubbing against the 
uterine walls. In coronal section, the cerebral lobes are seen 
as two semicircular structures above the orbits floating 
in amniotic fluid – an appearance best described as the 
‘Mickey Mouse’ sign (Figure 2.46c). 
• Differential diagnosis. It can sometimes be difficult to 
differentiate a large cephalocele from exencephaly 
when the cranial vault is completely absent. 
• Associated anomalies. In 25–50% of cases, other 
anomalies are present: spina bifida (craniorachischisis), 
cleft lip/palate, omphalocele, coronary heart disease, 
and limb anomalies. 
Obstetric management. Termination of pregnancy 
should be offered prior to viability. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. This anomaly is 
incompatible with life. Few cases survive more than 
a week. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 53 
Figure 2.46 (a) Pathologic finding of a term fetus with anencephaly. Acrania/anencephaly. (b) The calvarium is absent, but the relatively 
intact brain is covered with meninges. (c) Exencephaly. Coronal view, one week later, of the same fetus; the cerebral lobes are seen as two 
semicircular structures above the orbits floating in amniotic fluid – the appearance best described as the ‘Mickey Mouse’ sign. 
a b c 

Definition. Cephalocele is characterized by protrusion 
of intracranial structures through a cranial bone defect. 
The herniated anatomic structures can consist of meninges 
only (meningocele) or meninges plus cerebral tissue 
(encephalomeningocele).13 The most common location is 
occipital in Europe and the USA, although frontal 
cephaloceles are more frequent in South-East Asia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. According to the most widely 
accepted theory, cephalocele is caused by a lack of fusion 
of the neural tube in its specific closing sites, although 
some authors claim that postneurulation events with 
anomalies of the mesenchymal induction phases of the 
nervous tissue are responsible for the lesion. Cephaloceles 
are defined anatomically according to their location 
(frontal, parietal, occipital, frontoethmoidal, etc.). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based on the recognition 
of a cystic (meningocele) or complex (meningoencephalocele) 
formation of variable size protruding through 
a skull defect, often localized in the occipital region 
(Figure 2.47). This anomaly is usually revealed on 
a transthalamic view. However, the other planes are 
useful for a correct evaluation of the encephalic structures. 
In particular, the midsagittal view of the fetal 
head, if obtainable with a posterior approach, may 
clearly demonstrate both the bony defect and the 
myelomeningocele (Figure 2.48). The use of threedimensional 
ultrasound has further increased the potential 
for prenatal characterization of these defects. In 
particular, the multiplanar approach may be used to 
study the bony defect, whereas the surface and maximum-
mode renderings may provide an overall idea of 
the defect itself (Figure 2.48). If recognition of cerebral 
tissue inside the cephalocele still poses difficulties, as in 
small cephaloceles, it may be advisable to perform an 
MRI scan. Ultrasound diagnosis can also be difficult 
in frontal cephaloceles. An asymmetric localization of a 
cephalocele can be found in amniotic band syndrome, 
which is usually associated with other severe lesions, 
including omphalocele and limb amputations. 
• Differential diagnosis. The most important lesions 
to differentiate from occipital meningoceles are cystic 
hygroma, teratoma, and hemangioma. In all of these 
anomalies there is usually no skull defect (Figure 
2.47c), although a bony defect has been found in a 
minority of hemangiomas. 
• Associated anomalies. In up to 70–80% of cases, there 
can be other malformations of the CNS: agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, holoprosencephaly, 
and spina bifida; in the more voluminous 
54 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CEPHALOCELE 
Incidence. From 1 in 5000 to 1 in 100 000 at birth, but decreasing due to prenatal diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Cystic structure of variable dimensions protruding through a calvarial bone defect, most 
often in the occipital region. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: 14–18%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Postnatal morality varies from 30% to 50% for encephalocele and from 10% to 25% for meningocele. 
Figure 2.47 Cephalocele. Complex (a) and cystic (b) formations protrude through a skull defect, localized in the occipital region. (c) 
Small cystic hygroma; no calvarium defects are present. 
a b c 

forms, there is associated microcephaly. Among 
extracerebral anomalies, the most frequently associated 
are cardiac anomalies and skeletal dysplasias. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(14–18%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes possibly associated with cephalocele 
are:13 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . cephalocele + 
polydactyly, polycystic kidneys, and other CNS 
anomalies 
• Amniotic band syndrome: Look for .cephalocele + 
amputation of digits or limbs, facial disruptions, 
and cleft lip/palate 
• Frontonasal dysplasia: look for . cephalocele + 
hypertelorism + anterior cranium bifidum occultum, 
and widely set nostrils 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .cephalocele + 
eye anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract) and CNS 
anomalies (ventriculomegaly, midline anomalies, and 
lissencephaly) 
Obstetric management. Should a cephalocele be detected 
in a fetus, a thorough search for possibly associated 
structural anomalies has to be carried out. In addition, 
karyotyping is indicated, especially if other anomalies 
are present. Delivery by cesarean section is advisable to 
avoid trauma and infection (through the birth canal) of 
the exposed brain tissue. 
Postnatal treatment. Very large lesions have an 
unfavorable prognosis – hence there is no benefit 
from treatment. Small cephaloceles can be corrected 
surgically. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. These depend on the 
dimensions and the location of the lesion, on the presence 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 55 
Figure 2.48 Meningoencephalocele. In this case (20 weeks’ gestation), there is a huge meningocele with a very small occipital defect 
through which only the hypoplastic cerebellum has herniated. (a) Three-dimensional volume contrast imaging (VCI) rendering of the 
midsagittal view of the fetal head showing the meningocele (arrowheads) and the herniated hypoplastic cerebellum (arrow). (b) Three-dimensional 
surface rendering showing the herniated cerebellum. (c) Maximum-mode rendering showing the small occipital bony defect (arrow). (d) 
Multiplanar imaging, demonstrating the small bony defect on the three orthogonal planes (arrow). (e) The fetus after termination of pregnancy: 
note the huge meningocele and the initial microcephaly with moderately slanting forehead (arrow). 
a b c 
e d 

Definition. The term ‘spina bifida’ is still commonly 
used as a synonym for spinal dysraphism, although it 
properly refers to defective fusion of posterior spinal 
bony elements. The terms ‘spina bifida aperta’ or ‘cystica’ 
and ‘spina bifida occulta’ were once used to refer 
to open spinal dysraphism (OSD) and closed spinal dysraphism 
(CSD), respectively but have been progressively 
discarded. 
Myelomeningoceles and myeloceles are characterized 
by exposure of the placode through a midline defect in 
the back. In myelomeningoceles, expansion of the underlying 
subarachnoid space results in elevation of the placode 
above the cutaneous surface (open spina bifida with 
a dorsal cyst), whereas in myeloceles, the placode is flush 
with the cutaneous surface. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Both myelomeningoceles 
and myeloceles originate from defective closure of the 
primary neural tube, with persistence of a segment of 
non-neurulated placode. Most are located at the lumbosacral 
level, and the placode is terminal. Since neurulation 
does not occur, the cutaneous ectoderm does not 
detach from the neural ectoderm and remains in a lateral 
position. This results in a midline skin defect. 
Therefore, the external surface of the placode is directly 
visible on inspection. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis 
of spina bifida associated with a myelomeningocele or 
meningocele is based on the recognition of direct and 
indirect sonographic signs. In fact, the detection rate of 
this anomaly has greatly increased in recent decades 
56 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SPINA BIFIDA 
Incidence. 1 in 1000 at birth. Higher prevalence in Whites than African-Americans or Asians, and in Hispanics. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most cases are detected thanks to the indirect signs, including lemon sign, banana sign, and 
effacement of the cisterna magna. Ventriculomegaly can be associated. Direct signs best detectable on axial planes, 
are ‘C’ or ‘U’ shape of the affected vertebra, which is due to absence of the dorsal arches; an interruption of the 
cutaneous contour with/without a meningocele is commonly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: 8–16%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The 5-year mortality rate is about 35%, with 20% dying during the first 12 months of life. As far as the 
motor function of the lower limbs is concerned, cases are evenly spread between complete paralysis, partial 
paralysis, need for robust rehabilitation, and almost normal limb function. 
SPINAL DISRAPHISM 
Spinal cord malformations are collectively named 
spinal dysraphisms. They arise from defects occurring 
in the early embryologic stages of gastrulation (weeks 
2–3), primary neurulation (weeks 3–4), and secondary 
neurulation (weeks 5–6). Spinal dysraphisms are categorized 
into open spinal dysraphisms (OSDs), in 
which there is exposure of abnormal nervous tissues 
through a skin defect, and closed spinal dysraphisms 
(CSDs), in which there is complete skin coverage of the 
underlying malformation. OSDs basically include 
myelomeningocele and other rare abnormalities such 
as myelocele and hemimyelo(meningo)cele.40 CSDs are 
further categorized based on the association with low 
spinal subcutaneous masses. CSDs with mass are represented 
by lipomyelocele, lipomyelomeningocele, 
meningocele, and myelocystocele.40 Closed CSDs without 
mass comprise simple dysraphic states and complex 
dysraphic states. The latter category further 
comprises defects of midline notochordal integration 
(basically represented by diastematomyelia) and 
defects of segmental notochordal formation (represented 
by caudal agenesis and spinal segmental dysgenesis). 
With OSD, there is a leakage of cerebrospinal 
fluid within the amniotic cavity and the ensuing 
hypotension of subarachoid spaces triggers a cascade 
of events which eventually results in Chiari II malformation. 
In CSD there is no loss of cerebrospinal fluid 
and the cranial anatomy is normal. 
of cerebral tissue in the herniated sack, and on any association 
with hydrocephaly or microcephaly or other extracranial 
pathologies. The postnatal mortality rate varies from 
30% to 50%, depending on the above-mentioned parameters. 
Meningocele and an anterior (frontal) location are 
associated with lower mortality rates (10–25%). 

thanks to the discovery that indirect signs are present 
in most cases of spina bifida.41 
Indirect signs. There is a constant association between 
OSDs and the Chiari II malformation, a congenital hindbrain 
anomaly characterized by a small posterior fossa 
with caudal displacement of the vermis, brainstem, 
and fourth ventricle. Indirect signs, which have been 
described for the Chiari II malformation earlier in this 
chapter, are the lemon sign (typical deformation of the 
frontal bone), the banana sign (abnormal anterior curvature 
of the cerebellar hemispheres), obliteration of the 
cisterna magna, and a hypoplastic posterior cranial 
fossa. Obliteration of the cisterna magna is the most 
sensitive sign, with the percentage of false positives being 
close to zero. In addition, a degree of ventriculomegaly is 
present in most cases of spina bifida: it is usually mild to 
moderate in the 2nd trimester and worsens in the 3rd 
trimester, when 80–90% of fetuses with spina bifida will 
show moderate to severe ventriculomegaly. 
Direct signs. Sonographic assessment of the fetal spine 
is rather difficult even today, being strongly dependent 
upon the position of the fetus in utero. Direct sonographic 
recognition of the spinal defect requires systematic 
examination, in the axial and midsagittal 
planes, of each neural arch, from the cervical to the 
sacral region. The sonographic signs of an open spina 
bifida include: interruption of the cutaneous contour 
at the level of the affected vertebrae, evident both on 
axial and midsagittal planes; on axial views, the 
affected vertebra has a ‘C’ or ‘U’ shape, which is due 
to absence of the dorsal arches (Figure 2.49a); in addition, 
on coronal views, the lateral processes appear 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 57 
Figure 2.49 Spina bifida. (a) Photograph of a fetus with spina bifida. (b) Maximum-mode rendering of the spine demonstrates lateral splaying 
of the lateral vertebral processes, with widening of the spinal canal (arrows). (c) Axial scan of the lumbosacral spine demonstrating the 
open vertebra (arrows) and membranous coverage of the meningocele. (d) Longitudinal view of the lumbar spine showing the bulging membranes 
of the myelomeningocele (arrows). 
a b 
c d 

58 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SACROCOCCYGEAL TERATOMA 
Incidence. 1 in 40 000 at birth. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Large mass arising from the sacrococcygeal area. It can be completely cystic, solid or have 
mixed echostructure. The tumor may have also an intrapelvic component. Signs of heart failure are frequently 
associated: hydrops, cardiomegaly, polyhydramnios, subcutaneous edema. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The perinatal mortality rate is 30–40%. Poorer prognosis is associated with solid, malignant, and large 
tumors. 
widely separated (Figure 2.49b). Diagnosis is easier if 
a myelomeningocele (Figure 2.49a,c) is associated, 
while it may be difficult if the sac is absent. The midsagittal 
plane can be used for an adequate evaluation 
of the craniocaudal extension of the defect and to 
assess the dimensions of the myelomeningocele (Figure 
2.49c,d). Coronal views show the separation of the 
lateral processes. It should be underlined that sonographic 
recognition of the level and type of the lesion 
is useful in the assessment of the motor outcome of 
fetuses with OSD and helps counseling regarding the 
functional prognosis for this condition. 
The prenatal detection rate of CSD is decidedly lower, 
due to the absence of indirect signs. However, the prognosis 
of CSD is significantly better than that of OCD, 
with most cases of occult spina bifida being discovered 
incidentally after birth. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes sacrococcygeal 
teratoma, in which the indirect signs related to 
the posterior cranial fossa are absent and where the 
absence of a vertebral cleft can be demonstrated on a 
careful scan of the spine. 
• Associated anomalies. There is a constant association 
between OSDs and the Chiari II malformation which 
are part of the same malformative sequence. Clubfoot 
may develop in a significant percentage of cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is 8–16%. 
Obstetric management. The occurrence of associated 
anomalies should be excluded. Fetal karyotyping may 
be indicated in the presence of associated anomalies. 
Delivery by cesarean section is recommended to avoid 
any trauma to the myelomeningocele during transit 
through the birth canal, although this indication is still 
controversial. 
Postnatal treatment. Before surgery, care must be 
paid to covering the defect for ensuring complete asepsis. 
Ulceration of the placode and infection are responsible 
for a high mortality in untreated newborns. Therefore, 
these patients are operated on soon after birth. 
Hydrocephalus is a common occurrence after surgical 
correction, and requires placement of a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt. The frequent urinary tract infections 
should be carefully treated with the antibiotics of choice. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In OSD, neurologic 
compromise is the consequence of hydrocephalus due to 
the Chiari II malformation, and of an abnormal differentiation 
and development of neural cord, resulting in varibale 
degrees of motor paralysis to the lower limbs and 
incontinence. The 5-year mortality rate is about 35%, 
with 20% dying during the first 12 months of life. As far 
as the motor function of the lower limbs is concerned, 
cases are evenly spread between complete paralysis, partial 
paralysis, a need for robust rehabilitation, and almost 
normal limb function. In general, the neurologic prognosis 
depends on the entity and the level of the lesion, the 
involvement of nervous tissue (myelomeningocele), and 
the severity of associated hydrocephalus. Lower spinal 
lesions and smaller ventricular sizes are associated with 
better ambulatory status compared with higher lesions 
and large ventricular sizes. A large study of outcome predictors 
showed that the pattern of neurological deficit 
appears to depend on the level of the lesion.42 Bowel and 
bladder incontinence, hindbrain dysfunction, and intellectual 
and psychological disturbances are also frequently 
associated. To improve this relatively rather poor outcome, 
intrauterine surgery was proposed for these lesions 
some years ago. However, the results are still controversial. 
In CSD, there is usually a much lesser involvement of 
the neurl cord, and the chiari II malformation does not 
develop; the outcome is good with neurologic symptoms 
of significant entity present only in a minority of cases. 

Definition. The sacrococcygeal teratoma is a neoplasm 
thought to arise from the pluripotent cells of Hensen’s 
node, which is located anterior to the coccyx. Since the 
cells of this node migrate into the embryo’s tail during 
the 1st postconceptual week, this theory may explain 
why teratomas arise more frequently in the lower spinal 
area than in other parts of the body. The most widely 
accepted classification43 recognizes the following four 
subtypes, according to the extension of the tumor: type 1 
are predominantly external, with minimal presacral 
component; type 2 are predominantly external, with significant 
presacral component; type 3 are predominantly 
internal, with abdominal extension; and type 4 are 
entirely internal, with no external component. The first 
two subtypes account for more than 80% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sacrococcygeal teratomas appear 
as large masses arising from the sacrococcygeal area. In 
general, the cases described in the fetus attain very large 
sizes and are mainly external. The echogenicity of the 
tumor may vary according to the component – from 
densely hyperechoic with sparse calcifications to completely 
cystic. Care should be taken in searching for an 
intrapelvic component, which may be difficult to identify 
due to bowel echogenicity (Figure 2.50). On color 
Doppler, high vascularization is usually detected in solid 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 59 
S-C 
TERAT 
IVC 
Figure 2.50 Sacrococcygeal teratoma. 
(a) Large solid teratoma (28 weeks’ gestation) 
causing high-output cardiac failure. 
Note the dilatation of the inferior 
vena cava (IVC, arrows) draining the 
large vascular bed of the tumor. 
(b) Specimen showing a very large 
tumor and the associated hydrops (subcutaneous 
edema). (c) Another case of 
prevalently cystic sacrococcygeal teratoma: 
fetus after termination of pregnancy 
at 22 weeks’ gestation. 
a
b c 

tumors. Signs of heart failure are frequently associated 
with solid and large tumors: hydrops, cardiomegaly, 
polyhydramnios, and subcutaneous edema. 
• Prognostic indicators. These include a prevalently 
solid tumor, because of its strong association with 
high-output heart failure and hydrops (Figure 2.50b) 
and its higher malignant potential; large size, for the 
same reason; and a rapid growth rate, which is associated 
with malignant tumors and cardiac failure. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should be made only for 
small tumors with other possible masses located in 
the sacral area, including lipomas and neural tube 
defects. In the latter, the spine is abnormal, whereas 
lipomas tend to be strictly associated with the lower 
spinal elements. 
• Association with other malformations. Up to 25% of 
cases described postnatally are reported to be associated 
with other malformations, without any particular 
organ system being preferentially involved. However, 
prenatally diagnosed cases do not appear to show the 
same relatively high risk of association, and the only 
frequent finding is hydrops from high-output cardiac 
failure. 
Obstetric management. Should a sacrococcygeal teratoma 
be diagnosed in a fetus, a thorough search for 
other possibly associated malformations should be 
performed by an expert. Fetal echocardiographic monitoring 
is indicated to assess the potential and stage of 
high-output cardiac failure, especially with solid tumors. 
Termination of pregnancy is an option, considering the 
poor prognosis of large and solid tumors and/or if cardiac 
failure (hydrops) is associated. Delivery should take 
place in a tertiary referral center in order to provide adequate 
neonatal management. A cesarean section is 
always indicated in the case of solid and large tumors 
due to the high risk of soft tissue dystocia. A few 
attempts at reducing the vascular bed prenatally, with 
radiofrequency or laser coagulation, have been reported, 
but there was a high toll in terms of fetal deaths, and 
therefore this approach is currently not considered a 
valid therapeutic option. 
Postnatal therapy. This consists of resection of the external 
and internal components of the tumor. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
is guarded, with a 30–40% neonatal mortality 
rate, which is mainly due to hydrops from cardiac failure. 
There is also a consistent intrauterine mortality, for 
the same reasons. The only indicators of good outcome 
are represented by small mainly cystic tumors, which are 
also predominantly benign. 
60 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
REFERENCES 
1. Filly RA, Cardoza JD, Goldstein RB, Barkovich AJ. Detection of 
fetal central nervous system anomalies: a practical level of effort 
for a routine sonogram. Radiology 1989; 172: 403–8. 
2. Reece EA, Goldstein I. Three-level view of fetal brain imaging in 
the prenatal diagnosis of congenital anomalies. J Matern Fet Med 
1999; 8: 249–52. 
3. Nyberg DA. Reccomendations for obstetric sonography in the 
evaluation of the fetal cranium. Radiology 1989; 172: 309–11. 
4. Toi A, Lister WS, Fong KW. How early are fetal cerebral sulci 
visible at prenatal ultrasound and what is the normal pattern of 
early fetal sulcal development? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 706–15. 
5. Malinger G, Lerman-Sagie T, Watemberg N, et al. A normal 
second trimester ultrasound does not exclude brain pathology. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 51–6. 
6. Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A. Transvaginal fetal neurosonography: 
standardization of the planes and sections by 
anatomic landmarks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 8: 
42–7. 
7. D’Addario V, Pinto V, Di Cagno L, et al. The midsagittal view 
of the fetal brain: a useful landmark in recognizing the cause 
of fetal cerebral ventriculomegaly. J Perinat Med 2005; 33: 423–7. 
8. Babcook C, Chong B, Salamat M, et al. Sonographic anatomy of 
the developing cerebellum: normal embryology can resemble 
pathology. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996; 166: 427–33. 
9. Pilu G, Hobbins J. Sonography of fetal cerebrospinal anomalies. 
Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 321–30. 
10. Malinger G, Ginath S, Lerman-Sagie T, et al. The fetal cerebellar 
vermis: normal development as shown by transvaginal ultrasound. 
Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 687–92. 
11. Girard N, Gire C, Mancini J, et al. Ventriculomegaly. J Neuroradiol 
2002; 29: 1S8. 
12. Signorelli M, Tiberti A, Valseriati D. Width of the fetal lateral 
ventricular atrium between 10 and 12 mm: a simple variation of 
the norm? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 14–18. 
13. Stevenson RE, Hall JG, Goodman RM. In: Stevenson RE, 
Hall JG, Goodman RM eds. Human Malformations and 
Related Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1993: 
2975–3012. 
14. Kelly EN, Allen VM, Seaward G, et al. Mild ventriculomegaly 
in the fetus, natural history associated findings and outcome of 
isolated mild ventriculomegaly: a literature review. Prenat Diagn 
2001; 21: 697–700. 
15. Twining P, Jaspan T, Zuccollo J. The outcome of fetal ventriculomegaly. 
Br J Radiol 1994; 67: 26–31. 
16. Wilhelm C, Keck C, Hess S, et al. Ventriculomegaly diagnosed by 
prenatal ultrasound and mental development of the children. 
Fetal Diagn Ther 1998; 13: 163–6. 
17. Garel C. Ventricular dilatation. In: Garel C, ed. MRI of the Fetal 
Brain. Normal Development and Cerebral Pathologies. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. 2004: 201–16. 
18. Lewis AJ, Simon EM, Barkovich AJ, et al. Middle interhemispheric 
variant of holoprosencephaly: a distinct cliniconeuroradiologic 
subtype. Neurology 2002; 59: 1860–5. 

19. Barkovich AJ. Congenital malformations of the brain and skull. 
In: Pediatric Neuroimaging, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincot 
Williams & Wilkins. 2000: 251–381. 
20. Gentile M, Volpe G, Volpe P. Genetics of brain malformations. 
Ultrasound Rev Obstet Gynecol 2003; 3: 97–103. 
21. Bernard JP, Drummond CL, Zaarour P, et al. A new clue to the 
prenatal diagnosis of lobar holoprosencephaly: the abnormal 
pathway of the anterior cerebral artery crawling under the skull. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 19: 605–7. 
22. Pilu G, Sandri F, Perolo A, et al. Sonography of fetal agenesis of 
the corpus callosum: a survey of 35 cases. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1993; 3: 318–29. 
23. Maheut-Lourmiere J, Paillet C. Prenatal diagnosis of anomalies 
of the corpus callosum with ultrasound: the echographists’s point 
of view. Neurochirurgie 1998; 44(Suppl 1): 85–92. 
24. Volpe P, Paladini D, Resta M, et al. Characteristics, associations 
and outcome of partial agenesis of the corpus callosum in 
the fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 27: 509–16. 
25. Moutard ML, Kieffer V, Feingold J, et al. Agenesis of corpus 
callosum: prenatal diagnosis and prognosis. Childs Nerv Syst 
2003; 19: 471–6. 
26. Shevell MI. Clinical and diagnostic profile of agenesis of the 
corpus callosum. J Child Neurol 2002; 17: 896–900. 
27. Pilu G, Segata M, Ghi T, et al. Diagnosis of midline anomalies of 
the fetal brain with three-dimensional median view. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 522–9. 
28. Volpe P, Volpe G, Gentile M. Sonography of fetal posterior fossa 
abnormalities. Ultrasound Rev Obstet Gynecol 2003; 3: 97–103. 
29. Paladini D, Volpe P. Posterior fossa and vermian morphometry in 
the characterization of fetal cerebellar abnormalities: a prospective 
three-dimensional ultrasound study. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 482–9. 
30. Tortori-Donati P, Fondelli MP, Rossi A, et al. Cystic malformations 
of the posterior cranial fossa originating from a defect of the 
posterior membranous area. Mega cisterna magna and persisting 
Blake’s pouch: two separate entities. Childs Nerv Syst 1996; 12: 
303–8. 
31. Barkovich AJ, Kjos BO, Norman D, et al. Revised classification 
of posterior fossa cysts and cystlike malformations based on the 
results of multiplanar MR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989; 
153: 1289–300. 
32. Tortori Donati P, Rossi A, Biancheri R. Brain malformations. In: 
Tortori-Donati ed. Pediatric Neuroradiology. Berlin: Springer- 
Verlag. 2005: 121–98. 
33. Klein O, Pierre-Kahn A, Boddaert N, Parisot D, Brunelle F. 
Dandy–Walker malformation: prenatal diagnosis and prognosis. 
Childs Nerv Syst 2003; 19: 484–9. 
34. Adamsbaum C, Moutard ML, Andre C, et al. MRI of the fetal 
posterior fossa. Pediatr Radiol 2005; 35: 124–140. 
35. D’Addario V, Pinto V, Del Bianco A, et al. The clivus–sovraocciput 
angle: a useful measurement to evaluate the shape and size of the 
fetal posterior fossa and to diagnose Chiari II malformation. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001; 18: 146–9. 
36. Barkovich AJ, Kuzniecky RI, Jackson GD, et al. A developmental 
and genetic classification for malformations of cortical development. 
Neurology. 2005; 65: 1873–87. 
37. Goldstein I, Reece EA, Pilu G, et al. Sonographic assessment of 
the fetal frontal lobe: A potential tool for prenatal diagnosis of 
microcephaly. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158: 1057–62. 
38. Toi A, Lister WS, Fong KW. How early are fetal cerebral sulci 
visible at prenatal ultrasound and what is the normal pattern of 
early fetal sulcal development? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 706–15. 
39. Fong KW, Ghai S, Toi A, et al. Prenatal ultrasound findings of 
lissencephaly associated with Miller–Dieker syndrome and comparison 
with pre- and postnatal magnetic resonance imaging. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 716–23. 
40. Rossi A, Biancheri R, Cama A, et al. Imaging in spine and spinal 
cord malformations. Eur J Radiol 2004; 50: 177–200. 
41. Nicolaides KH, Campbell S, Gabbe SG. Ultrasound screening for 
spina bifida: cranial and cerebellar signs. Lancet 1986; ii: 72–4. 
42. Cochrane DD, Wilson RD, Steinbok P, et al. Prenatal spinal 
evaluation and functional outcome of patients born with 
myelomeningocele: information for improved prenatal counselling 
and outcome prediction. Fetal Diagn Ther 1996; 11: 159–68. 
43. Altman RP, Randolph JG, Lilley JR. Sacrococcygeal teratoma: 
American Academy of Pediatrics Surgical Section Survey. J Pediatr 
Surg 1974; 9: 389–98. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 61 

The fetal face represents one of the key anatomic regions 
from both a psychological and a clinical standpoint. 
Observing the fetal face on the screen of the scanner 
plays a central role in the development of materno-fetal 
bonding, especially with recent developments in threedimensional 
ultrasound. In addition, it has to be considered 
that a significant number of chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromes are associated with major 
and/or minor anomalies of the face. Finally, the high social 
and cosmetic impact of isolated anomalies of the face, such 
as microphthalmia or micrognathia, is extremely important. 
All of these factors, together with the difficulties posed by 
ultrasound examination of an irregularly shaped anatomic 
region such as the fetal face, contribute to make the fetal face 
one of the most difficult and delicate areas to explore. 
Timing of examination. The ultrasound appearance of the 
fetal face varies significantly throughout gestation, owing 
to the progressive accumulation of adipose tissue, especially 
at the level of the maxilla and the chin. This explains 
why the fetal face appears extremely thin and bony until 
23–24 weeks; thereafter, the facial features will progressively 
smooth to acquire individual features in the 3rd 
trimester (30–32 gestational weeks) (Figures 3.1 and 3.2). 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). As 
already mentioned, the fetal face represents an 
extremely irregular region to explore with ultrasound, 
if compared with regular geometric shapes such as the 
fetal cranium or limbs. This is why ultrasound examination 
of the fetal face has always posed significant 
problems in all attempts at a standardization of the 
ultrasound approach.1,2 To overcome the above-mentioned 
significant limitations, it is necessary to have in 
mind an extremely detailed mental replica of the spatial 
position of the fetal face in relation to the limbs 
and the uterine cavity. With these significant limitations, 
we report below the reference scanning planes, 
classified as axial, coronal, sagittal, and oblique, and 
the anatomic structures assessable in each of these 
Chapter 3 
Craniofacial and neck anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE FACE AND NECK: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 3.1 Fetal profile at different gestational ages – 2D imaging. The progressive increase in subcutaneous fat is responsible for the significant 
changes in the sharpness of the facial features: (a) 12 gestational weeks; (b) 20 gestational weeks; (c) 32 gestational weeks. 
63 
a b c 

views. Furthermore, it has to be underlined that the 
actual movements required for the hand holding the 
transducer to switch from one plane to the other are 
quite subtle and consist mainly of rotational and/or 
sweeping movements. With regard to the possible 
approaches, we should underscore the significant role 
played by ultrasound physics in obtaining a clear and 
artifact-free image: the better displayed structures are 
those at 90° to the insonating beam. Thus, for example, 
if the orbits are displayed with a ventral approach, 
the lens and the orbicular muscles will be better 
imaged; on the contrary, with a lateral approach, the 
bony orbits, and their lateral and medial aspects, with 
the ethmoid between, will be the structures displayed 
in the clearest way. Considering that the fetal face 
comprises the anterior part of the head, then the feasible 
approaches are reduced to lateral and ventral 
(anterior). As already mentioned, the ultrasound 
planes usually employed in the assessment of the fetal 
face are the axial, coronal, sagittal and oblique ones. 
The different views will be described separately afterwards. 
However, they are shown by scanning plane 
(axial, sagittal, coronal, oblique) in figures 3.3 and 
3.4. Since the anomaly scan is carried out in most 
countries between 18 and 22 weeks of gestation, all 
ultrasound planes described and illustrated below 
refer to fetuses examined in that gestational age range, 
unless otherwise specified. 
1. Axial views. The following ultrasound planes are 
shown in Figure 3.3: 
(i) orbits – lateral approach (Figure 3.5) 
(ii) orbits – ventral approach (Figure 3.6) 
(iii) base of the orbits/upper maxilla – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.7) 
(iv) lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.8) 
(v) tongue/pharynx – ventral approach (Figure 3.9) 
(vi) mandible/inferior alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.10a) 
(vii) mandibular bone – ventral approach 
(Figure 3.10b) 
(viii) thyroid – ventral approach (Figure 3.11) 
2. Sagittal views. The two reference planes are: 
(i) facial profile – midline sagittal (Figure 3.13) 
(ii) ear – parasagittal (lateral) (Figure 3.14) 
3. Coronal views. The following ultrasound planes are 
shown in Figure 3.4: 
(i) face (Figure 3.15) 
(ii) palate (Figure 3.16) 
4. Oblique views. The following ultrasound planes are 
also shown in Figure 3.4: 
(i) lips (Figure 3.17) 
(ii) palate (Figure 3.18) 
64 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.2 Fetal profile at different 
gestational ages – three-dimensional 
imaging. The progressive increase in 
subcutaneous fat is responsible for the 
significant changes in the sharpness of 
the facial features: (a) 12 gestational 
weeks; (b) 20 gestational weeks; (c) 32 
gestational weeks. 
a 
b 
c 

CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 65 
Figure 3.3 Axial ultrasound views for the assessment of the splanchnocranium. This figure illustrates the level of the scanning plane and 
the corresponding two-dimensional ultrasound image. All views are illustrated in detail in Figures 3.5–3.11. 

66 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.4 Coronal and oblique ultrasound views for the assessment of the splanchnocranium. This figure illustrates the level of the 
scanning plane and the corresponding two-dimensional ultrasound image. All views are illustrated in detail in Figures 3.15–3.18. 

Orbits (lateral approach) and related malformations 
(Figure 3.5). This represents the classic view for the 
assessment of the bony orbits and the measurement of the 
binocular and interocular diameters. The corresponding 
nomograms are given in the Appendix.3 With reference to 
this view, and its corresponding drawing in Figure 3.3, it 
has to be underscored that, notwithstanding the fact that 
this view can also be achieved as a perfectly axial plane, it 
is common practice to obtain it with a minimal rotation 
of the transducer end that insonates the anterior aspect of 
the fetal head, starting from the axial transthalamic view; 
hence, in practice, the view used for the assessment of 
the orbits with a lateral approach represents a slightly 
oblique view of the fetal head (Figure 3.3). As is evident 
from Figure 3.5, in this plane, the lateral and median 
aspects of the orbits are clearly visible, which allows 
correct measurement of binocular and interocular diameters. 
It should be underlined that the above-mentioned 
biometry does not represent an integral part of the 
biometric assessment commonly carried out as part of the 
mid-trimester scan in all countries; in some, only the visualization 
of the orbits, but not their biometric assessment, 
is required. However, orbital biometry should be checked 
whenever there is a suspect of orbital malformations 
such as hypertelorism, hypotelorism, or microphthalmia. 
The orbital malformations that can be suspected and 
diagnosed on this view are as follows: 
• Microphthalmia/anophthalmia: complete absence or 
severe hypoplasia on one or both orbits 
• Hypertelorism/hypotelorism: increased/reduced interocular 
distance, with orbits of normal or abnormal 
dimensions 
• Macrophthalmia: increased orbital diameter, usually 
bilateral 
On the basis of what has been said about ultrasound 
physics and insonation, it is useful to stress that the eye 
bulbs, regardless of how normal or abnormal they may 
appear on this view, should be electively assessed on the 
ventral approach view (see below). On the contrary, the 
orbital anomalies reported above can also be detected on 
the ventral approach view. We have decided to describe 
the two views separately, in order to underscore the different 
accuracy with which the soft and hard tissues of 
the bony orbit and ocular bulb are displayed in each. 
Orbits (ventral approach) and related malformations 
(Figure 3.6). As has been said, this view should be sought 
to assess the intraocular soft tissues, the lenses, and the 
posterior walls of the orbits, constituted mainly by the 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 67 
FACIAL ANOMALIES BY SCANNING VIEW 
Figure 3.5 Axial view of the orbits – lateral approach. The lateral 
walls of the orbits and the midline structures (ethmoid) are clearly 
displayed. The lenses are not always visible on this view. 
Figure 3.6 Axial view of the orbits – 
ventral approach. Both lenses and the 
whole of the eye bulb are clearly 
depicted (arrows). Posteriorly, the 
back of the bony orbit, which is 
accounted for by the sphenoid, can be 
seen (arrowheads). (a) Two-dimensional 
imaging. (b) Three-dimensional 
surface rendering. 
a b 

anterior aspect of the sphenoidal wings. The lenses will 
appear as small echogenic circular structures within the 
eyes (Figure 3.6). Consequently, this represent the elective 
approach for the diagnosis of lens opacities and 
cataracts, microphthalmia, and arhinia. The orbital malformations 
that can be suspected and diagnosed on this 
view are as follows: 
• Cataract: partial/complete opacity of one or both 
lenses 
• Aphakia: congenital absence of the lens 
• Arhinia: absence of the nose (bones and soft tissues, 
nostrils included) 
• Microphthalmia/anophthalmia: complete absence or 
severe hypoplasia on one or both orbits 
• Hypertelorism/hypotelorism: increased/reduced interocular 
distance, with orbits of normal or abnormal 
dimensions 
• Macrophthalmia: increased orbital diameter, usually 
bilateral 
Base of the orbits/upper maxilla and related malformations. 
This view corresponds to an axial plane at the 
level of the lower rim of the orbits, which consists of the 
upper part of the maxillary bones (Figure 3.7). In fact, 
the malformations evident in this view only are very rare 
and consist of dacriocistocele (obstruction and enlargement 
of the lacrimal duct) and extremely rare cases of 
malar hypoplasia, which is one of the features of the 
EEC (ectrodactlyly–ectodermal dysplasia) syndrome. 
Lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge and related malformations. 
This plane cuts through the hard palate and the 
upper alveolar ridge, allowing the best possible view 
of the latter structure (Figure 3.8). Consequently, this 
view should be electively sought in order to assess 
the extent of the bony defect in case of cleft lip/palate. 
It is important to underline that isolated cleft lip 
(without associated cleft palate) can also be detected 
on this ultrasound plane, with the upper lip too being 
evident on this view. 
Tongue/pharynx and related malformations. If the transducer 
is moved caudally a few millimeters, the region of 
the mouth is displayed, with the tongue in the middle 
and the oropharynx posteriorly, in the prevertebral area 
(Figure 3.9). Therefore, in this view, the tongue diameters4 
can be measured in order to arrive at a diagnosis of 
macro- or microglossia. 
Mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone and 
related malformations. The axial view of the mandible 
allows, with minor angling movements of the transducer, 
display of the lower alveolar ridge (Figure 3.10a) and, 
68 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.7 Base of the orbits–upper maxilla – ventral approach. 
Both zygomatic bones, which continue posteriorly in the orbital 
bases, can be seen (arrows).
Figure 3.8 Lower maxilla/upper 
alveolar ridge – ventrial approach. The 
alveoli of the upper teeth are positioned 
symmetrically in relation to the midline 
and the maxillary sinuses. In front of 
the upper alveolar ridge, the upper lip, 
displayed cross-sectionally, is visible 
(arrowheads). (a) Two-dimensional 
imaging. (b) Three-dimensional surface 
rendering. 
a b 

below it, the bony mandible with the symphisis on the 
midline and the two mandibular branches laterally 
(Figure 3.10b). Therefore, this view allows confirmation 
of a suspicion of micrognathia, possibly raised while 
assessing the fetal facial profile. In particular, measurement 
of the Jaw Index helps support the diagnosis of 
moderate micrognathia in uncertain cases. The Jaw Index 
is given by the ratio of the anteroposterior mandibular 
diameter to the biparietal diameter: values less than 23 
are indicative of micrognathia.5 
Thyroid and related malformations. This plane, which 
consists of an axial view of the fetal neck at the level of 
this gland, is relatively difficult to obtain, due to the 
fact that the operator has to wait for the fetus to 
extend the head lightly and to remain in that position 
to give a reliable display of the thyroid. In fact, with 
the fetal head in its most common position, acoustic 
shadowing of the mandible makes visualization of 
the thyroid impossible. With a compliant fetus, the 
thyroid, which surrounds the trachea, is seen in the 
center on the neck between the two jugular veins and 
carotid arteries, with the cervical vertebra posteriorly 
(Figure 3.11). 
Facial profile and related malformations (Figures 3.12 
and 3.13). This view, which represents an extremely 
important one to obtain in order to get an overall idea of 
the anatomic proportions of the fetal face, represents a 
midsagittal plane, as already pointed out. Its importance 
is due to the fact that in the same plane, the three regions 
of the face (forehead, eyes and nose, and mouth and chin) 
are displayed together. The irregularity and the extreme 
phenotypic variability of the lines that make up the 
human face do not lend themselves easily to the creation 
of nomograms expressing the harmony and the correct 
mathematical or geometric relationships of the various 
elements composing the facial profile, at least in the 
fetus.1 Consequently, the diagnosis of generic profile 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 69 
Figure 3.9 Tongue/pharynx – ventral 
approach. Just caudal to the upper alveolar 
ridge, the tongue (T) can be seen in 
the mouth. The oropharynx (arrows) is 
visualized posteriorly, in the prevertebral 
area. Lateral to the tongue, the 
two mandibuar rami are seen in crosssection 
(arrowheads). Anteriorly, the 
upper lip is visible only if the plane 
is obtained with the mouth shut. (a) 
Two-dimensional imaging. (b) Threedimensional 
surface rendering. 
Figure 3.10 Mandible and inferior alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach. (a) In the plane just below the tongue, the lower horseshoe-
shaped alveolar ridge can be seen. (b) In contrast, the bony 
mandible has an acute angle. The symphysis can be seen on the 
midline (arrow). 
a
a 
b 
b 

abnormalities, such as a sloping forehead or a wide nasal 
root, is mainly based on a subjective assessment. In this 
ultrasound plane, the following aspects can be recognized 
(Figure 3.13): the echogenic curved shape of the frontal 
bone, with the overlying hypoechoic line represented by 
the soft tissues; the nasal area, with the nasal bone(s) in 
the upper part and the soft tissue of the tip of the nose; 
part of the hard palate; the lips, with the upper lip protruding 
slightly over the lower one; and the chin with the 
bony mandible. It is useful to underline that, if the scanning 
view is perfectly on the midline, the insonating beam 
passes through the still open metopic suture, allowing a 
nice view of the brain, with the corpus callosum, the third 
ventricle, and the cerebellar vermis (Figure 3.13; and see 
Chapter 2). The major abnormalities detectable on this 
view are as follows (Figure 3.12): 
• Forehead, sloping forehead: due to the severe hypoplasia 
of the frontal lobes in microcephaly 
• Forehead, turricephaly: increased vertical diameter of 
the forehead, due to early closure of the sutures 
• Nose, arhinia: Absence of the nose (bones and soft tissues, 
nostrils included); midline defect, associated 
with the holoprosencephaly sequence 
• Nose, proboscis: midline soft tissue appendix, 
protruding from the nasal root area; midline defect, 
associated with the holoprosencephaly sequence 
• Mouth, bilateral cleft: Additional tissue on the 
philtrum, common in bilateral clefts 
• Mouth, macroglossia: increased volume of the 
tongue, usually protruding between the lips 
• Chin, micrognathia: hypoplasia of variable degree 
of the bony mandible, both in the anteroposterior 
diameter (retrognathia) and in the laterolateral one 
Ear and related malformations. The most lateral 
sagittal plane of the fetal head is that passing for the 
external ear, which can be insonated with delicate 
movements of the transducer (Figure 3.14). It is difficult 
to confirm a diagnosis of low-set ears, frequently 
associated with chromosomal abnormalities and nonchromosomal 
syndromes, but it is possible to confidently 
detect pre-auricular tags, which are also 
associated with rare syndromic conditions. However, 
it should be underlined that this parasagittal twodimensional 
view has been replaced by the threedimensional 
surface-rendering image of the fetal face, 
which is much more easily obtained and, as far as ear 
abnormalities are concerned, provides greater diagnostic 
accuracy as well (see Figure 3.32). 
Face (coronal) and related malformations. In this 
coronal view, the face is displayed en face, allowing 
an overall evaluation of the various anatomic structures 
(Figure 3.15). At the same time, this allows recognition of 
abnormally protruding anatomic structures, such as the 
eyes in the case of proptosis, bilateral cleft lip (additional 
tissue on the philtrum), or the tongue (macroglossia). 
Palate (coronal) and related malformations. As already 
pointed out, in this case, the depth of the cut is increased, 
displaying the bony palate (Figure 3.16). As a result, this 
view can be used to demonstrate a unilateral or bilateral 
cleft palate. 
Lips (oblique) and related malformations. Oblique tangential 
views of the lips and palate are of fundamental 
importance for the detection of the facial clefts and the 
abnormalities of the nostrils associated with the holoprosencephaly 
sequence (arhinia or single nostril). An 
oblique view of the lips allows assessment of the 
philtrum in the middle of the upper lip, its relationship 
with the nostrils, the lower lip, and, inferiorly, the chin 
(Figure 3.17). Therefore, this view allows diagnosis of 
single nostril, and median, unilateral, and bilateral 
clefts. 
Palate (oblique) and related malformations. This view is 
parallel but deeper in comparison with the previous one. 
It allows assessment of the upper alveolar ridge and, 
therefore, detection of defects of the hard palate and 
their relationships with the nasal cavity (Figure 3.18). 
The most significant malformations detectable on this 
view are as follows: 
70 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.11 Thyroid – ventral approach. In this plane, the thyroid 
(Th and horizontal arrows) appears as a weakly hyperechoic midline 
structure surrounding the trachea (Tr and oblique arrow). This 
appears as a small round sonolucent area. The two jugular veins 
can be seen laterally, adjacent to the horizontal arrows as small 
round sonolucent areas. Posteriorly, the vertebral body is visible. 

CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 71 
Normal 
Slanting 
forehead 
Turricephaly Proboscis 
Cleft Arhinia 
Macroglossia Micrognathia 
Figure 3.12 Summary of the most important anomalies of the fetal facial profile. A sloping head is typical of microcephaly. Proboscis and 
arhinia are associated with holoprosencephaly. Turricephaly, due to early closure of the coronal suture, is typical of Apert syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly). 
In the case of a bilateral cleft lip/palate, there is commonly additional tissue on the philtrum, which becomes evident 
on the midsagittal view of the facial profile. Mild macroglossia can be found in trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), whereas severe macroglossia 
is typical of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. Micrognathia is associated with trisomy 18 and with a considerable number of nonchromosomal 
syndromes (fetal akinesia derformation sequence (FADS), skeletal dysplasia, etc.). 

• single nostril: midline defect, associated with the 
holoprosencephaly sequence 
• median cleft: midline defect, associated with the 
holoprosencephaly sequence 
• unilateral cleft lip/palate: unilateral defect of the lip, 
alveolar ridge, and hard palate 
• bilateral cleft lip/palate: bilateral defect of the lip, the 
alveolar ridge, and hard palate, commonly associated 
with additional tissue on the philtrum 
72 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.13 Midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile. On this 
view, the following structures can be recognized: the frontal area, 
the nasal root, the nose with the nasal bone (arrow), the lips with 
the hard palate (hp) in cross-section, and the chin, with the 
mandible (M) in cross-section. It should be noted that if the view is 
perfectly on the midline, as in this case, the orbits cannot be seen, 
this being a symmetric organ. In addition, due to the yet-unossified 
metopic suture, the ultrasound beam penetrates deep in the fetal 
head, allowing a good view of the corpus callosum (CC) and the 
cerebellar vermis (V). 
Figure 3.14 Parasagittal view at the level of the external ear. This 
view, which is often difficult to obtain with two-dimensional ultrasound, 
allows visualization of the external ear, which is abnormal or 
wrinkled in some syndromic conditions. The whole anatomy of the 
external ear is visible. This image was obtained in a 29-week-old 
fetus. 
Figure 3.15 Coronal view of the face. (a) Normal fetus. (b) 
Syndromic fetus (22 weeks) with evident proptosis (arrows). 
a b 
Figure 3.16 Coronal view of the palate. This plane is cut slightly 
deeper than that in Figure 3.15, allowing recognition of the bony 
palate. 

Artefacts 
Orbits. Since the orbits are symmetric organs, care 
should be taken in obtaining a perfectly axial view. 
If this does not happen, a false-positive diagnosis of 
microphthalmia can be made (Figure 3.19). In such a circumstance, 
it is necessary to re-obtain the plane, making 
delicate sweeping and tilting movements, in order to 
achieve a correct symmetric positioning of the transducer 
to remove the artefact. 
Lips. If the umbilical cord lies close to the upper 
lip, this can sometimes create the false impression 
of a clefting (Figure 3.20a). In this case, the lips 
should be rechecked after a few minutes to allow the 
fetus to move. Alternatively, power Doppler (or color 
Doppler with a relatively low pulse repetition 
frequency) may be used to discriminate between 
the cord lying on the lips and a real cleft lip/palate 
(Figure 3.20b). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 73 
Figure 3.17 Oblique view of the lips. This represents the classic 
plane for the assessment of the lips in normal and abnormal conditions; 
the lips, the nose with the nostrils, and the chin are displayed. 
Figure 3.18 Oblique view of the palate. This plane is cut slightly 
deeper than that in Figure 3.17, allowing a view of the upper 
alveolar ridge with the hard palate (arrows). 
Figure 3.19 Artefact. A false-positive diagnosis of microphthalmia 
can be made if the plane for the visualization of the orbits 
is not perfectly axial. (a) One of the orbits (usually that distal to the 
transducer) appears smaller than the other (arrows). (b) It is sufficient 
to re-obtain the axial plane with a correct angle to remove the 
artifact (arrowheads). 
Figure 3.20 Artefact. A false-positive diagnosis of cleft lip/palate 
can be made if a cord loop is positioned in front of the lips. (a) The 
cord, lying vertically on the lips, can be mistaken for a cleft 
(arrows). (b) It is sufficient to wait for the fetus to move or, better, 
to switch on color/power Doppler to identify the umbilical blood 
flow and remove the artifact. 
a
a b 
b 

Premises. The fetal face is one of the anatomic regions 
that benefits more from a three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound 
approach, be this with multiplanar imaging or 
with surface rendering. In particular, the employment of 
3D ultrasound represents the best possible approach to 
the detailed characterization of craniofacial malformations, 
since this technique is able to effectively display 
anomalies both of the soft tissues and of the bony structures. 
This is why we deem it important to dedicate this 
part of the chapter to the description of the multiplanar 
and surface rendering images of immediate clinical utility. 
It should be recalled here that a general introduction 
to the 3D technique is presented in Chapter 1, where 
the procedure of volume acquisition and rendering is 
explained – hereinafter, only the details regarding the use 
of 3D ultrasound for the assessment of craniofacial 
anomalies are described. 
Lips and palate 
Multiplanar imaging. The multiplanar mode represents 
the best approach for a detailed assessment of normal 
and abnormal facial anatomy. The volume acquisition is 
usually carried out having as a reference two-dimensional 
plane the midsagittal view of the facial profile, described 
elsewhere in this chapter. However, if the region of 
interest is the oromandibular one, as in the case of facial 
clefting or micrognathia, the acquisition can also be 
advantageously made from an axial, ventral view of the 
face, at the level of the maxilla. Once the volume has been 
obtained, its study in multiplanar imaging allows a 
detailed evaluation of the bones and the soft tissues. For 
example, an acquisition obtained from the axial view 
at the level of the maxilla is shown in Figure 3.21. As is 
evident, the possibility to scroll the volume on one plane, 
checking how the views change on the other two planes, 
allows reliable identification of anatomic detail in normal 
and abnormal conditions. The utility of the multiplanar 
approach is demonstrated in Figure 3.22, obtained simply 
by rotating the image of the a window of Figure 3.21, 
in order to display the facial profile in a vertical, more 
familiar position. In the case of complex cleftings, the use 
of multiplanar imaging allows a careful assessment of the 
extent and subtype of the defect, thanks to the correlation 
among the three orthogonal planes. The aspects in multiplanar 
imaging of a normal fetus, a fetus with unilateral 
cleft lip/palate and a third with bilateral cleft lip/palate 
are shown in Figure 3.23–3.25: the features of the defects 
and their extent are evident. 
Surface rendering. Having completed the anatomic 
assessment on multiplanar imaging, it is possible to 
switch to the surface rendering mode, if the aim is the 
assessment of soft tissues (Figure 3.26 and 3.27a). If, 
however, the operator elects to study the bony structures, 
then the ‘maximum’ mode should be employed: 
this filter adds transparency to the superficial less 
echogenic tissues, letting the underlying bony skeleton 
show up (Figure 3.27b). Surface-rendering images of 
unilateral cleft lip/palate, bilateral cleft lip/palate, and 
isolated cleft lip are shown in Figures 3.28–3.30. 
In Figure 3.31, the maximum mode is used to 
74 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
THE ROLE OF 3D ULTRASOUND IN 
THE ASSESSMENT OF FACIAL ABNORMALITIES 
Figure 3.21 Multiplanar assessment of the face at 32 weeks’ 
gestation. This image demonstrates the possibility of navigating 
the volume on the three orthogonal planes. Positioning the caliper 
at the level of the upper alveoli on the sagittal view, in window a, 
the axial view of the alveolar ridge will appear in window b and 
the coronal view of the face in window c. 
Figure 3.22 Multiplanar assessment of the face. This image shows 
the same volume as in Figure 3.21: on simply rotating the image in 
window a by 90°, the images in windows b and c change accordingly. 
a b 
c
a b 
c 

demonstrate the bony cleft of the palate. Both rendering 
modes (surface and maximum) and multiplanar 
imaging can be advantageously employed during 
prenatal counseling sessions with the parents and for 
consultation with plastic surgeons. 
Ear 
Surface rendering. The external ear can, with some 
expertise, be imaged with 2D ultrasound, and there are 
reports in the literature of pre-auricular tags detected 
with this technique. However, we believe that 3D 
ultrasound and, above all, its surface-rendering mode, 
makes the assessment of the normal and abnormal 
external ear much easier and immediate.6 In addition, 
this approach allows to diagnose, with a good degree 
of accuracy, the occurrence of low-set ears, which represents 
a key feature in a significant number of chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal anomalies. The 3D 
appearances of a normal ear and of different ear abnormalities 
are shown in Figure 3.32. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 75 
Figure 3.23 Multiplanar assessment of the face: normal fetus. To 
adequately study the lips and the whole area of the mouth, it is useful 
to display the axial plane in window a. Positioning the caliper 
at the level of the upper alveoli, the integrity of the hard palate can 
be assessed on the coronal plane (window c). 
Figure 3.24 Multiplanar assessment of the face: unilateral cleft 
lip/palate (27 weeks’ gestation). In this case, on positioning the 
caliper at the level of the bony defect (arrow) in the axial plane 
(top left window), the abnormal communication between mouth 
and nose becomes visible in the coronal plane (lower left window), 
with the caliper at the level of the palatal defect. 
Figure 3.25 Multiplanar assessment of the face: bilateral cleft 
lip/palate (22 weeks’ gestation). Also in this case, on positioning 
the caliper in the midline, behind the median remaining part of the 
alveolar ridge, on the axial view (top left window), the additional tissue 
on the philtrum, characteristic of bilateral clefts, becomes visible 
in the sagittal plane (top right window–arrow), while the bilateral 
ample palatal defect is visible in the coronal plane (lower left 
window). 
Figure 3.26 Surface rendering of the normal fetal face (same 
volume as in Figures 3.21 and 3.22, 32 weeks’ gestation) – rendering 
mode for soft tissues (surface mode). The ROI (region of interest) 
box is positioned around the fetal face (arrowheads), with an adequate 
acoustic window, and on (b) the side of the green visualization 
bar is checked (arrows). In (R), the reconstructed three-dimensional 
image is displayed: this is a normal fetus of Afro-American origin. 
a 
a
c 
b 
c 
b a b 
c 

Cranial sutures and related abnormalities. The cranial 
sutures can be assessed only by 3D ultrasound, with the 
transparent maximum mode. The procedure and the 
appearance of normal and abnormal sutures is described 
at the end of this chapter. 
The fetal face 
Surface rendering. Three-dimensional reconstruction of 
the fetal face has unfortunately represented for years 
the key marketing asset of 3D ultrasound both among 
professionals and in the media.7 The number of articles 
76 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.27 Renderings for soft 
tissues and bones. (a) Surface-mode 
rendering allows display of the facial 
features (large nasal root, typical 
of the Afro-American population). 
(b) Maximum-mode rendering is used 
to assess the bones: the metopic suture, 
between the frontal bones, the hard 
palate, and the mandible are all clearly 
displayed. 
Figure 3.28 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
unilateral cleft lip/palate. 
This is the same case as in Figure 3.24 
(27 weeks’ gestation). The appearance 
of the face, with the distortion of 
the alae nasi, is similar to the aspect at 
birth. 
Figure 3.29 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
bilateral cleft lip/palate. This 
is the same case as in Figure 3.25 (22 
weeks’ gestation). Also in this case, the 
three-dimensional reconstruction of the 
bilateral cleft is similar to the autopsy 
finding. 
a b 

appearing in women’s magazines is almost comparable to 
the number of scientific publications in medical journals. 
The concept of fetomaternal bonding has been misused 
and abused in order to justify the wide use of 3D 
ultrasound. We have demonstrated above the clinical utility 
of such an approach in the characterization of fetal 
facial malformations, and we firmly believe that the clinical 
assessment of the abnormal fetus should be and should 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 77 
Figure 3.30 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
unilateral cleft lip. In this 
syndromic fetus, the three-dimensional 
surface reconstruction (volume acquired 
at 32 weeks) allows detection of the 
small cleft of the lip. The alveolar ridge 
was unaffected. On the right, the 
neonate at birth. 
Figure 3.31 Maximum-mode rendering 
for the bones. The same volumes 
used for the images in Figures 3.24, 
3.25, and 3.27–3.29 are now processed 
with the maximum mode, in order to 
show the bony defects associated with 
cleft/palate (arrows): (a) normal palate 
(see Figure 3.27). (b) unilateral cleft 
lip/palate (see Figures 3.24 and 3.28); 
(c) bilateral cleft lip/palate (see Figures 
3.25 and 3.29); (d) large midline defect 
in a fetus with holoprosencephaly (21 
weeks’ gestation). 
a
c d
b 

remain the key motivation for the use of 3D ultrasound. 
‘Scanning for pleasure’, as Larry Platt8 has said, or producing 
nice views of fetal facial expressions, should not be 
considered as misuse – however, in our opinion, it should 
not be financially exploited without letting women know 
that fetal portraiture is not a medical procedure. 
78 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.32 Surface-rendering reconstruction: external ear. (a) Magnification of a normal ear at 32 weeks’ gestation. (b) Syndromic fetus: 
low-set ears with preauricular tag. (c) Syndromic fetus: low-set ears. (d) Syndromic fetus: low-set ears and facial dysmorphism. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Definition. Hypoplasia of variable degree of the bony 
orbit and the eye bulb. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Microphthalmia can be 
unilateral or bilateral. In both cases, it is often associated 
with severe chromosomal and non-chromosomal 
syndromes, the most common of which are described 
below. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the axial view 
of the orbits, regardless of the approach (lateral or 
ventral), as already described. The orbit appears small 
and hypoplastic – sometimes to such an extent that it 
is hard to identify them (Figures 3.33–3.35). In the case 
of moderate microphthalmia, the use of published 
nomograms3 (see the Appendix) may be of help in 
establishing the diagnosis. 
Note. In the case of misalignment of the ultrasound 
beam on the axial plane, a false-positive impression of 
microphthalmia can be created (see Figure 3.19). 
• Prognostic indicators. If the anomaly is bilateral, it is 
often syndromic and, as such, has a poorer prognosis. 
Isolated unilateral microphthalmia has a very high 
aesthetic impact and may or may not be associated 
with sight loss, according to the presence and functional 
status of the hypoplastic eye bulb. Aphakia 
(complete absence of the lens) may indicate complete 
absence of the eye bulb. 
• Association with other malformations. Microphthalmia 
is relatively often associated with cataract 
or lens opacity. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Microphthalmia 
is one of the most common features of trisomy 
ANOPHTHALMIA/MICROPHTHALMIA 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Reduced orbital diameter on the axial view of the orbits. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, COFS, Meckel–Gruber, Walker–Warburg. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. Significant aesthetic impact also for isolated cases. 
a b c d 

13 (in >50% of cases), especially if holoprosencephaly is 
also present. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with microphthalmia are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome (oculo-auriculo-vertebral 
spectrum, OAVS):9,10 look for . microphthalmia, 
unilateral + cleft lip/palate and hemifacial microsomia 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome:11 
look for . microphthalmia, bilateral + arthrogryposis 
and micrognathia (see Chapter 10) 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 79 
Figure 3.33 Bilateral microphthalmia 
(19 weeks’ gestation). (a) Ultrasound: 
in this fetus with trisomy 13, both 
orbits are severely hypoplastic. (b) 
Autopsy: the enophthalmos and sealed 
eyelids are evident. The eye bulbs were 
severely hypoplastic. Bilateral cleft 
lip/palate, which is frequently encountered 
in trisomy 13, is also evident. 
Figure 3.34 Unilateral microphthalmia 
plus cataract. (a) The severe 
hypoplasia of the left orbit, which 
is associated with a corneal opacity 
(arrowhead), is evident. (b) The autopsy 
confirms both ultrasound findings, i.e. 
unilateral microphthalmia and cataract. 
Figure 3.35 Bilateral microphthalmia (33 weeks’ gestation). (a) Two-dimensional ultrasound: on this axial view of the orbits, the orbital cavities 
are replaced by whitish areas (arrows) and there is no sign of the eye bulbs either. (b) Three-dimensional surface-rendering reconstruction 
of the fetal face showing the apparently sealed eyelid and the enophtalmos . (c) At birth: both eyelids appear sealed and there is no sign of either 
orbits or eyebulbs. 
a
a
a b
b c 
b 

• Walker–Warburg syndrome:12 look for . microphthalmia, 
bilateral + cataract, hydrocephaly, and 
Dandy–Walker malformation 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . microphthalmia, bilateral 
+ laryngeal atresia, cleft lip/palate, external ear 
anomalies, bilateral renal agenesis, and congenital 
heart disease (see Chapter 10) 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:12 look for . microphthalmia, 
bilateral + cephalocele, polycystic kidney, 
and polydactyly (see Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. Should microphthalmia be 
detected in a fetus, fetal karyotyping is mandatory in order 
to exclude chromosome 13 anomalies (trisomy and longarm 
deletion, del(13q)). In addition, a thorough anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert, in order to detect 
major and/or minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis 
of one of the above-mentioned syndromes. Obstetric care 
and mode and timing of delivery are unaffected. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the lesion is 
part of a syndrome, then overall survival is extremely 
poor, due to the severity of the above-mentioned syndromic 
conditions. On the other hand, in the case of 
isolated microphthalmia, the main problem, which may 
sometimes require cosmetic surgery only because of psychologic 
reasons, is the significant aesthetic impact 
related to the facial dysmorphic features. The lifespan is 
unaltered, while the quality of life depends upon the 
degree of visual compromise of the affected eye. 
80 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CATARACT 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Lens opacity, unilateral or bilateral, detected on the axial view of the orbits. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: COFS, Walker–Warburg, Neu–Laxova, chondrodysplasia 
punctata. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. Good outcome after surgery in non-syndromic cases. 
Definition. Partial or total opacity of the eye lens. It can 
be unilateral or bilateral. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Cataract is an extremely rare 
lesion in the fetus. It can be the effect of 1st trimester 
maternal infections (rubela) or be due to the underlying 
presence of a syndrome. Isolated, unilateral, nonsyndromic 
cases have also been described. In this regard, 
a recent population case–control study14 has found a 
positive correlation between maternal influenza/common 
cold/minor respiratory infections during early pregnancy 
and the occurrence of cataract in the fetus, but 
only if these minor illnesses were not treated with 
antifever drugs.14 These findings led the authors of the 
study to two conclusions: 1) that congenital non-syndromic 
cataract may be the result of transient maternal 
hyperhermia during organogenesis, and 2) that influenza 
vaccination and antifever therapy in common cold/ 
minor respiratory infections in early pregnancy may 
reduce the incidence of congenital non-syndromic 
cataract.14 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the axial 
view of the orbits, preferably with a ventral approach: at 
the level of one or both orbits, a hyperechogenic usually 
round area is seen, as already described earlier in this 
chapter (Figures 3.34 and 3.36). Numerous authors have 
demonstrated that the recognition of a lens opacity is 
undeniably associated with cataract, while the reverse is 
not always true: the absence of any hyperechogenicity 
within the orbit in fetuses at risk of cataract does not 
allow one to exclude its presence. 
• Prognostic indicators. Bilateral cataracts are usually 
of syndromic origin, and, as such, have a poorer prognosis. 
Conversely, isolated, unilateral cases are more 
commonly due to intrauterine infections; in these 
cases, the final outcome depends on the spread and 
severity of the infection. If the cataract is associated 
with microphthalmia, this is more indicative of a syndrome. 
The isolated forms, which are not always 
detectable in utero as they are not constantly associated 
with lens hyperechogenicities, have a significantly 
better prognosis. 
• Association with other malformations. Microphthalmia 
is the most frequently associated anomaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, 
especially for bilateral forms. The in utero detectable syndromes 
that can be associated with cataract are as follows: 
• Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome:11 
look for . cataract + microphthalmia, (bilateral), 
arthrogryposis, and micrognathia 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome:12 look for . cataract + 
microphthalmia, hydrocephaly, and Dandy–Walker 
malformation 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:12 look for . cataract + 
microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
severe cerebellar hypoplasia, hypertelorism, micrognathia, 
short limbs, syndactyly, joint contractures, 
early-onset fetal growth retardation, and polyhydramnios 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Chondrodysplasia punctata:12 look for . cataract + 
symmetric rhizomelic limb shortening and epiphyseal 
calcifications 
Obstetric management. Should cataracts be detected in 
a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and/or minor signs 
possibly leading to the diagnosis of one of the abovementioned 
syndromes. Obstetric and delivery management 
should be changed accordingly. 
Postnatal therapy. This entails lens aspiration and the 
use of contact lens, bifocal spectacles, and occlusion 
therapy (of the other eye, to stimulate the aphakic one), 
followed at a later stage by placement of a posterior 
chamber intraocular lens, with the latter procedure still 
being controversial.15,16 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If additional 
anomalies and syndromes are absent, survival is unaffected 
and the quality of life unremarkable, although in 
selected cases visual axis reopacification can occur. In 
these cases, the intraocular lens should be replaced.16 
In syndromic cases, which are usually associated with 
microphthalmia, the perinatal mortality risk is extremely 
high, owing to the severe abnormalities that characterize 
the above-mentioned syndromes. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 81 
Figure 3.36 Bilateral cataract. In 
this case, bilateral cataract, detected at 
20 weeks’ gestation (a), was the only 
sonographically recognizable sign of a 
recurrent Walker–Warburg syndrome. 
(b) At autopsy the occurrence of bilateral 
cataracts was confirmed. Note the 
opaque aspect of the eye. 
HYPERTELORISM 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Increased (> 95th centile) interocular distance, often, but not always, associated with an 
increased binocular distance. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: frontonasal dysplasia, Neu–Laxova, median facial cleft syndrome, 
Apert syndrome. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. 
a b 

Definition. Increased (> 95th centile) interocular distance, 
often, but not always associated with an increased binocular 
distance. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Hypertelorism is rarely found 
in the fetus. Since embryologically the ocular structures 
develop laterally and then start to migrate towards the 
midline, to end up in their normal position, hypertelorism 
may be seen as a partial arrest in this migration process (as 
in the median facial cleft syndrome). Alternatively, it can 
be the result of an anterior cephalocele, which mechanically 
limits the migration process. Or it can be determined 
by anomalies in the development and growth of the 
cranial bones, as in Apert syndrome (see Chapter 10). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the axial 
view of the orbits, with a lateral or ventral approach. In 
the rare cases of severe hypertelorism, the diagnosis is 
straightforward and does not need to be confirmed with 
the measurement of the binocular and inter-ocular diameters. 
However, in most instances, the degree of hypertelorism 
is moderate or moderately severe (Figure 3.37). 
In these cases, the diagnosis of hypertelorism should 
always rely on the biometric assessment (binocular and 
interocular diameters > 95th centile). 
• Prognostic indicators. The recognition of a midline 
cystic structure, consistent with a diagnosis of an 
anterior cephalocele, represents a poor prognostic 
sign, since this anomaly is often associated with a 
bifid nose and median clefting (median facial cleft 
syndrome). The association with other abnormalities 
of the face and/or the central nervous system increases 
the syndromic risk exponentially. 
• Association with other malformations. There are no 
significant malformative clusters reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. There have 
been a few cases of trisomy 13 and rare chromosomal 
arrangements. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
in utero detectable syndromes that can be associated 
with hypertelorism are as follows: 
• Neu–Laxova:12 look for . hypertelorism + microcephaly, 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, severe cerebellar 
hypoplasia, cataract, micrognathia, short limbs, 
syndactyly, joint contractures, early-onset fetal growth 
retardation, and polyhydramnios (see Chapter 10) 
• Median facial cleft syndrome:12 look for . hypertelorism 
+ midline facial clefting and anomalies of the nose 
• Apert syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly):12 look for 
. hypertelorism + turricephaly, macroglossia, syndactyly, 
fusion of cervical vertebrae, renal anomalies, 
and congenital heart disease (see Chapter 10) 
• Fronto-nasal dysplasia:17 look for . hypertelorism + 
anterior cephalocele, median cleft lip, and bifid 
nose 
Obstetric management. Should hypertelorism be 
detected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to detect major and/or 
minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis of one of 
the above-mentioned syndromes. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends on the general clinical context, and on the type 
of any underlying syndromic condition of which the 
hypertelorism is an expression. 
82 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.37 Hypertelorism. This image shows the moderate 
increase in interocular distance in a fetus with multiple anomalies. 
HYPOTELORISM 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Reduced interocular and binocular distances. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, and related to the almost constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: trisomy 13. 
Outcome. Extremely poor, if associated with holoprosencephaly. 

Definition. Reduced interocular and binocular distances 
(< 5th centile). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The most common cause 
of hypotelorism is the migration defect underlying 
the frequently associated holoprosencephaly (see 
Chapter 2). The phenotypic expression of this midline 
migration defect ranges from severe hypotelorism to 
cyclopia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the axial 
view of the orbits, with a ventral or lateral approach. 
It should be underlined that the overwhelming majority 
of cases of hypotelorism detected in utero are 
associated with holoprosencephaly (Figure 3.38). As 
already pointed out for hypertelorism, the diagnosis is 
straightforward in the most severe cases, whereas in the 
less severe ones, measurement of the binocular and 
interocular diameters is of fundamental diagnostic 
importance. 
• Prognostic indicators. The fact that holoprosencephaly 
is associated in 80% of the cases detected prenatally 
makes the association of this severe central 
nervous system developmental abnormality the key 
prognostic indicator. 
• Association with other malformations. The most 
frequent association is with holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (about 
40%). The most frequently associated chromosomal 
aberration is trisomy 13, given its high incidence in 
holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. In addition to the already-mentioned holoprosencephaly, 
hypotelorism can also occur, less often, in 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Should hypotelorism be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, because of the high 
risk of trisomy 13. In addition, a thorough anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert, in order to 
detect the various defects characterizing the holoprosencephaly 
sequence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
poor and the mortality rate high because of the high 
association with trisomy 13. In those cases in which the 
chromosomes are normal, the risk of severe mental 
retardation is strictly related to the subtype of holoprosencephaly 
(see Chapter 2). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 83 
Figure 3.38 Hypotelorism. Three degrees of hypotelorism, which in most instances is associated with holoprosencephaly, are shown: 
(a) moderate hypotelorism, associated with a single nostril; (b) a single bony orbit with two adjacent eyebulbs, associated with arhinia and 
proboscis; (c) cyclopia (single orbit and single eyebulb), also associated with arhinia and proboscis. 
a b c 

Definition. Proboscis: single midline appendix of soft 
tissues (but can have a bony skeleton) departing from the 
nasal root area. Arhinia: complete absence of the nasal 
bones and of the nares. It can be associated or not with 
the proboscis. Single nostril: evidence of a single nasal 
opening. It represents the less severe anomaly of the 
nasal area associated with holoprosencephaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As reported above, proboscis, 
arhinia, and single nostril are different expressions of 
the same midline developmental anomaly characteristic 
of holoprosencephaly, namely a field developmental 
derangement of the prechordal mesoderm. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view is not the 
same for the various defects. The midsagittal plane of the 
fetal profile permits recognition of the proboscis and of 
the arhinia (Figures 3.12, 3.39, and 3.40). The axial view 
of the orbits (Figure 3.41) allows detection of arhinia 
only (the proboscis lies on another more cranial plane), 
while single nostril, which represents the less severe holoprosencephaly-
related developmental anomaly of the 
nasal placode, can only be recognized on the oblique 
view of the lips (Figure 3.42; see also Chapter 2). 
The diagnosis of all the above-mentioned anomalies is 
straightforward and does not need any biometry. 
• Prognostic indicators. The fact that holoprosencephaly 
is constantly associated with these types of 
defects represents the most important negative prognostic 
factor. 
• Association with other malformations. There is a 
constant association with holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high. 
It is obviously dependent on the constant association 
with holoprosencephaly and on the 40% chromosomal 
risk of this condition, mostly related to trisomy 13. 
84 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ANOMALIES OF THE NOSE – 1: PROBOSCIS, ARHINIA, SINGLE NOSTRIL 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Proboscis: Fetal profile view: single midline mainly soft tissue formation departing from the 
nasal root area. Arhinia: Fetal profile view: complete absence of the nasal bones and soft tissues: Single nostril: 
oblique view of the lips: evidence of a single opening. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, and related to the constant association with holoprosencephaly 
(trisomy 13). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high, and related to the constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Outcome. Extremely poor, due to the constant association with holoprosencephaly. 
Figure 3.39 Proboscis in alobar holoprosencephaly. This midsagittal view of the facial profile shows the appendix (arrow) arising from 
the forehead: (a) two-dimensional ultrasound; (b) three-dimensional maximum mode rendering; (c) confirmation at autopsy. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high, because of the constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Obstetric management. Should these severe abnormalities 
of the nose be recognized on ultrasound, karyotyping 
is mandatory, because of the high risk of 
trisomy 13. In addition, a thorough anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert, in order to detect 
the various defects characterizing the holoprosencephaly 
sequence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
is very poor and the survival minimal because of the association 
with holoprosencephaly and the 40% risk of a 
concomitant trisomy 13. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 85 
Figure 3.40 Arhinia in semilobar 
holoprosencephaly. (a) On this midsagittal 
view of the fetal face, the absence of 
the nose determines the extremely flat 
profile, confirmed at autopsy (b). 
Figure 3.41 Arhinia in semilobar holoprosencephaly. The absence 
of the nasal bones is also evident on this axial view of the orbits: note 
the depressed area between the orbits (arrowhead). 
a b 

Definition. There is no generally accepted definition 
of an ‘abnormal nose’, as this term has been created 
by the present authors. The aim of this small section is 
to draw the attention of the reader to the assessment 
of the overall aspect and harmony of the various components 
of the fetal profile and of the nose in particular. 
In textbooks on human dysmorphology,12 as well 
as in the OMIM website (On-Line Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
entrez), the number of syndromes featuring minor 
abnormalities of the nose is enormous. Anomalies of 
the nose that can be detected in the neonate include a 
low or wide nasal bridge, a small nose with or without 
anteverted nares, hypoplasia of the alae nasi, and 
choanal atresia. However, unfortunately (or luckily…) 
virtually none of these minor anomalies of the 
nose can be diagnosed with certainty in the fetus. In 
addition, the extreme variability of the normal human 
phenotype has to be considered. It is of the utmost 
importance to explain this wide phenotypic variability 
to the parents of the possibly abnormal fetus. 
Nonetheless, we believe that, in an appropriate diagnostic 
framework, the careful evaluation of even 
minor or apparently insignificant anomalies of the 
fetal profile may contribute to support, or rule out a 
diagnostic hypothesis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The minor developmental 
anomalies of the nose are determined by the underlying 
syndromic condition. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The key plane for the detection of 
minor anomalies of the nose is the midsagittal view of 
the fetal profile. Once again, it has to be underlined that 
such subjective approach to the assessment of the fetal 
nose appearance can be adopted only if a complex malformative 
cluster has already been diagnosed and there 
is a differential diagnostic doubt to be clarified. In this 
context, such an approach, based on the descriptions of 
facial features reported in neonatal dysmorphology 
books, may help to resolve the issue. The same diagnostic 
process can also be applied a posteriori, i.e. when the 
recognition of a malformative cluster has already led to 
the identification of a likely diagnosis: in this circumstance, 
the confirmation that an anomaly of the nose 
described for that syndrome is indeed present in the 
index fetus further supports the diagnosis.18 
• Prognostic indicators. The prognosis depends on the 
underlying syndromic condition, given that the anomalies 
of the nose described in this section are of no or 
mild clinical relevance. 
• Association with other malformations. As a general 
rule, syndromic conditions involving the face 
86 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.42 Single nostril in semilobar 
holoprosencephaly. This oblique view 
of the orbits allows demonstration of 
the single nostril. The confirmation at 
autopsy is shown on the right; also note 
the hypotelorism and microphthalmia. 
ANOMALIES OF THE NOSE – 2: THE ‘ABNORMAL’ NOSE 
Incidence. Very rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Fetal profile plane: minor abnormalities of the dimensions and the proportions of the nose; 
abnormal nasal root. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. Trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Variable. 
Outcome. Depends on the overall clinical context. 

often present with anomalies of the lips and/or 
micrognathia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low. 
It is true that fetuses with trisomy 21 have a small nose 
and a flat profile, but in most circumstances it is the 
detection of major anomalies and/or of other robust soft 
markers of aneuploidy, such as a thickened nuchal fold 
or hypoplastic/absent nasal bones,19,20 that leads to karyotyping 
and to the final diagnosis of trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is variable, 
depending on the clinical context. 
Obstetric management. Minor facial anomalies, such as an 
‘abnormal’ nose, are generally discovered after other 
significant malformations have already been diagnosed. If 
this occurs during the 2nd trimester, and if, following the 
prenatal counseling session, the parents opt to continue the 
pregnancy, serial ultrasound examinations should be 
scheduled, as additional features may arise late in gestation. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final prognosis 
depends on the underlying syndromic condition. 
In general, syndromes associated with abnormal facial 
features relatively often carry a moderate to high risk of 
mental retardation. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 87 
CLEFT LIP/PALATE 
Incidence. Relatively common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Views able to display lips, upper alveolar ridge and hard palate. On these views, the cleft 
appears as an interruption of the lip and/or the alveolar ridge/palate. It can be unilateral, bilateral, or median. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, especially for the median (holoprosencephaly and trisomy 13) 
and the bilateral (trisomy 13, 18) variants. Very low for the isolated unilateral cleft lip. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, Fraser, EEC, Fryns, frontonasal dysplasia. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in syndromic cases. Good/extremely good for unilateral clefts. From acceptable 
to good for bilateral clefts. 
Definition. The defect may involve only the upper lip 
(cleft lip, CL), or extend to the alveolar ridge and, possibly, 
to the hard palate (cleft lip/palate, CLP). It can be 
unilateral, bilateral, or median. At birth, unilateral CL 
account for 29% of all clefts, unilateral CLP for 40%, 
bilateral CLP for 27%, and bilateral CL for the remaining 
5%. It should be underlined that the more severe 
facial clefts classified according the Tessier scheme21 are 
not considered in this section. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The lips and the palate originate 
from the first branchial arch between the 7th and 
the 12th weeks of gestation. In particular, the upper lip 
and the philtrum originate from the fusion of the medial 
nasal prominence with the lateral nasal prominences and 
the maxillary prominences. Similarly, the palate develops 
from the midline fusion of the secondary palatal 
shelves. If the lateral fusion process is blocked, then the 
lateral type of cleft lip/palate occurs; if, rather, it is the 
downward development of the medial nasal process that 
is arrested, this leads to the median type of cleft, which 
often extends laterally, since the absence of the median 
nasal process also prevents lateral fusion. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Even if the ultrasound diagnosis of 
CLP has been reported as early as the 12th week of gestation,
22 the limited development of facial soft tissues at 
this early stage of development poses significant limitations 
on diagnostic accuracy. The diagnosis of CLP is 
made using different views of the lower part of the face, 
as already mentioned. In particular, the cleft of the lip 
appears as a defect at the level of the upper lip (a rare 
example of bilateral CL is shown is Figure 3.43). If this is 
not associated with hard palate defects, the alveolar ridge 
is intact and the maxilla unremarkable. If, on the contrary, 
the cleft involves the bony structures, an abnormal 
communication between the oral and nasal cavities is 
seen; in this latter instance, distortion of the alae nasi is 
common (Figure 3.44; see also Figures 3.24, 3.28, and 
3.31). In the case of a bilateral CLP, additional tissue at 
the level of the philtrum is commonly seen (Figures 3.45 
and 3.46; see also Figures 3.25, 3.29, and 3.31). The 
diagnostic potential of the various ultrasound planes that 
can be employed for the assessment of the upper lip and 
palate is discussed below. The axial view of the maxilla 
allows direct recognition of the defect of the lip and 
the bony palate. If this view is obtained with a ventral 

(anterior) approach, the diagnostic accuracy is higher, as 
the ultrasound beam can penetrate through the defect up 
to the nasal cavity, and this gives a clearer idea of the 
width and the depth of the cleft (Figures 3.44–3.46). In 
comparison, the lateral approach allows detection of the 
defect of the upper alveolar ridge and of the palate, but 
does not usually allow assessment of the depth of the 
defect. In addition, in the case of bilateral CLP, the progressive 
absorption and refraction of ultrasound waves 
at the level of the defect closest to the transducer blurs 
the visualization of the farther cleft. Oblique views of the 
lips and the palate can demonstrate the anomalies of the 
soft tissues and of the bony part, respectively. It should 
be underlined that, in comparison with the axial views, 
the oblique views have the advantage of better displaying 
the spatial relationships between the lips and the nose, 
which can sometimes be distorted (Figures 3.44–3.46). 
Coronal views at the level of the face and the maxilla 
allow the best display of a median cleft, which is usually 
associated with holoprosencephaly (Figure 3.47). It 
should be noted that the midline sagittal view appears 
unremarkable in unilateral CLP, since the defect lies in 
another plane. Only in the case of bilateral CLP does this 
view appear abnormal, due to the additional tissue present 
at the level of the philtrum (Figure 3.48). A summary 
of the ultrasound approach to the diagnosis of 
different types of CLP, listing the pros and cons of the 
various scanning views, is given in Table 3.1. 
88 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.43 Bilateral cleft lip. With 
three-dimensional ultrasound, the multiplanar 
approach, associated with the 
surface rendering, allows demonstration 
of a double cleft of the upper lip 
(arrows): axial view on the top left 
window and coronal view on the lower 
left window. Note the normal alveolar 
ridge, under the lip, which excludes a 
concurrent cleft palate. The surfacerendering 
reconstruction (lower right 
window) demonstrates the appearance 
of the cleft lip (arrows). 
Figure 3.44 Unilateral cleft lip/palate. Unilateral cleft determining distortion of the alae nasi (27 weeks’ gestation). (a) Oblique view, 
demonstrating the lip defect and the distortion of the alae nasi (arrow). (b) Axial view, demonstrating the extent of the bony defect (arrows). 
(c) Coronal view, demonstrating the abnormal communication between nose and mouth (arrow). (d) The appearance of the defect at birth. 
a b c d 

Note. If the umbilical cord lies on the upper lip, this may 
raise the suspicion of a CLP: the vertical sonolucent area 
corresponding to the umbilical vein with its walls may 
sometimes lead to a false-positive diagnosis of CLP. It is 
sufficient to repeat the scan after a few minutes or to 
switch on the color/power Doppler to rule out a real 
defect (see Figure 3.20). 
• Prognostic indicators. The risk of chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal anomalies is higher for CLP 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 89 
Figure 3.45 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. 
Bilateral cleft lip/palate with additional 
tissue on the philtrum (22 weeks’ gestation). 
(a) Oblique view, demonstrating 
the double defect of the lip (arrows), 
and the additional tissue on the midline. 
(b) Axial view, demonstrating the double 
bony defect (arrows). (c) Coronal view, 
demonstrating the double communication 
between nose and mouth (arrows). 
(d) The appearance of the defect after 
termination of pregnancy. 
Figure 3.46 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. 
Another case of bilateral cleft lip/palate: 
this coronal view demonstrates the double 
bony defect. The confirmation at 
autopsy is shown on the right. 
a b 
c d 

than for CL, and higher for bilateral clefts than 
for unilateral ones. However, the worst prognosis 
is probably associated with the median cleft, because 
of its association with holoprosencephaly and/or 
other severe midline defects (frontonasal dysplasia). It 
also has to be considered that the cosmetic results 
depend upon the extent and the depth of the defect. 
• Association with other malformations. The single 
group of anomalies most frequently associated with 
CLP is represented by congenital heart disease. 
The role of 3D ultrasound in the characterization of CLP. 
Once such an anomaly has been detected, the next steps 
necessary for a thorough counseling session are the 
anatomic characterization of the defect and the assessment 
of its syndromic or isolated nature. In this context, 
the employment of 3D ultrasound has shown a number 
of advantages. Firstly, the use of a surface-rendered 
image of the defect enhances the communication of the 
diagnosis to parents. Secondly, the same image, together 
with the maximum-mode one, can be used for consultation 
with the plastic surgeon. Besides, the possibility to 
renavigate the volume together with other specialists 
allows discussion also of fine anatomic details, and this in 
turn makes the prenatal counseling session more accurate 
and effective. See also the discussion earlier in this chapter 
on the role of 3D ultrasound and Figures 3.21–3.31. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high for 
median clefts (holoprosencephaly) and for bilateral ones 
(15–30%). It is moderately high for unilateral CLP 
(5–15%), but minimal for isolated CL.23 CLP can be 
associated with trisomies 13 and 18 and with other rarer 
chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very high. 
The number of syndromes featuring CLP among the 
possible prenatally detectable signs is huge, and it would 
90 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.47 Median cleft lip/palate in lobar holoprosencephaly. (a) Axial view, demonstrating the midline defect of the lip and palate 
(arrow). (b) Midsagittal view, demonstrating the arhinia and the absence of the upper alveolar ridge (arrowhead). (c) Coronal view, 
demonstrating the abnormal communication between nose and mouth (caliper). (d) Three-dimensional surface-rendering reconstruction 
demonstrating the midline defect. (e) The appearance of the defect at birth. Note also that such a severe midline defect of the face is rarely 
associated with lobar holoprosencephaly. 
a b 
c d e 

be of limited value to report all of them here. Before 
listing the syndromes with CLP most frequently detected 
in the fetus, it is important to underline that a CLP may 
sometimes represent the only prenatally detectable sign 
of various syndromes of clinical importance; we believe 
that this information should be given to the parents 
during the counseling session. The syndromes associated 
with CLP that are most frequently diagnosed in the fetus 
are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome:9,10 look for . CLP, unilateral + 
unilateral microphthalmia and hemifacial microsomia 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . CLP, unilateral + 
laryngeal atresia, congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, 
external ear anomalies, and bilateral renal 
agenesis (see Chapter 10) 
• EEC (ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia) syndrome:12 
look for . CLP, unilateral + ectrodactyly (lobster claw 
anomaly of hands and feet) and maxillary hypoplasia 
• Frontonasal dysplasia:17 look for . CLP, median + 
anterior cephalocele and hypertelorism 
• Fryns syndrome:12 look for . CLP, unilateral + diaphragmatic 
hernia and central nervous system anomalies 
Obstetric management. Should CLP be detected in a 
fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed by 
an expert, in order to detect major and minor malformations 
possibly leading to the diagnosis of an underlying 
syndromic condition. Karyotyping is recommended, 
because of the relatively high risk of trisomy 13, especially 
in bilateral CLP. For isolated unilateral CLP and 
for CL, this option should be discussed with the parents. 
In the case of isolated CL/CLP, prenatal consultation 
with the reference surgeon, who may provide the parents 
with all necessary information regarding the timing and 
the results of the surgical procedure, is of the utmost 
importance. 
Postnatal therapy. It is very important to explain to the 
parents that the surgical correction will not be carried 
out at birth. Only by fully understanding this piece of 
information will the parents be able to cope with the 
continuous confrontation with the defect at home. The 
use of presurgical plates and/or strapping is controversial. 
However, they may help feeding and, at the same 
time, contribute to narrowing the cleft, making surgery 
easier. If used, it is important that they be fitted soon 
after birth by an experienced orthodontist. As far as the 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 91 
Figure 3.48 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. In 
these two cases, due to the presence of 
the additional tissue on the philtrum, the 
midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile 
is also abnormal, unlike in unilateral 
clefts, where it is unremarkable. 

Scanning plane Pros Cons 
Axial – ventral Clear diagnosis of cleft Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
extent and depth position 
Axial – lateral Good assessment of the In bilateral clefts, insufficient definition of 
extent of the lip defect, the defect located distal to the transducer 
less of the bony component 
Oblique – lips Excellent assessment of the Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
lip defect and of possibly position 
associated anomalies of the 
alae nasi 
Oblique – palate Good assessment of the bony Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
defect and of the relationship position. Does not give information on the 
with the nasal cavity. It lip component, since the plane is 
completes the previous view deeper than this structure 
Coronal – face Good assessment of median Lateral defects do not show up on this 
lip and nose defects view 
(holoprosencephaly) 
Coronal – palate Good assessment of the bony No information on lips and nose, since the 
defect and of the relationship plane is deeper than these superficial 
with the nasal cavity structures 
Sagittal – profile Enables detection of just the No information on unilateral clefts or on 
additional tissue on the bilateral ones except for assessment 
philtrum in bilateral clefts of the philtrum 
surgical approach is concerned, different protocols have 
been applied over the years in relation to the surgical 
technique and the timing of the surgical approach (also 
depending on the type of defect: unilateral versus bilateral, 
CL versus CLP, with or without distortion of the 
alae nasi). The classical ‘rule of 10’ (10 months of age, 
10 g/dl of hemoglobin, and 10 pounds (about 4.5 kg) of 
weight) is not accepted by all surgeons. Currently, there 
is no uniform protocol for the surgical approach to CLP, 
but the repair of the various components (lip, soft palate, 
and hard palate) is carried out at different times and in 
different sequences: closure of the lip and hard palate, 
followed by closure of the soft palate; or closure of the 
lip and soft palate, followed by closure of the hard 
palate; or closure of the lip, soft palate, and hard palate 
together; or closure of the soft palate, followed by the 
hard palate, followed by lip reconstruction.24 Possible 
residual velopharyngeal dysfunction is managed with the 
help of speech therapists through speech and language 
therapy, possibly before school age. It is important 
to underline that different aspects are involved in 
the assessment of the surgical correction of facial cleftings: 
aesthetic, morphometric, functional (language, high 
airway, hearing, and jaw function), and psycological.25 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The main prognostic 
determinant is the syndromic or isolated nature of 
the defect. In the latter instance, survival is unaffected, 
but the perceived quality of life is a function of the severity 
of the defect (bilateral versus unilateral, CL versus 
CLP) and of the consequent cosmetic and functional 
surgical outcome (speech, language, hearing, etc.25). 
92 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 3.1 Ultrasound diagnosis of cleft lip/palate. Pros and cons of the different ultrasound planes 

Definition. Abnormal shape and arrested development 
of the mandible. The defect is defined as retrognathia 
if the most affected axis is the anteroposterior one; if 
the whole mandible is affected, then the defect is defined 
as micrognathia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The mandible develops from 
the first branchial arch: the mandibular processes merge 
on the midline to form the mandible and, more superficially, 
the lower lip. The normal development of the 
mandible can be blocked by genetic factors, as in chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal syndromes, or by enviromental 
ones. The latter mechanism applies to the 
severe micrognathia characteristically present in neuromuscular 
conditions such as FADS (fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence – see Chapter 10): in this case, it is the 
fixed contracture of the temporomandibular joint that 
prevents the opening of the mouth and consequently the 
normal development of the mandible. In severe cases, the 
same mechanism may also determine microstomia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of 
micrognathia is electively carried out on the sagittal view 
of the fetal profile. In this plane, the absence of the last 
feature characterizing the fetal profile, i.e. the chin, is 
recognized. This finding is consistent with the diagnosis 
of micrognathia, which, in the most severe cases, can be 
associated with a retraction of the lower lip (Figures 3.49 
and 3.50). In severe cases, this view alone is sufficient to 
subjectively diagnose micrognathia. However, less severe 
cases of micrognathia can be reliably diagnosed only by 
applying biometric techniques. Nomograms of the various 
mandibular diameters have been published. Among these, 
the Jaw Index5 shows fair diagnostic accuracy, since it 
normalizes the mandibular diameters on the biparietal 
diameter (BPD) allowing to identify a cut-off which is 
independent of gestational age. The Jaw Index is calculated 
as follows: Jaw Index = (anteroposterior mandibular 
diameter/BPD) × 100. A value of 23 represents the 95th 
centile. Another advantage of the Jaw Index is that it is 
measured on the axial view of the mandible; therefore, it 
also allows detection of micrognathia if the facial profile 
view cannot be obtained because of an unfavorable position 
of the fetus. It is useful to note that in the case of 
extremely severe micrognathia, if the axial plane of the 
mandible is obtained, it is possible to visualize on the same 
view both the maxillary and the mandibular alveolar 
ridges (Figure 3.51). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 93 
MICROGNATHIA 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Fetal profile view: retrognathia/micrognathia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high: trisomies 13 and 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: FADS, multiple pterygium, Neu–Laxova, Nager, 
Treacher–Collins, Pierre–Robin, achondrogenesis, camptomelic dysplasia, diastrophic dysplasia, femoral 
hypoplasia–unusual facies syndrome. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in the majority of syndromic cases. Variable in primary mandibular defects 
(Pierre–Robin). 
Figure 3.49 Micrognathia in trisomy 
18. On the midsagittal view of the fetal 
facial profile, the micro/retrognathia is 
evident. The confirmation at autopsy is 
shown on the right. 

Note. As with the ‘abnormal nose’ described earlier 
in this chapter, the variation of the normal human 
phenotype is also extreme in the shape, dimensions, 
and protrusion of the mandible. Again, it is safe 
practice to consider the phenotype of the parents 
in the scanning room prior to defining as certainly 
abnormal the profile of the fetus that is under 
examination! 
• Prognostic indicators. The most severe forms of micrognathia 
are often syndromic. Also, if there is edema of the 
facial subcutaneous tissue, regardless of the degree 
of micrognathia, the risk of chromosomal and nonchromosomal 
syndromes is very high (Figure 3.50), 
and the prognosis consequently poorer. 
• Association with other malformations. Micrognathia 
is virtually never an isolated finding, being among the 
94 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.50 Severe micrognathia in 
FADS (fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence). (a)Onthis midsagittal view of 
the fetal facial profile, the severe 
micro/retrognathia is evident. (b) This 
oblique view of the lips demonstrates 
the associated microstomia, due to the 
block of the temporomandibular joint. 
(c) Confirmation of the diagnosis at birth 
(early neonatal death). 
Figure 3.51 Extremely severe micrognathia, in orofaciodigital syndrome. (a) On this midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile, the 
extremely severe micro/retrognathia is evident (arrowhead). (b) The retrognathic component is so severe that on this axial view of the 
mandible both the lower and the upper alveolar ridges (arrows) can be displayed; note also the microglossia. (c) Confirmation of diagnosis 
at autopsy.
a c 
b
a b c 

most common syndromic facial features. And in a 
significant number of those cases in which this apparently 
represents the only ultrasound abnormal finding, 
an underlying syndrome is often found after birth 
or at autopsy.12,26 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high. 
Trisomies 18 and 13 are among the chromosomal aberrations 
most frequently associated with micrognathia. In 
particular, at autopsy, 70% of trisomy 18 cases shows 
micrognathia of variable severity. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very 
high. A large number of non-chromosomal syndromes 
can be associated with micrognathia. We report below 
those most commonly encountered in the fetus, divided 
according to the pathogenetic mechanism. The first 
group includes those characterized by a defect of neuromuscular 
transmission (arthrogryposes): the FADS, 
(which also includes Pena–Shokeir syndrome27), multiple 
pterygium syndrome, and Neu–Laxova syndrome. 
In this group, micrognathia is the consequence, as 
already mentioned, of masseter contracture, which 
blocks the temporomandibular joint. The second group 
includes primary defects of mandibular development, 
such as Pierre–Robin anomaly. Finally, there are the 
skeletal dysplasias, in which micrognathia represents 
the expression of a skeletal developmental derangement. 
The most common skeletal dysplasias that feature, 
among other signs, micrognathia are camptomelic 
dysplasia, the group of short-rib polydactyly syndromes, 
and thanatophoric dysplasia. It should be 
underlined that all these syndromes are severe conditions 
with very high perinatal mortality rates, with the 
exception of the primary developmental defects of the 
mandible (Pierre–Robin anomaly). 
• FADS (Fetal Akinesia Deformation Sequence, including 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome):27 look for . micrognathia 
+ diffuse joint contractures, thoracic 
hypoplasia, clubfeet, ulnar deviations of the hands and 
extremely reduced fetal movements (see Chapter 10) 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:12 look for . micrognathia 
+ diffuse joint contractures and multiple 
pterygia at elbow and knee 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:12,28 look for . micrognathia 
+ microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar 
hypoplasia (severe), hypertelorism, short limbs, 
joint contractures, syndactyly, early-onset fetal growth 
retardation, and polyhydramnios (see Chapter 10) 
• Nager syndrome:29 look for . micrognathia + ectrodactyly, 
mesomelic hypoplasia, and external ear 
anomalies 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome:12 look for . micrognathia 
+ external ear anomalies 
• Pierre–Robin anomaly:12 look for . micrognathia + 
glossoptosis and cleft palate 
• Achondrogenesis:12 look for . micrognathia + micromelia, 
calvarial hypomineralization, and hydrops 
(see Chapter 9) 
• Camptomelic dysplasia:12 look for . micrognathia + 
bowed and short femurs and tibiae (see Chapter 9) 
• Diastrophic dysplasia:12 look for . micrognathia + 
micromelia, ‘hitchhiker’ thumb, and kyphoscoliosis 
(see Chapter 9) 
• Femoral hypoplasia/unusual facies syndrome:12 look 
for . micrognathia + focal hypoplasia of one or both 
femurs, micrognathia, and maternal insulin-dependent 
diabetes (see Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. When micrognathia is diagnosed 
in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and minor anomalies 
possibly leading to the disclosure of an underlying syndromic 
condition. Karyotyping is recommended, because 
of the relatively high risk of trisomies 13 and 18. Care 
should be taken in planning delivery in the case of primary 
mandibular defects, such as the Pierre–Robin anomaly, in a 
tertiary referral center. In fact, life-threatening obstruction 
of the upper airways may occur at birth, and can lead to 
cerebral palsy from neonatal hypoxia if its occurrence is 
not predicted and adequately managed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis basically 
depends on the severity of the underlying syndrome. 
Survival is good only in the case of primary mandibular 
defects (e.g. Pierre–Robin syndrome). Quality of life, 
which depends upon the success of reconstructive surgery, 
is fair in a significant percentage of cases. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 95 
EXTERNAL EAR ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Relatively common (but seldom detected). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Parasagittal and axial views of the head, at the level of the ears. Pre-auricular tags; 
abnormal auricles, crumpled ears. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: autosomal trisomies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, Fraser, Nager, Treacher–Collins. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in syndromic cases. 

Definition. The aim of this section is to draw the attention 
of the reader to the anomalies of the external ear. 
These anomalies can be detected by ultrasound, and this 
finding can be employed in the differential diagnosis of 
various syndromes. As a premise, it should be underlined 
that the anomaly of the external ear most commonly 
associated with syndromic conditions, namely low-set 
ears, is not diagnosable with a good degree of certainty 
by 2D ultrasound. It has already been described how the 
use of 3D ultrasound has increased the diagnostic accuracy 
for this abnormal feature. Nomograms for the 
diameters of the external ear have been published 
(Appendix).30 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The external ear originates 
from the first and second branchial arches. The preauricular 
tag represents an anomalous differentiation 
of these embryonic structures. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view is the most 
lateral antero-posterior view of the fetal head, which 
allows the whole external ear to be displayed (Figures 
3.52 and 3.53; see also Figure 3.14). The occurrence of a 
pre-auricular tag can also be detected on the axial view of 
the orbits, since this plane displays the pre-auricular area, 
where the tags are, if present. Nomograms for the longitudinal 
ear diameter (Appendix) can be employed to 
confirm a diagnosis of microtia or, much more rarely, 
macrotia. The use of 3D ultrasound has also rendered this 
diagnosis much easier to achieve (Figures 3.32 and 3.53). 
• Prognostic indicators. Regardless of the shape of the 
external ear, it is the recognition of pre-auricular tags 
that represents the poorest prognostic sign, because of 
the high syndromic significance of this finding. 
• Association with other malformations. These 
include other developmental anomalies involving 
anatomic structures deriving from the first and 
second branchial arches, such as micrognathia and 
congenital heart disease. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
There is a close connection to the presence of trisomy 13 
and, to a lesser extent, trisomy 18. Down syndrome 
fetuses tend to have small ears. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. Pre-auricular tags may be present in a significant 
number of syndromes. The syndromes associated with 
external ear anomalies that are most frequently diagnosed 
in the fetus are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome:9,10 look for . external ear 
anomalies (or tags) + hemifacial microsomia (unilateral) 
microphthalmia and clefting – (see Chapter 10) 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . external ear anomalies 
(or tags) + laryngeal atresia, congenital heart 
disease, microphthalmia (unilateral), and facial clefting 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Nager syndrome:29 look for . external ear anomalies 
(or tags) + ectrodactyly, micrognathia, and 
mesomelic hypoplasia 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome:12 look for . external ear 
anomalies (or tags) + micrognathia 
Obstetric management. The detection of severe external 
ear anomalies (tags, anotia, and small and wrinkled ears) 
usually follows the diagnosis of major fetal abnormalities. 
In the extremely rare cases in which the external 
ear anomaly represents the first abnormal finding on 
96 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.52 Pre-auricular tags – 
two-dimensional ultrasound. This 
parasagittal view at the level of the 
external ear demonstrates the abnormal 
pre-auricular appendices (arrows). The 
insets show the anatomic correlates. The 
dysmorphic features of the fetus after 
termination of pregnancy are shown on 
the right: note also the cleft lip and the 
hypertelorism. 

ultrasound, a detailed assessment of facial anatomy 
should be carried out, in order to disclose possible dysmorphisms. 
However, it should be considered that moderate 
microtia/macrotia may represent a familial trait and, 
as such, may be devoid of any prognostic significance. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends upon the severity of the underlying syndrome. 
Survival and quality of life are normal in the case of 
familial macrotia or microtia. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 97 
Figure 3.53 Pre-auricular tags – threedimensional 
ultrasound. This surfacerendering 
reconstruction demonstrates 
the wrinkled ear and the preauricular 
tag in this 30-week-old fetus. The 
confirmation of the diagnosis at birth 
(40 weeks) is show on the right. 
CONGENITAL HIGH-AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME (CHAOS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Facial profile view: oropharyngeal and cervical masses obstructing the upper airways. Axial 
view of the thorax: Laryngeal/tracheal atresia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low, except for Pierre–Robin syndrome (25%). 
Outcome. Mainly unfavorable, unless the EXIT procedure is employed. 
Definition. Different types of congenital and acquired 
anomalies may cause the CHAOS sequence. These 
anomalies become a perinatal emergency when they 
completely block the high airway: in this case, survival 
can only be assured if the obstructing mass is removed or 
bypassed (tracheotomy). These anomalies include laryngeal 
atresia (see Chapter 6), tracheal atresia, obstructing 
laryngeal cysts, obstructing tumors of the oropharynx 
and the cervical region, large thoracic masses such as 
cystic adenomatoid malformations of the lung, and rare 
cases of diaphragmatic hernia. 
Physiopathology. This group of anomalies is responsible 
for a partial or total obstruction of the upper airways 
at various levels. The obstruction can be located in 
the oropharynx (epignathus, lymphangiomas, etc.), or 
may involve more distal structures such as the larynx 
(laryngeal atresia) or the trachea (tracheal atresia and 
neck tumors). If these masses are very large, they can 
compromise swallowing of amniotic fluid relatively early 
in the course of the 3rd trimester, causing severe 
polyhydramnios. At birth, the priority is to promptly 
re-establish the patency of the upper airways in order to 
ensure normal ventilation.31–33 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The most common anomalies 
possibly causing CHAOS are the following: 
• Epignathus. This is a rare teratoma originating from 
the sphenoid bone or from the soft tissues of the 
oropharynx. It often achieves large dimensions, protruding 
from the mouth. It appears as an echogenic 
mass located in front of the mouth and nose of the 
fetus. The ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward 
a b 

and is made on the facial profile view. In the case of a 
dramatically fast-growing mass, the early compression 
can lead to developmental anomalies of the nose 
and the mouth (micrognathia and cleft palate). 
• Tumors of the tongue. An extremely rare location for 
a tumor is the tongue or, in general, the oral cavity. 
The mass will be prevalently cystic if of lymphangiomatous 
origin,34 or solid and hyperechoic in case 
of teratomas. If located in the oral cavity, the mass 
will grow within the mouth, eventually causing the 
lips to part (Figure 3.54). Only in the worst cases, 
such as in epignathus, will the mass continue its 
growth outside the fetal mouth. The ultrasound diagnosis 
is made on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile, 
for a general assessment: a detailed topographic 
study will then be carried out employing axial views 
of the maxilla, the oral region, and the mandible, to 
assess possible involvement of the submandibular 
area and the anterior neck region. 
• Pierre–Robin anomaly. This condition has already 
been described among the primary developmental 
defects of the mandible. It is mentioned here as it can 
cause clinically significant obstruction of the upper 
airways if the degree of micrognathia and the concurrent 
glossoptosis are severe. The degree of micrognathia 
and glossoptosis are best evaluated on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low, since 
these lesions are primarily tumor masses. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low, 
except for the Pierre–Robin anomaly, for which the 
association rate with syndromic conditions reaches 25% 
of cases. Of these, the syndromes potentially detectable 
in the fetus are diastrophic dysplasia (see Chapter 9), 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 10), and 
camptomelic dysplasia (see Chapter 9). 
Obstetric management and prognosis. The perinatal 
management of these conditions is complex and 
multidisciplinary. As already mentioned, upper-airway 
obstruction represents a neonatal emergency. There are 
two possible management options: (1) rapid delivery 
and immediate tracheotomy and (2) the so-called EXIT 
(ex-utero intrapartum treatment) procedure.32,33 The 
latter is currently the most widely accepted option for 
CHAOS management and is described briefly here. 
Incision through the abdominal layers is carried out with 
the standard approach. After entering the abdominal 
cavity, intraoperative ultrasound is performed in order 
to locate the insertion site of the placenta, which has to 
be carefully avoided in the successive hysterotomy. The 
hysterotomy is generally carried out with staplers, which 
ensure at the same time cutting and hemostasis of the 
myometrium. Amniorrhexys is then performed and 
the fetal head and neck are exposed. This is followed 
by intubation. Throughout this procedure, fetal wellbeing 
is monitored with oximetry and umbilical cord 
velocimetry. Once intubation has been completed, the 
umbilical cord is severed and the fetus delivered. If intubation 
fails, due to severe obstruction, then either a tracheotomy 
is performed or, according to the type of mass 
causing the obstruction, the tumor is removed surgically, 
if feasible. The outcome of the EXIT procedure depends 
mainly on the type of lesion causing the obstruction: it is 
very good for benign tumors of the neck (teratomas, 
etc.), but poor or very poor for extremely severe conditions 
such as laryngeal atresia or primary pulmonary 
hypoplasia.32,33 
98 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.54 Lymphangioma of the 
oropharynx, one of the anomalies 
potentially responsible for the CHAOS 
sequence. On the midsagittal view of 
the fetal face, the lips (LL) are pushed 
apart by the cystic intraoral mass (M) 
(F, forehead; N, nose). At birth, the 
lymphangioma (arrowheads) displaces 
the tongue. 

Definition. Although cystic hygromas account for 
most cervical masses in the fetus, there are other very 
rare entities that can originate at this level, such as 
anterior neck teratomas and goiter. Neck teratomas 
show histologically a prevalence of neuronal cells of 
ectodermal origin. Goiter consists of hypertrophic and 
hyperplastic thyroid follicles, and represents an 
expression of fetal hypothyroidism. The most common 
causes of fetal goiter are represented by maternal 
hyperthyroidism or, much more rarely, by maternal 
therapy with propiltiouracile. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As with most tumors, 
cervical teratomas are sporadic lesions. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
midsagittal view of the profile, but only when the 
head is extended, allowing the anterior neck region to 
be seen, and on the axial view of the thyroid, which 
allows direct assessment of the origin and the relationships 
of the mass with the other neck organs and 
vessels. Neck teratomas are usually solid and hyperechoic, 
or partly cystic, with possible calcified spots 
(Figure 3.55). Goiters appear as solid well-defined 
areas continuous with the thyroid gland, with which 
they share a weakly hyperechogenic appearance. 
• Prognostic indicators. The concurrent occurrence of 
evident polyhydramnios indicates the likely presence 
of esophageal compression. An abnormal and fixed 
hyperextension of the fetal head is a consequence of 
very large neck tumors. 
• Associations with other malformations. These are 
not known. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low, 
as for all tumor masses. Goiters also do not show any 
additional risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low, as for all tumor masses. Goiters also do not show 
any association with non-chromosomal syndromes. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 99 
OTHER TUMORS OF THE NECK 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal view of the fetal profile; axial view of the thyroid region: anterior neck masses 
(mesenchymal tumors, goiter). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Variable, depending on the degree of upper-airway obstruction. Good for goiter (when due to maternal 
thyroid dysfunction). 
Figure 3.55 Neck teratoma. (a) On 
this midsagittal view of the fetal profile, 
the mass (arrows), located in the anterior 
neck region, appears to be causing 
severe hyperextension of the fetal 
head (N, nose). (b) An oblique view of 
the fetal neck demonstrating the 
mass (arrows) and the fetal head (H). 
(c) The huge teratoma at birth. 
a
b 
c 

Obstetric management. Should an anterior neck mass 
be diagnosed in a fetus, the occurrence of concurrent 
polyhydramnios should be evaluated. If present, this 
indicates the likely presence of esophageal compression 
and CHAOS. In these cases, an EXIT procedure (see 
above) should be considered. If polyhydramnios is 
absent, operative delivery by cesarean section is indicated 
due to the common occurrence of anomalous 
presentation and/or mechanical dystocia due to the 
neck hyperextension. 
Postnatal treatment. The final treatment of neck 
tumors consists in their surgical removal. However, it 
should be noted that a significant percentage of mesenchymal 
tumors tend to regress after birth. Therefore, 
unless immediate surgery is indicated due to the malignant 
nature of the tumor, induced neck deformities 
(congenital wryneck, sternocleidomastoid muscle 
hypoplasia, etc.) or impairment of swallowing, then 
prolonged follow-up may be the approach of choice. 
More than one tumor has macroscopically disappeared 
or dramatically shrunken in a few months after birth, 
allowing easier and less invasive surgical removal. 
Some authors have claimed that the regression 
observed in the neonatal period for numerous mesenchymal 
benign tumors is due to the fact that their 
growth is sustained in utero by the maternal hormonal 
(estrogenic) milieu, which is claimed to represent a 
hyperplastic stimulus. As soon as this hormonal storm 
ceases, with delivery, the growth of the tumor is no 
longer stimulated and the mass shrinks significantly. 
Goiters can also undergo the same dramatic changes 
(partial or complete regression) once thyroid hormone 
receptors are no longer downregulated by maternal 
hyperthyroidism. Surgery is indicated in the rare cases 
in which significant esophageal compression occurs. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis is 
usually good for both conditions, and quality of life is 
not affected in the absence of mechanical sequelae due to 
these masses. Congenital muscular torticollis (wryneck), 
temporomandibular joint anomalies, dental malocclusion, 
etc. may require orthopedic surgery, orthodontic 
procedures, and physiotherapy. 
100 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.56 Normal cranial sutures and fontanelles. Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering allows clear visualization of all 
cranial sutures and fontanelles. However, in order to obtain adequate images, care should be taken to maintain a perpendicular 
insonation angle with the suture of interest. These images are of a fetus at 22 weeks’ gestation. (a) Metopic suture (arrowheads). (b) 
Coronal and temporoparietal sutures (arrowheads). (c) Anterior fontanelle (arrowheads) and sagittal suture (arrow). (d) Posterior 
fontanelle (arrow) and parieto-occipital suture. 
ABNORMALITIES OF CRANIAL SUTURES 
Assessment of cranial sutures can only be performed 
using 3D ultrasound. All sutures and fontanelles can be 
displayed applying transparent maximum mode rendering 
to previously acquired volumes of the fetal head. 
However, care should be taken in selecting an adequate 
approach for the study of each suture: due to the physics 
of ultrasound, only structures at an angle > 45° (90° 
would be the optimum) with the insonating beam will be 
clearly displayed. Hence, the structure of interest should 
always be in front of the insonating beam: volumes of 
the fetal face cannot be used to display the anterior 
fontanelle and, vice versa, volumes acquired with the 
objective to study the anterior fontanelle cannot be used 
to assess the metopic suture in detail. Normal images of 
the metopic, coronal, sagittal, and parieto-occipital 
sutures and of the anterior and posterior fontanelles are 
shown in Figure 3.56. 
The reliable assessment of sutures and fontanelles by 
3D ultrasound has led to the recognition of their abnormalities. 
These include delayed fusion/ossification, premature 
fusion (synostoses), and presence of additional 
bones (Figure 3.57). 
Recently, attention has focused on the aspect of the 
metopic suture, both for its intrinsic value and probably 
a b c d 

because it is easily studied retrospectively in stored 
volumes of fetal faces. Study of the metopic suture has 
demonstrated that ossification of the frontal bones starts 
at 9 weeks at the level of the supraorbital ridges, spreading 
them medially and laterally: at 12 weeks, the frontal 
bones are described as thick eyebrows. At 13 weeks, the 
frontal bones meet in the midline at the level of the nasal 
root, and the ossification then progresses upwards. The 
gap between the two frontal bones starts to close at 
around 16 weeks in the supranasal region, and this 
fusion progresses with advancing gestation, so that at 
32 weeks there is apparent closure of the metopic suture, 
starting from the glabella and then moving towards the 
anterior fontanelle.35 It has recently been demonstrated 
that this process is delayed or altered in a number of 
pathologic conditions, ranging from central nervous system 
malformations (Dandy–Walker malformation), 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, and (holoprosencephaly) 
to Down syndrome and skeletal dysplasias.36 In particular, 
recognized abnormal appearances of the metopic 
suture are V- or Y-shaped suture, U-shaped suture, 
premature closure, and additional bone. These aspects are 
shown in Figure 3.57. In addition to these findings, 3D 
ultrasound also allows the detection of synostoses, which 
are typical of some disorders associated with abnormal 
skull shape, such as Apert syndrome37 and thanatophoric 
dysplasia. Abnormal development of the fontanelles can 
also be demonstrated with this technique: in our experience, 
ossification of the fontanelles is delayed in the case 
of hydrocephalus and acondroplasia (Figure 3.58). 
In summary, a new diagnostic horizon has been 
opened by 3D ultrasound – namely, abnormalities 
of the cranial sutures. This diagnostic field has so far 
been only sampled, and the preliminary results are 
those reported here. However, this represents one of 
the most promising areas for investment in future 
research, considering that a significant number of syndromic 
conditions have among their typical signs a 
delayed ossification of the sutures, and of the metopic 
suture in particular. It is likely that other new interesting 
anomalies of the suture ossification process will 
soon be found. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 101 
Figure 3.57 Abnormal cranial sutures. (a) Normal metopic suture at 22 weeks’ gestation. (b) U-shaped metopic suture and severely unossified 
anterior fontanelle in severe hydrocephalus (22 weeks’ gestation; note also incipient macrocrania). (c) U-shaped metopic suture in a 
fetus affected with Apert syndrome (23 weeks’ gestation). (d) Completely sealed metopic suture in a fetus affected with semilobar holoprosencephaly 
(20 weeks’ gestation). 
Figure 3.58 Abnormal fontanelles. (a) Normal anterior fontanelle at 22 weeks’ gestation. (b) Wide anterior fontanelle in severe 
hydrocephalus (22 weeks’ gestation). (c) Wide anterior fontanelle and underossified sagittal suture in another case of early hydrocephalus 
(19 weeks’ gestation). (d,e) Two cases of achondroplasia at 26 and 29 weeks’ gestation respectively, showing extremely wide anterior 
fontanelles. 
a b c d 
a b c d e 

1. Jeanty P, Romero R, Staudach A, Hobbins JC. Facial anatomy of 
the fetus. J Ultrasound Med 1986; 5: 607–16. 
2. Rotten M, Levaillant JM. Two and three-dimensional 
sonographic assessment of the fetal face. 1. A systematic analysis 
of the normal face. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 
224–31. 
3. Jeanty P, Dramaix-Wilmet M, Van Gansbeke D, et al. 
Fetal ocular biometry by ultrasound. Radiology 1982; 143: 
513–16. 
4. Kimes KR, Mooney MP, Siegel MI, Todhunter JS. Size and 
growth rate of the tongue in normal and cleft lip and palate human 
fetal specimens. Cleft Palate Craniofac J 1991; 28: 212–16. 
5. Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
micrognathia in the fetus. The Jaw Index. Obstet Gynecol 1999; 
93: 382–6. 
6. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
7. Chervenak FA, McCullough LB. An ethical critique of boutique 
fetal imaging: a case for the medicalization of fetal imaging. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2005; 192: 31–3. 
8. Platt LD. Three-dimensional ultrasound, 2000. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 295–8. 
9. Martinelli P, Maruotti GM, Agangi A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
hemifacial microsomia and ipsilateral cerebellar hypoplasia in a 
fetus with oculoauricolovertebral spectrum. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2004; 199–201. 
10. Volpe P, Gentile M. Three-dimensional diagnosis of Goldenhar 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 798-800. 
11. Paladini D, D’Armiento MR, Ardovino I, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
diagnosis of the cerebro-oculo-facio-skeleta (COFS) syndrome. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 91–3. 
12. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
13. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a family with 
negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
14. Vogt G, Puho E, Czeizel AE. Population-based case–control study 
of isolated congenital cataract. Birth Defects Res Part A 2005; 73: 
997–1005. 
15. Jeffrey BG, Birch EE, Stager DR Jr, Stager DR Sr, Weakley DR. 
Early binocular visual experience may improve binocular sensory 
outcomes in children after surgery for congenital unilateral 
cataract. J AAPOS 2001; 5: 209–16. 
16. O’Keefe M, Fenton S, Lanigan B. Visual outcomes and complications 
of posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation 
in the first year of life. J Cataract Refract Surg 2001; 27: 
2006–11. 
17. Martinelli P, Russo R, Agangi A, Paladini D. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of frontonasal dysplasia. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 375–9. 
18. Paladini D, Borghese AM, Arienzo M et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of Pallister–Killian syndrome in the 2nd 
trimester of pregnancy: the importance of the fetal facial profile. 
Prenat Diagn 2000; 20: 996–8. 
19. Vintzileos AM, Walters C, Yeo L. Absent nasal bone: a specific 
marker for second-trimester fetuses with Down syndrome. 
Ultrasound Med Biol 2003; 29: 5S. 
20. Benoit B, Chaoui R. Three-dimensional ultrasound with maximal 
mode rendering: a novel technique for the diagnosis of bilateral 
or unilateral absence or hypoplasia of nasal bones in secondtrimester 
screening for down syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2005; 25: 19–24. 
21. Tessier P. Anatomical classification facial, cranio-facial and 
latero-facial clefts. J Maxillofac Surg 1976; 4: 69–92. 
22. Bronshtein M, Blumenfeld I, Kohn J, et al. Detection of cleft 
lip by early second trimester transvaginal sonography. Obstet 
Gynecol 1994; 84: 73–5. 
23. Nyberg DA, Sickler GK, Hegge FN, et al. Fetal cleft lip with and 
without cleft palate: US classification and outcome. Radiology 
1995; 195: 677–80. 
24. Sommerlad BC. The management of cleft lip and palate. Curr 
Pediatr 2002; 12: 43–50. 
25. Timmons MJ, Wyatt RA, Murphy T. Speech after repair of isolated 
cleft palate and cleft lip and palate. Br J Plastic Surg 2001; 
54: 377–84. 
26. Vettraino IM, Wesley L, Bronsteen R, et al. Clinical outcome of 
fetuses with sonographic diagnosis of isoalted micrognathia. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 102: 801–5. 
27. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
in three consecutive pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2001; 17: 163–5. 
28. Neu–Laxova syndrome: detailed prenatal diagnostic and postmortem 
findings and literature review. Am J Med Genet A 2004; 
125: 240–9. 
29. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Lamberti A, Lapadula C, Martinelli P. 
Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Nager syndrome. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 195–7. 
30. Chitkara U, Lee L, EI-Sayed YV, et al. Ultrasonographic ear 
length measurement in normal second – and third trimester 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000; 183: 230–4. 
31. Lim FY, Crombleholme TM, Hedrick HL, et al. Congenital high 
airway obstruction syndrome: natural history and management. 
J Pediatr Surg 2003; 38: 940–5. 
32. Bouchard S, Johnson MP, Flake AW, et al. The EXIT procedure: 
experience and outcome in 31 Cases. J Pediatr Surg 2002; 37: 
418–26. 
33. Hirose S, Harrison MR. The ex utero intrapartum treatment 
(EXIT) procedure. Semin Neonatol 2003; 8: 207–14. 
34. Paladini D, Morra T, Guida F, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and 
perinatal management of a lingual lymphangioma. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1998; 11: 141–3. 
35. Faro C, Benoit B, Wegrzyn P, Chaoui R, Nicolaides KH. 
Three-dimensional sonographic description of the fetal frontal 
bones and metopic suture. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
618–21. 
36. Chaoui R, Levaillant M, Benoit B, et al. Three-dimensional 
sonographic description of abnormal metopic suture in secondand 
third-trimester fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
761–4. 
37. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyng P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
102 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
REFERENCES 

Etiology and pathogenesis. Cystic hygroma (CH) is 
thought to arise from impaired drainage of the jugular 
lymphatic sacs (JLS) or from altered lymphangiogenesis.1 
The JLS are the first part of the lymphatic system to 
develop: at the 5th week, the internal jugular veins give 
rise to lymphatic buds, which fuse and form the JLS. The 
peripheral lymphatic system is formed by sprouting from 
these sacs. The JLS in human fetuses normally reorganize 
into lymphatic nodes after 10 weeks of gestation. The formation 
of the lymphatic system is completed by ingrowth 
of the thoracic duct into the left lymphatic sac, which 
thereby connects several lymphatic vessels. After reorganization 
of the JLS into lymphatic nodes, the connection 
of the thoracic duct to the internal jugular vein is the main 
site at which drainage of lymphatic fluid takes place.2 
Ultrasound diagnosis. CH develops, typically, late in the 
1st trimester and is characterized by the presence of bilateral 
fluid-filled cavities in the fetal neck. An axial view of 
the fetal neck is required in order to make the diagnosis.3 
The fluid-filled cavities consist of cystic dilatations of the 
JLS, and are commonly partitioned by a thick fibrous 
band corresponding to the nuchal ligament (Figure 4.1). 
There is an ongoing debate regarding the differentiation 
between increased nuchal translucency (NT) and CH in 
the 1st trimester of pregnancy. For this purpose, several 
authors have recently advocated the use of the axial plane 
of the fetal neck at the base of the skull to differentiate 
between the two conditions.3,4 On this view, the presence 
of subcutaneous edema of the neck or diffuse thickening, 
with fine septations, should not be diagnosed as CH, but 
represents the anatomic spectrum of NT; on the contrary, 
the recognition of bilateral cystic jugular lymphatic sacs is 
typical of CH (Figure 4.2). However, according to other 
authors,2 the visualization of mildly isolated distended 
jugular lymphatic sacs is probably not sufficient to establish 
a diagnosis of cystic hygroma (Figure 4.3). When 
detected in the 1st trimester, CH can evolve into different 
pictures: it can progress towards generalized hydrops, 
resolve completely, or persist in part as nuchal edema, 
irrespective of the fetal karyotype. The resolution of the 
hygroma has been related to an early partial and transient 
lymphatic obstruction or to a delay in jugular lymphatic 
connection that results in temporary lymphatic obstruction, 
which resolves with time. Lesions that persist into 
the 2nd trimester are characterized by giant cysts that 
completely fill the amniotic cavity. Often, with increasing 
lymphedema of the upper trunk, neck, and base of the 
skull, fluid-filled regions with septa are found inside the 
skin. Eventually, the progression of the lymphedema 
leads to effusions in the body cavities. In addition, when 
the venous return to the heart is impeded, hydrops 
through the jugular lymphatic obstructive sequence 
(JLOS) may develop.1 
Chapter 4 
Cystic hygroma and non-immune 
hydrops fetalis 
CYSTIC HYGROMA (CH) 
103 
Incidence. High. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. It is characterized by bilateral cystic structures of the posterior neck with one or more 
typical septations (commonly in the 2nd trimester). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (35–50%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Poor in most cases, especially for the high frequency of associated anomalies. Only 10% of cases survive 
without major morbidity. 

• Differential diagnosis. The main differential diagnosis 
of CH includes occipital cephalocele (OC), cervical 
teratoma, increased nuchal fold, and NT. In OC, a 
calvarial bony defect is present. In cervical teratoma, 
the fetal neck is often hyperextended and a solid 
or mixed, solid-cystic, mass is present (teratomas 
frequently arise in the anterior neck region). The 
increased nuchal fold is not fluid; it may be a 
by-product of CH but should not be regarded as CH. 
The differential diagnosis with an increased NT has 
been addressed above. Figure 4.4 shows the sonographic 
appearance of several conditions that should 
be differentiated from CH. 
• Prognostic indicators. Several studies have analyzed 
the prognostic significance of classifying hygromas 
into septated and non-septated forms. Although 
some studies have suggested that the presence of 
septations predicts an increased likehood of aneuploidy 
and poor fetal outcome,5 this concept has not 
been confirmed by other authors.6 
• Association with other malformations. CH is associated 
with other malformations in up to 60% of 
cases, including cardiac defects, skeletal dysplasias, 
diaphragmatic hernia, and central nervous system 
(CNS) anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. About 
35–50% of cases of CH have an abnormal karyotype. 
In the 2nd trimester, the most common chromosomal 
anomaly associated with a large CH, often with typical 
septations, is Turner syndrome. In the 1st trimester, 
there is the same proportion of trisomies 21 and 18 and 
Turner syndrome.4 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. 
The most common syndromes associated with CH are as 
follows: 
• Noonan syndrome:7 look for .CH + congenital heart 
disease (pulmonary stenosis and cardiomyopathy), 
facial anomalies, and fetal growth retardation (FGR) 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:7 look for . CH + 
micrognathia, camptodactyly, joint contractures, ptergia 
at knees and elbows and FGR (see also Chapter 10) 
104 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 4.1 Cystic hygroma at 16 weeks’ gestation – Turner syndrome. (a) On the axial view, the possible presence of septa (arrows) is 
evaluated. (b) On the midsagittal view, the extent of the retronuchal hygroma is assessed (arrowheads). (c) Confirmation at autopsy. 
In this case, significant subcutaneous edema was also present. 
a c 
b 

• Fryns syndrome:7 look for . CH + diaphragmatic 
hernia, microphthalmia, CNS anomalies, and distal 
limb anomalies. 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:7 look for . CH + CNS 
anomalies, microcephaly, joint contractures, micrognathia, 
and FGR (see also Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. The sonographic detection of CH 
should prompt a detailed examination of fetal anatomy 
in order to detect associated anomalies and signs of 
hydrops. The presence of CH is a strong indication for 
karyotyping, because of the high risk of aneuploidy. The 
disease course of a fetus with a cystic hygroma detected in 
CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 105 
Figure 4.2 Cystic hygroma at 13 weeks’ gestation. The multiplanar approach allows simultaneous visualization of the severe septate 
hygroma (arrows) on the axial (a) and, (b) midsagittal view. (c) Three-dimensional surface rendering, demonstrating the thoracic extension 
of the lymphangiectasia (arrows). (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Figure 4.3 Multiplanar imaging of a fetus with increased nuchal translucency (NT) and dilated jugular lymphatic sacs. The axial image 
(top left panel) shows mildly dilated jugular lymphatics (arrows), possibly suggesting cystic hygroma. The midsagittal view (top right 
panel), shows enlarged NT (arrow). 
a d 
b 
c 

the first trimester may be unpredictable; in fact, there is 
no reliable method to predict which hygromas will regress 
and which will progress to frank non-immune hydrops 
fetalis (NIHF). Also, if the karyotype is normal and 
no associated anomalies are found, the parents should 
still be counseled about the uncertain prognosis. If 
the pregnancy is continued, the fetus should be followed 
closely with detailed serial ultrasound. Large CH 
in fetuses reaching term of gestation can complicate 
obstetric and perinatal management. Infants with large 
prenatally detected hygromas may require delivery by 
cesarean section. There are reports of successful vaginal 
delivery after intrauterine cyst decompression. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Only 10% of 
fetuses with CH survive without major morbidity. In 
fact, CH is often associated with chromosomal anomalies, 
hydrops, and fetal death. Many fetuses with CH 
seen during the 1st trimester die spontaneously before 20 
weeks’ gestation. An even poorer prognosis is expected if 
CH is associated with other anomalies, including chromosomal 
aberrations.1,4 CH is also a marker of numerous 
genetic syndromes with normal karyotype, and the 
poor survival rate in this condition is mainly due to its 
association with hydrops that develops as a result of the 
JLOS.1 JLOS illustrates the compression of the venous 
return to the fetal heart by congested jugular lymphatic 
sacs and subsequent cardiac failure as early as in the 
1st trimester. In cases of CH with normal karyotype and 
no associated malformations, the parents should still be 
counseled about the uncertain prognosis. If an isolated 
CH not associated with chromosomal anomalies or any 
malformations has resolved, it is likely that the infant 
will be normal; however, resolution of the hygroma 
per se does not imply a good prognosis, as resolution 
has been documented in fetuses with genetic anomalies. 
It is also important to note that long-term developmental 
follow-up of infants with resolved hygromas is not 
available. 
Postnatal therapy. At present, complete excision remains 
the treatment of choice for CH. It can be a difficult procedure 
due to the infiltrative nature of CH. However, 
before attempting excision of a CH, the extent of the 
lesion and its relationship to surrounding structures 
must be clearly defined by magnetic resonance imaging. 
Postoperative complications, including recurrence, 
wound seromas, infection, and nerve damage, occur in 
more than 30% of cases. Recently, sclerosing agents (e.g. 
bleomycin) have also been used to treat CH. 
106 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 4.4 Differential diagnosis of retronuchal anomalies. (a) Septate cystic hygroma at 16 weeks’ gestation. (b) Nuchal fold in trisomy 
21 at 20 weeks’ gestation. (c) Severe hydrops with subcutaneous edema and lymphangiectasia (arrowheads) at 19 weeks’ gestation. 
(d) Nuchal translucency > 99th centile in trisomy 21 at 13 weeks’ gestation. (e) Occipital meningoencephalocele, with a large meningeal 
sac (arrowheads e, herniated brain) at 21 weeks’ gestation. (f) Retronuchal edema with lymphangiectasia in FADS (fetal akinesia 
deformation sequence) at 20 weeks’ gestation. 
a b c 
d e f 

Definition. Fetal hydrops represents a aspecific condition 
characterized by an increase of total body water content. 
In such a condition, the excess fluid collects by ultrafiltration 
in body cavities (pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal 
effusions) and/or in the subcutaneous tissue. Placental 
edema and polyhydramnios are frequently associated 
(30–70%). Fetal hydrops is divided into two etiologic 
groups: immune fetal hydrops and non-immune hydrops 
fetalis (NIHF); the former is due to maternal Rhesus 
immunization, while the latter has a wide spectrum of 
possible causes. Immune hydrops was decidedly more frequent 
until prophylaxis against Rhesus immunization 
was implemented worldwide. Currently, less than 10% 
of all cases of fetal hydrops, with national variations, are 
due to Rhesus immunization. In this chapter, only NIHF 
will be illustrated. By definition, the term NIHF refers to 
fluid collections in at least two body cavities or to one fluid 
collection plus diffuse subcutaneous edema. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of NIHF 
includes a huge number of different causes. Cardiac 
causes are those most frequently responsible for NIHF, 
accounting for 20–40% of cases, whereas no cause (idiopathic 
hydrops) – or at least no sonographically recognizable 
cause – is found in 30–50% of cases. A partial list of 
the numerous conditions associated with NIHF is given 
in Table 4.1. The etiology of NIHF comprises primarily 
four types of pathogenetically different causes: 
1. Cardiac failure and related conditions. Cardiac failure 
can be due to a low output or to a high output. 
The former is caused by primary cardiac conditions, 
including functional and structural defects. Among 
the functional causes, severe bradyarrhythmias (complete 
heart block) and severe tachyarrhythmias 
(supraventricular parossistic tachycardia and atrial 
flutter) result in low cardiac output due to the 
extreme bradycardia and the impaired diastolic filling 
associated with increased preload, respectively. With 
regard to the structural causes (congenital heart disease) 
it should be noted that the presence of the two 
shunts represented by a patent ductus arteriosus and 
a patent foramen ovale is able to reduce the hemodynamic 
impact of isolated obstructive lesions (tricuspid 
atresia or hypoplastic left heart) and septal lesions 
(atrioventricular or ventricular septal defects). In contrast, 
cardiac failure often develops in the case of 
severe volume overload due to severe valvular insufficiency 
(severe Ebstein’s anomaly, critical aortic stenosis 
with mitral insufficiency, pulmonary atresia with 
intact ventricular septum and tricuspid insufficiency). 
The basic cause of cardiac failure in these cases is the 
pump deficit. The same mechanism leads to cardiac 
failure and NIHF in the case of cardiomyopathies 
associated with severe impairment of the systolic 
function. Among the extracardiac conditions possibly 
responsible for high output heart failure and NIHF, 
it should be noted that the most common are those 
featuring arterio-venous fistulas. These include placental 
chorioangioma, sacrococcygeal teratoma, 
aneurysm of the vein of Galen, twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome (TTTS) (recipient twin), and acardius 
twin (TRAP (Twin-Reversed-Arterial Perfusion) 
sequence). These conditions have in common an 
increased blood volume (perfusion of the tumor mass 
or recipient or acardiac twin) that cannot be managed 
by the immature fetal heart, with consequent cardiac 
failure. Much rarer is the venous compression in the 
case of large thoracic or cardiac tumors/masses. 
2. Chromosomal anomalies. The chromosomal anomaly 
most frequently associated with CH and NIHF is 
monosomy X. Trisomy 21 and a significant number of 
other autosomal trisomies (13 and 18) can also be 
associated with early NIHF. Finally, it should be noted 
that Down syndrome may also be associated with lateonset 
moderate hydrops, often involving pleural effusion 
and ascites or subcutaneous edema; in these cases, 
the cause is thought to be local lymphatic obstruction. 
CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 107 
NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS (NIHF) 
Incidence. Frequent. 1 in 3000 births, but high intrauterine death rate. 
Diagnosis. Fluid collection in serosal cavities (ascites, hydrothorax, pericardial effusion), subcutaneous edema, 
prevalently of head and thorax, but sometimes also of limbs. Polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20%): monosomy X, autosomal trisomies 21, 18, 13. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high. Skeletal dysplasias, non-chromosomal syndromes, storage 
diseases, infections. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable, except for cases associated with potentially treatable causes such as anemia 
from parvovirus B19 infection and supraventricular parossistic tachycardia. 

108 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 4.1 Causes of non-immune hydrops in the fetus (NIHF) by anatomic region 
Cause by region Frequency of hydrops 
Brain 
Cerebral hemorrhage Low 
Aneurysm of the vein of Galen High 
Cerebral tumors Low 
Heart 
CHD featuring valve insufficiency Relatively high 
CHD featuring impaired cardiac function Relatively high 
(cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, tachyarrhythmias, CHB) 
Cardiac tumors Low 
Thorax (heart excluded) 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML) Low 
Pulmonary sequestration Moderate 
Laryngeal atresia High 
Mediastinal tumors (teratomas, mainly) Moderate 
Abdomen – gastrointestinal tract 
Diaphragmatic hernia Low 
Meconium peritonitis Moderate 
Hepatitis High 
Hepatic fibrosis Moderate 
Abdomen – genitourinary system 
Urethral obstruction Moderate 
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease Low 
Renal vein thrombosis High 
Ovarian cyst torsion Low 
Tumors and conditions featuring high output cardiac failure 
Mediastinal teratoma Moderate 
Neuroblastoma Moderate 
Hepatoblastoma Moderate 
Nephroblastoma Moderate 
Sacro-coccygeal teratoma High 
Galen vein aneurysm High 
Placental chorioangioma High 
Twin to twin transfusion syndrome High 
Hematologic/vascular causes of fetal anemia 
Cerebral, subdural hemorrhage Low 
Umbilical, renal, caval thrombosis High 
Autoimmune thrombocytopenia Moderate 
3. Skeletal dysplasias and syndromes. The skeletal 
dysplasias most commonly associated with NIHF 
are the hypophosphatasia and the group of 
short-rib polydactyly syndromes. The type and 
number of non-chromosomal syndromes possibly 
associated with NIHF is enormous. It is useful to 
remember here the neuroarthrogryposes (fetal akinesia 
deformation sequence (FADS), Neu–Laxova 
syndrome, and multiple–pterygium syndrome – 
see Chapter 10), Fraser syndrome (see Chapter 10), 
Oro-facio-digital syndrome, Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome (see Chapter 10), and various storage 
diseases (mucopolysaccharidoses and mucolipidoses). 
Among the isolated conditions, very rarely 
and only for large lesions, cystic adenomatoid malformation 
of the lung and pulmonary sequestration 
(see Chapter 6) can lead to hydrops due to caval 
compression. In contrast, laryngeal atresia is 

CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 109 
almost invariably associated with hydrops (see 
Chapter 10). 
4. Infections. NIHF is a non-specific sign of various 
infections vertically transmitted from mother to 
fetus, including both viral and non-viral infections. 
In the case of viral infections, the development 
of NIHF is probably due to different and synchronous 
mechanisms: inflammation, myocarditis with 
pump deficit, hemolytic anemia and/or hepatitis, 
and hepatitis-induced hypoproteinemia. The viruses 
most frequently associated with fetal hydrops 
are: parvovirus B19, coxsackievirus, herpesvirus 
(varicella), cytomegalovirus (CMV), adenovirus, and 
influenza virus type B. Among the non-viral infections, 
the most common are syphilis, listeriosis, and 
toxoplasmosis. 
The final result of the various conditions mentioned 
above is a breakdown of equilibrium between intracapillary 
and extracapillary pressures, with consequent fluid 
ultrafiltration in the interstitial space. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. NIHF can develop at any time 
during pregnancy, depending on its cause. If associated 
with syndromes and/or chromosomal aberrations, it is 
usually of early onset, being apparent in the 1st 
trimester. If this is the case, it is often associated with 
CH and diffuse subcutaneous edema of the head and 
body, referred to as ‘space suit’. If NIHF is due to 
maternal infections or cardiac failure, its onset can also 
be in the late 2nd or 3rd trimester. The fluid collections 
– in the abdomen, pleura, or pericardium – appear as 
sonolucent areas with different shapes characteristic 
of the different locations. Subcutaneous edema appears 
as a moderately hyperechoic thickening of the soft 
tissue of the fetal face, trunk, and sometimes limbs. The 
diagnostic views depend on the site of the fluid collection. 
In the most severe cases, the midsagittal view of 
the fetus, at low magnification (Figure 4.5), can provide 
an overall idea of the regions involved, as it is possible 
to display simultaneously ascites, hydrothorax, pericardial 
effusion, and subcutaneous edema. The same plane 
also allows detection of the frequently associated CH. 
In moderate or initial hydrops, the fluid collection may 
be limited to one or two sites, and therefore its diagnosis 
needs dedicated planes. Axial views of the head, neck 
and thorax may allow assessment of the extent and 
severity of the effusions and the subcutaneous edema 
(Figure 4.6). With regards to the ascites, it should be 
noted that, initially, the fluid collects in the pelvis only, 
and therefore it should be sought in this region and not 
at the level of the liver. 
• Differential diagnosis. NIHF should be differentiated 
from isolated effusions, which may have a completely 
different underlying cause. 
• Prognostic indicators. NIHF is per se a condition with 
poor prognosis. A positive prognostic indicator is 
recognition of a potentially treatable cause of the 
hydrops, such as parossistic tachycardia (usually 
responsive to antiarrhythmic drugs), a parvovirus 
B19 infection (managed with intrauterine blood 
transfusion on the basis of measurement of middle 
cerebral artery systolic peak velocity8). 
Figure 4.5 Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). A midsagittal view of the fetal body at low magnification can provide an overall idea of 
the distribution and severity of hydrops. In this case, an extremely severe edema of the fetal head (arrowheads), ascites (asc), and polyhydramnios 
can be seen. 

110 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Association with other malformations. See ‘Etiology 
and pathogenesis’. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, especially 
for early-onset NIHF (20%). The chromosomal anomalies 
most frequently associated with NIHF are Turner 
syndrome, autosomal trisomies (13, 18, and 21), and 
rarer aberrations, including partial deletions and unbalanced 
translocations. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high (see ‘Etiology and pathogenesis’). It is not useful to 
list here the huge number of syndromes possibly associated 
with NIHF. 
Obstetric management. Since few causes of NIHF can benefit 
from intrauterine treatment, a detailed assessment of all 
the possible causes previously listed should be performed; 
this entails a thorough anatomic scan and fetal echocardiography 
to confirm or rule out the most frequent determinant 
of NIHF, namely cardiac defects. Karyotyping is also 
mandatory, due to the high risk of aneuploidy. Maternal 
serological assessment should be carried out as well, in 
order to detect possible recent seroconversion for CMV, 
parvovirus B19, coxsackievirus, Toxoplasma, etc. 
Intrauterine therapy. The forms of NIHF potentially 
reversible following intrauterine treatment are only 
those due to (1) tachyarrhythmias (supraventricular 
parossistic tachycardia and atrial flutter) and (2) 
parvovirus B19 infection with ascertained fetal anemia. 
In the former, transplacental or (in unresponsive cases) 
direct intraumbilical therapy with antiarrhythmic drugs 
(digoxin, flecainide, or labetalol) can restore a sinus 
rhythm, with consequent clearance of the hydrops. In 
the case of severe fetal anemia, detected by Doppler 
velocimetry of the middle cerebral artery,8,9 due to parvovirus 
B19 infection, intrauterine blood transfusions 
may help the fetus in the acute phase of the infection, 
with good neonatal outcome. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis of 
NIHF is extremely poor. The intrauterine mortality rate 
is very high, and only the few cases in which the abovementioned 
causes have been recognized can expect a 
good outcome in a significant percentage of cases. 
Figure 4.6 Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). After the midsagittal view has provided an overall idea of the hydrops distribution, axial 
views may be used to assess in detail the various anatomic regions: (a) hydrothorax and subcutaneous edema (arrowheads) (LL, left 
lung; RL, right lung; (b) ascites (asc); (c) placental edema and polyhydramnios in TTTS; (d) diffuse severe hydrops of the fetal trunk (H, 
heart); (e) diffuse severe hydrops of the cervical region, without hygroma (the arrow indicates the scapula). 
a b c 
d e 

CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 111 
REFERENCES 
1. Chevernak FA, Isaacson G, Blakemore KJ, et al. Fetal cystic hygroma. 
Cause and natural history. N Engl J Med 1983; 309: 822–5. 
2. Bekker MN, Haak MC, Rekoert-Hollander M, et al. Increased 
nuchal translucency and distended jugular lymphatic sacs on firsttrimester 
ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 239–45. 
3. Ville Y. Nuchal translucency in the first trimester of pregnancy: 
ten years on and still a pain in the neck? Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2001; 18: 5–8. 
4. Kharrat R, Yamamoto M, Roume J, et al. Karyotype and outcome 
of fetuses diagnosed with cystic hygroma in the first 
trimester in relation to nuchal translucency thickness. Prenat 
Diagn 2006; 26: 369–72. 
5. Bronshtein M, Bar-Hava I, Blumenfeld I, et al. The difference 
between septated and non-septated nuchal cystic hygroma in the 
early second trimester. Obstet Gynecol 1993; 81: 683–7. 
6. Brumfield CG, Wenstron KD, Davis RO, et al. Second trimester 
cystic hygroma: prognosis of septated and nonseptated lesions. 
Obstet Gynecol 1996; 88: 979–82. 
7. Stevenson RE, Hall JC, Goodman RM, eds. Human Malformations 
and Related Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1993. 
8. Hernandez-Andrade E, Scheier M, Dezerega V, Carmo A, 
Nicolaides KH. Fetal middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity 
in the investigation of non-immune hydrops. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2004; 23: 442–5. 
9. Mari G, Adrignolo A, Abuhamad AZ, et al. Diagnosis of fetal anemia 
with Doppler ultrasound in the pregnancy complicated by 
maternal blood group immunization. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1995; 5: 400–5. 

Chapter 5 
Congenital heart disease 
SEQUENTIAL ANATOMY AND FUNCTIONAL 
ASSESSMENT OF THE HEART: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
The spectrum of congenital heart disease (CHD) 
that can be encountered in the fetus is wide, with a significant 
number of very complex defects. The description 
of these defects can benefit from a sequential 
segmental analysis, which consists of a step-by-step 
procedure that defines the central cardiovascular connections, 
beginning from the venous pole to the arterial 
one. Only in this way is it possible to understand and 
effectively describe the anatomy of complex fetal CHD. 
To perform a sequential segmental analysis of the fetal 
heart, the first step is the description of the viscero-atrial 
situs. Then, the atrioventricular and ventriculo-arterial 
connections are defined and described. 
Situs. As a premise, it should be considered that, of all the 
anomalies occurring in the case of left or right isomerism 
(situs ambiguus), only those involving the venae cavae 
and, to a lesser extent, the pulmonary veins can be 
recognized in the fetus. Abnormalities in the spatial relationships 
between the bronchi and the pulmonary arteries 
and the number of pulmonary lobes cannot be detected 
in utero. With these limitations in mind, the viscero-atrial 
situs can be described as follows.1,2 
Situs solitus. The liver and inferior vena cava are in 
the right hemiabdomen, and the spleen, stomach, and 
descending aorta are in the left. There is a trilobed lung 
with three bronchi on the right, and a bilobed lung with 
two bronchi on the left. The morphologic right atrium is 
on the right and the morphologic left atrium on the left. 
Situs inversus. This is a mirror image of situs solitus, and 
is not usually associated with CHD, though there are 
some CHDs that can occur together with situs inversus. 
Right atrial isomerism (asplenic syndrome). In this 
case, all left-sided structures are absent. The liver is 
centrally positioned due to the asplenia; the inferior 
vena cava and the aorta are usually close to one 
another and positioned on the same side of the spine. 
The lungs are both trilobed with three bronchi. Also, 
the atrial appendages are both morphologically right. 
Right atrial isomerism is frequently associated with 
complex CHD. 
Left atrial isomerism (polysplenic syndrome). The liver is 
also centrally positioned in this case, but it is surrounded 
by several small splenic islets (polysplenia). The inferior 
vena cava is interrupted, and the systemic return is represented 
by an azygos continuation, adjacent to the 
descending aorta, which drains into the superior vena 
cava. Both lungs are bilobed with two bronchi. The atrial 
appendages are morphologically left. Major CHDs are 
associated in more than 50% of cases. 
Atrioventricular connections 
Atrioventricular concordance. This is the normal situation 
in which, with two atria and two ventricles, the 
right atrium connects to the morphologically right ventricle 
and the left atrium to the morphologically left ventricle. 
This relationship can occur within a situs solitus 
or inversus. 
Atrioventricular discordance. In this abnormal situation, 
with two atria and two ventricles, the right atrium 
connects to the morphologically left ventricle and 
the left atrium connects to the morphologically right 
ventricle. 
Double atrioventricular inlet. In this case, there are two 
atria connecting to the same ventricle. The second ventricular 
chamber is generally hypoplastic and sometimes 
connected to the dominant chamber through a ventricular 
septal defect. In this situation, the morphology of the 
dominant ventricle should be assigned, whether of left 
113 

ventricular, right ventricular, or (rarely) indeterminate 
morphology. 
Single atrioventricular inlet. In this case, there is only 
one atrium, which connects to the dominant ventricle, 
while the second atrium connects only to the other 
atrium via the foramen ovale. The second atrioventricular 
connection is absent, due to atresia or imperforation 
of the ipsilateral atrioventricular valve. Also in this 
case, the second chamber is hypoplastic and may or 
may not communicate with the dominant ventricle. It 
should also be determined if the single ventricle is on 
the right, due to mitral atresia, or on the left, due to 
tricuspid atresia. 
Atrioventricular valves. Once the type of atrioventricular 
connection has been determined, it is necessary to 
describe the possible anomalies of the atrioventricular 
valves: each valve can be imperforate, atretic, fused 
with the other (a common atrioventricular valve, as in 
the atrioventricular septal defect), or over-riding a ventricular 
septal defect. 
Ventriculo-arterial connections 
Ventriculo-arterial concordance. In this situation, with 
two ventricles and two great arteries, each artery is 
connected to its morphologically correct counterpart: the 
pulmonary artery arises from the morphologically right 
ventricle and the aorta emerges from the morphologically 
left ventricle. These definitions of the ventriculo-arterial 
junction apply regardless of the situs and the atrioventricular 
connection. 
Ventriculo-arterial discordance. In this situation, the 
pulmonary artery is connected to the morphologically 
left ventricle, and the aorta to the morphologically right 
ventricle. 
Double outlet. In this case, more than 50% of each 
vessel is in connection with the same ventricle. It should 
then be determined if the double outlet occurs from a 
morphologically right (most common), left, or indeterminate 
ventricle. 
Single outlet. In this case, there is only one arterial trunk 
connecting to the ventricles. This may occur due to pulmonary 
atresia, aortic atresia, or common arterial trunk. 
In all cases, the ventricle(s) to which the single patent 
arterial vessel is connected should be defined. 
Ventriculo-arterial valves. In this case, the anomaly of 
the valve should be defined: atretic, imperforate, dysplastic, 
or overriding a ventricular septal defect. 
Additional anomalies. Any defects of the heart that have 
not been described in the sequential analysis can then be 
reported. These may include positional anomalies of the 
heart; levocardia, mesocardia, dextrocardia or defects of 
the single segments (interatrial or interventricular 
defects, aortic coarctation, etc.). 
114 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TIMING OF EXAMINATION, ULTRASOUND 
APPROACH, AND SCANNING PLANES 
Timing of examination. Assessment of the central 
cardiovascular connections is electively performed from 
18 weeks’ gestation onwards. However, major CHD can 
also be detected earlier, at 12–14 weeks, in high-risk cases. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). 
Complete assessment of fetal cardiac anatomy requires 
different views necessary to evaluate the central connections, 
from the veno-atrial junction to the ventriculoarterial 
one, and the ductal and aortic arches. Only by 
obtaining these views is it possible to confirm a normal 
sequential anatomy. The totality of these views constitutes 
fetal echocardiography, which also comprises a 
functional evaluation of the heart by color Doppler and, 
if necessary, pulsed-wave Doppler. However, in the 
midtrimester anomaly scan, only a partial assessment 
of the heart is generally required; this includes the 
4-chamber view and, in some countries, the outflow tract 
views.3 Since both the anomaly scan and fetal echocardiography 
are generally carried out in the 2nd trimester, most 
of the sonographic images reported in this chapter have 
been taken at 19–22 weeks’ gestation unless stated otherwise. 
The views can be summarized as follows: 
• Axial views: 
– 4-chamber view (Figures 5.1–5.7) 
– 3-vessel view (Figures 5.8 and 5.9) 
• Oblique views: 
– Long axis of the left ventricle (Figures 5.10–5.13) 
– Long axis of the right ventricle (Figures 5.11 and 
5.14) 
– Short axis of the right ventricle (Figures 5.12 and 
5.14) 
• Sagittal views: 
– Cavo-atrial junction (Figure 5.15) 
– Aortic arch (Figure 5.16) 

This represents the key plane for the ultrasound diagnosis 
of CHD: all anomalies of the atria, the atrioventricular 
valves, the septa (inter-atrial and interventricular – with 
the significant exception of the outlet and malalignment 
ventricular septal defects), and the ventricles are recognized 
in this view. At the same time, it allows a suspicion 
to be obtained of a significant number of the severe malformations 
affecting the ventriculo-arterial junction. 
Normal 4-chamber view. This represents an axial view 
of the fetal thorax. It is defined as an apical 4-chamber 
view (Figure 5.1a), if the cardiac apex is directed 
towards the transducer and the interventricular septum 
is aligned with the insonating beam, and as a transverse 
4-chamber view (Figure 5.1b) if the interventricular septum 
is at 90° angle with the insonating beam. For a correct 
assessment of the 4-chamber view, both approaches 
should be sought. In fact, due to the physics of ultrasound, 
only the anatomic structures at right-angles (or at 
an acute angle) to the insonating beam will be correctly 
displayed on the screen. As a result, the atrioventricular 
plane and the posterior atrial walls are better assessed 
on the apical 4-chamber view, whereas the septa, the 
myocardial walls, and the chordae tendinae are better 
displayed on the transverse 4-chamber view. Assignment 
of the cardiac chambers is made following an anteroposterior 
axis connecting the spine posteriorly with the 
sternum anteriorly: in front of the spine is the descending 
thoracic aorta, and the cardiac chamber adjacent to the 
aorta is the left atrium, while the chamber located just 
below the sternum is the right ventricle. The remaining 
two chambers (right atrium and left ventricle) are consequently 
assigned. A reliable marker that enables one to 
check the axiality of the 4-chamber view is given by the 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 115 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE BY SCANNING PLANE 
4-CHAMBER VIEW AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
Atrial defects. Single atrium; atrial enlargement from severe atrioventricular insufficiency; type II atrial septal 
defects (only the larger ones); congenital mega-atrium. 
Septal defects. Ventricular septal defect; complete/partial atrioventricular septal defect. 
Single atrioventricular inlet. Tricuspid atresia; hypoplastic left heart syndrome; single-inlet single ventricle; 
hypoplastic right heart. 
Double atrioventricular inlet. Double-inlet single ventricle. 
Ventricular disproportion. Aortic coarctation; mitral stenosis; critical aortic stenosis; pulmonary atresia/critical 
stenosis. 
Impaired contractility, unilateral. Critical aortic stenosis; pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. 
Impaired contractility, bilateral. Cardiomyopathies. 
Myocardial hypertrophy, bilateral. Cardiomyopathies. 
Figure 5.1 (a) Apical 4-chamber view. The atrioventricular plane and the drainage of two pulmonary veins are best imaged on this view. 
(b) Transverse 4-chamber view. With the lateral approach, the best-insonated structures are the myocardial free walls, the interventricular 
septum, the interatrial septum with the foramen ovale flap, the chordae tendinae, and the papillary muscles of the atrioventricular valves. 
On this view, the diameters of the cardiac chambers and of the atrioventricular annuli can be measured, if necessary. For the assignment of 
the cardiac chambers, see the text. LA, left atrium; pv, pulmonary veins; RV, right ventricle; arrowhead: thoracic descending aorta. 
a b 

ribs: in the fetus, these are horizontal, and therefore, if 
the 4-chamber view is correctly aligned, one complete 
rib on each side of the thorax will appear. On the other 
hand, in case of ill-alignment, several rib segments will 
be displayed on the screen. The following is a checklist 
of the anatomic structures to assess on the 4-chamber 
view (Figure 5.2): (a) two-third of the heart in the left 
hemithorax; (b) the cardiac apex pointing to the left of 
the midline (levocardia) with a 45° (± 20°) cardiac axis 
(this is calculated tracing a line along the interventricular 
septum and measuring the angle between this line and 
the midsagittal line, traced between the sternum and 
the spine); (c) at least two of the four pulmonary veins 
draining into the left atrium; (d) two atria of similar size; 
(e) the flap of the foramen ovale opening into the left 
atrium; (f) two separate atrioventricular valves, with offset 
appearance (the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve 
inserts just below the septal leaflet of the mitral valve) 
and regular excursion; (g) two ventricles of roughly similar 
size, with the right one slightly wider and rounder than 
the left, due to the presence of the moderator band in its 
apical part (the left ventricle forms the cardiac apex); 
(h) free right and left myocardial walls of similar thickness 
and with regular contractility; (i) an intact interventricular 
septum. With regard to sonographic assessment of 
the interventricular septum, it should be noted that an 
116 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.2 Checklist of the features to 
assess on the 4-chamber view. (a) Twothirds 
of the heart in left hemithorax. 
(b) Apex on the left, with 45° cardiac 
axis (levocardia). (c) At least two 
pulmonary veins draining in the left 
atrium. (d) Two atria of similar size. 
(e) Foramen ovale flap opening into the 
left atrium. (f) Presence of the crux of 
the heart, with offset aspect of the two 
atrioventricular valves, which show normal 
systodiastolic excursion. (g) Two 
ventricles of similar diameter, with mild 
prevalence of the right one, which also 
shows a rounder appearance because 
of the presence of the moderator band. 
The left ventricle forms the cardiac apex. 
(h) Equal thickness of the free ventricular 
walls, with normal contractility. 
(i) Intact interventricular septum. In 
addition, the rhythm should be checked. 
a f
g
h
i 
b
c
d
e 

artifact can occur if this structure is assessed on the 
apical 4-chamber view: absorption of the ultrasound 
waves by the whole length of the septum creates a 
‘dropout’ artifact just below the atrioventricular plane, 
and this may be mistaken for an inlet ventricular septal 
defect. This is why the interventricular septum should be 
electively assessed on the transverse 4-chamber view – at 
least for the part that is indeed visible on this plane. In 
fact, the interventricular septum wedges towards the 
aortic root, at the center of the heart, and this subaortic 
tract of the septum cannot be visualized on the 4-chamber 
view, since it lies in another plane. To assess the 
subaortic tract of the septum, the long axis of the left 
ventricle should be visualized (see below). 
Major anomalies recognizable on the 4-chamber view 
are listed in Figure 5.3. 
Atrial anomalies. A common atrium is associated in most 
instances with a complete atrioventricular septal defect 
(Figure 5.4a): there is generally no evidence of an interatrial 
septum, (some remnants can sometimes be seen). In 
the case of type II atrial septal defect (of which only the 
largest can be suspected at ultrasound), there is a wide 
foramen ovale flap that floats freely between the two 
atria, and often the septum primum is not identifiable as 
such, but the flap departs from the atrioventricular plane 
(Figure 5.4b). If a common atrium is suspected, the first 
step is to double-check the scanning view: if the plane is 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 117 
Figure 5.3 Anomalies recognizable 
on the 4-chamber view. (a) Normal 
heart. (b) Right atriomegaly from 
tricuspid dysplasia and insufficiency. 
(c) Ebstein’s anomaly, with apical displacement 
of the insertion of the tricuspid 
valve. (d) Ventricular septal defect. 
(e) Atrioventricular septal defect (with 
common atrioventricular valve). (f) Left 
ventricular hypoplasia and mitral atresia 
(hypoplastic left heart syndrome). 
(g) Right ventricular hypoplasia (plus 
ventricular septal defect) due to tricuspid 
atresia. (h) Double-inlet single ventricle. 
(i) Ventricular disproportion and 
moderate prevalence of the right ventricle 
(an indirect sign of aortic coarctation). 
(j) Biventricular hypertrophy 
(cardiomyopathy). (k) Tumors (rhabdomyomatosis). 
RA, right atrium; CA, 
common atrium; LA, left atrium; SV, 
single ventricle. 
a g
h
i
j 
k 
b
c
d
e
f 

slightly posteriorized, the normal coronary sinus can be 
mistaken for an ostium primum atrial septal defect. The 
correct 4-chamber view is just cranial to the view in 
which the coronary sinus is visible. If the impression of a 
common atrium persists, then the atrioventricular plane 
should be assessed, as an atrioventricular septal defect is 
the anomaly most commonly associated with a single 
atrium. If atrial enlargement is detected, this is almost 
always due to an insufficiency of the correspondent atrioventricular 
valve. It should be underlined that this finding 
of an increased atrial volume is much more commonly 
seen on the right side than on the left: the former finding 
can be associated with Ebstein’s anomaly (Figure 5.4c) 
and with tricuspid dysplasia, which in turn is often associated 
with pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. On the contrary, 
left atrial enlargement is due to mitral insufficiency, 
which is almost always associated with critical aortic 
stenosis. The final anomaly that can be detected while 
assessing the atria is absence of the septum primum, usually 
in the context of a partial atrioventricular septal 
defect (Figure 5.4d). 
Septal anomalies. A ventricular septal defect (VSD) can 
be recognized on the 4-chamber view only if it involves 
the inlet perimembranous area or the muscular part of 
the septum (Figure 5.5a,b). The defects involving the outlet, 
subaortic, portion can be detected only on the long 
axis of the left ventricle. A muscular VSD appears as an 
interruption of the septal continuity of variable dimensions, 
preferably shown on a transverse 4-chamber view, 
because of the above-mentioned physics of ultrasound. 
An inlet VSD, on the contrary, is best appreciated on an 
apical 4-chamber view, as a small absence of echoes just 
below the atrioventricular plane (Figure 5.5b). This type 
of defect is significantly associated with trisomy 21. An 
atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is defined as complete 
if there is only one atrioventricular valve deriving from 
the fusion of the two orifices (Figure 5.5c). The partial 
variant of atrioventricular septal defect is rarely diagnosed 
in the fetus, and is characterized by a defect of the 
septum primum associated with loss of the normal offset 
appearance of the atrioventricular plane (Figure 5.4d). 
Single atrioventricular inlet. A single inlet can be due to 
atresia/imperforation of the mitral or the tricuspid valve. 
118 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.4 Atrial anomalies: 4-chamber view. (a) Common 
atrium (CA) in complete atrioventricular septal defect. (b) Wide 
foramen ovale (arrowhead) in atrial septal defect type II (ostium 
secundum). (c) Severe right atriomegaly due to tricuspid insufficiency 
in Ebstein’s anomaly. The arrow indicates the severe displacement 
of the septal and posterior tricuspid leaflets (RA, right 
atrium). (d) Absence of the septum primum (arrow): in partial atrioventricular 
septal defect. 
Figure 5.5 Septal defects: 4-chamber view. (a) Double muscular ventricular septal defects (arrows). (b) Ventricular septal defect, 
inlet type (arrow). (c) Complete atrioventricular septal defect, with common atrioventricular valve and common atrium (CA). LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
c 
a b c 
d 

The former is usually seen in the context of a hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome (Figure 5.6a) (the isolated form of 
mitral atresia is extremely rare). On the contrary, in the 
case of tricuspid atresia (Figure 5.6b), the ventricle is 
hypoplastic but the outflow (pulmonary artery) can be 
normal. However, if both the tricuspid and pulmonary 
valves are atretic, then the right ventricle is virtual and 
the defect, which is called hypoplastic right heart, is 
the mirror image of the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. 
The final possibility is the single-inlet single ventricle 
(Figure 5.6c), a very rare anomaly in which a single 
atrium connects to a single dominant ventricle via a single 
patent atrioventricular valve. 
Double-inlet single ventricle. In this rare anomaly 
(Figure 5.7a), there are two normal atria that connect to 
the same ventricle via two separate atrioventricular valves. 
Ventricular disproportion. If the right ventricle is larger 
than the left ventricle, and the mitral annulus is significantly 
smaller than the tricuspid annulus, the defect can 
be a rare mitral stenosis (Figure 5.7b), which can be 
associated with aortic stenosis and coarctation in Shone 
syndrome. However, the defect most commonly associated 
with ventricular disproportion (right ventricle 
larger than the left) is aortic coarctation (Figure 5.7c). 
Finally, it should be pointed out that the same appearance, 
with a right ventricle larger than the left, can also 
represent a transient benign finding that will regress 
spontaneously after birth. 
Impaired contractility, unilateral. If unilateral, impaired 
contractility cannot be due to a primary myocardial disorder, 
but is the consequence of an increase in interventricular 
pressure and/or volume. Hence, if right-sided, it 
is usually due to pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis; if it 
is the left ventricular myocardial wall that is affected, then 
critical aortic stenosis is likely to be the underlying cause. 
Impaired contractility, bilateral. If the whole myocardium 
is affected, then a primary disorder of cardiomyocytes 
(cardiomyopathy or myocarditis) is likely 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 119 
Figure 5.6 Single ventricular inlet: 4-chamber view (a) Hypoplastic left heart: the mitral valve is atretic and the left ventricle is extremely 
hypoplastic (arrowhead). (b) Tricuspid atresia: the tricuspid valve is atretic and the right ventricle is hypoplastic (arrowhead). A small inlet 
ventricular septal defect connects the rudimentary right chamber with the left ventricle. (c) Single-inlet single ventricle: there is a single wide 
atrium connected through a single atrioventricular valve to a single ventricular chamber. LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SV, single 
ventricle. 
Figure 5.7 Ventricular anomalies: 4-chamber view. (a) Double-inlet single ventricle: two atria connect with the same ventricle through 
two separate atrioventricular valves. (b) Moderate left ventricular hypoplasia (arrow) due to mitral stenosis (the annulus is reduced in size 
in comparison with the tricuspid one. Note also the moderately dilated coronary sinus, due to a concurrent persistence of the left superior 
vena cava draining into the coronary sinus (arrowhead). (c) Ventricular disproportion due to prevalence of the right chambers. This can be 
an indirect sign of aortic coarctation (arrowheads). LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SV, single ventricle. 
a b c 
a b c 

to be present. In these cases, the myocardial walls 
are often thickened, the ejection fraction is reduced, 
and atrioventricular valvular regurgitation is often 
associated. In the case of myocarditis, the heart is usually 
dilated, the walls are less hypertrophied, and 
there should be serological evidence of maternal 
infection. 
Myocardial hypertrophy, bilateral. This is usually due to 
primary or secondary cardiomyopathy. 
120 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
3-VESSEL VIEW AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
This represents an axial view of the upper mediastinum, to 
evaluate the pulmonary artery, ascending aorta and superior 
vena cava in relation to their relative sizes and relationships. 
It is important to underline that the abnormalities of 
the ventriculo-arterial connections, such as transposition of 
the great arteries, may not show up on the 3-vessel view, as 
this plane is higher than the ventriculo-arterial connection. 
Normal 3-vessel view (Figure 5.8a). As already mentioned, 
this is an axial view of the upper mediastinum; 
in particular, the three vessels are (from right to left) the 
superior vena cava, the aorta, and the pulmonary artery. 
If the transducer is slightly tilted, the junction of the ductus 
arteriosus with the isthmic tract of the aortic arch 
becomes visible. The thymus is also visible just behind 
the sternum, whereas the two arches are in the prevertebral 
area, on the left of the trachea. Some AA have used 
the view with confluence of two arches to emphasize 
vascular relationships to the fetal trachea as well; in fact 
it is called the 3 vessel and trachea view (Figure 5.8c, d). 
As a result, the abnormalities of the great vessels, the 
aortic arch, and the thymus (aplasia/hypoplasia, typical 
of 22q11 microdeletion) can be recognized on this view. 
Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction (Figure 5.8b). 
Persistence of the left superior vena cava may or may not 
be associated with agenesis of the right superior vena cava. 
If both vessels are present at the same time, then a fourth 
small vessel can be seen on the left of the pulmonary artery; 
if the right superior vena cava is absent, then the left superior 
vena cava will be larger, as it will be the only venous 
return for the cerebral circulation; at the same time, the 
rightmost vessel (right superior vena cava) will be absent. 
Aortic arch anomalies (Figure 5.8c,d). In coarctation 
of the aorta, the vessel in the middle, corresponding 
to the aorta, will be severely or moderately hypoplastic, 
Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction. Persistence of the left superior vena cava; agenesis of the right superior 
vena cava. 
Aortic artery/arch anomalies. Aortic atresia; aortic coarctation; aortic arch interruption; right aortic arch; double 
aortic arch. 
Pulmonary artery anomalies. Pulmonary atresia. 
Thymus anomalies. Aplasia; hypoplasia. 
Figure 5.8 Anomalies of the 3-vessel view. In all images, the 
arrowhead indicates the position of the trachea. (a) In the 
normal fetus, the thymus (T) is located in front of the three 
vessels, with the pulmonary artery (P) on the left, the aorta 
(A) in the middle, and the superior vena cava on the right. (b) 
In the case of persistence of the left superior vena cava 
(LSVC), this vessel is found on the left of the pulmonary 
artery. In the case shown here, the concurrent agenesis of the 
right superior vena cava led to the significant dilatation of the 
former vessel. (c) In the case of severe aortic coarctation, the 
aorta, in the middle, appears extremely reduced in size in 
comparison with the adjacent ductal arch. Note the persistent 
left superior vena cava on the left of the ductal arch. (d) In the 
case of right aortic arch, which is frequently associated with 
22q11 microdeletion, the trachea is located between the ductal 
arch (on the left) and the aortic arch (on the right). AO, 
aortic arch; DA, ductal arch. 
A b 
c d 

This is the second most important view after the 
4-chamber view. 
Long axis of the left ventricle, normal (Figure 5.12a,b). 
This view is obtained by rotating the transducer slightly 
towards the right fetal shoulder, in order to visualize the 
ascending aorta: this vessel arises from the left ventricle 
and points towards the right shoulder prior to curving 
into the aortic arch. 
Checklist. (1) The presence of a vessel that connects with 
the morphologically left ventricle positioned on the left 
and that can be defined as the aorta (branching at wide 
angle far from the semilunar valve). (2) Septo-aortic continuity. 
(3) The presence of a semilunar valve showing 
normal systo-diastolic excursion (the leaflets disappear 
completely during systole, being flattened on the aortic 
walls). (4) The presence of crossover: the direction of the 
aorta is at roughly 90° to the direction of the pulmonary 
trunk displayed on the long axis of the right ventricle. (5) 
The size of the vessel is similar to (slightly smaller than) 
that of the other vessel visualized on the long axis of the 
right ventricle. 
Septal anomalies (Figure 5.13a,b). In a malalignment 
VSD, the infundibular septum is anteriorly displaced, 
and this leads to the aortic overriding. This feature is 
shared by most conotruncal anomalies, and, if detected, 
should prompt a thorough assessment of the right 
outflow for the differential diagnosis (Figure 5.11). On 
the contrary, in the case of a simple outlet VSD, there is 
only a discontinuity of the septum, but this is normally 
aligned with the anterior aortic wall. 
Crossover anomalies (Figure 5.13c,d). If two parallel 
vessels are displayed on the long axis of the left ventricle, 
then an anomaly of crossover is present. In this 
case, if each vessel arises from one ventricle, then the 
diagnosis will be transposition of the great arteries; if, 
on the contrary, both vessels are connected to the same 
ventricle, which is almost always the right one, then a 
double-outlet right ventricle is diagnosed. A doubleoutlet 
left ventricle is an extremely rare condition. 
Anomalies of the aorta (Figure 5.13e). In most cases of 
critical aortic stenosis, the 4-chamber view is significantly 
abnormal, and this leads to the diagnosis. On the long axis 
of the left ventricle, the aortic annulus is hypoplastic, and 
the dysplastic and thickened valve remains in the lumen of 
the vessel throughout the cardiac cycle. The ascending 
aorta can be enlarged or hypoplastic. In the case of a 
common arterial trunk, the main pulmonary artery or the 
two branches arise directly from the aortic vessel, which is 
overriding a malalignment VSD. The truncal valve, which 
derives from the abnormal fusion of the two semilunar 
valves, is often dysplastic and insufficient. 
according to the degree of coarctation. The differential 
diagnosis with interruption of the aortic arch can be only 
made if the 3-vessel and trachea view (with the confluence 
of the two arches) is obtained. If the aortic arch is interrupted, 
the course of the ascending aorta is more vertical 
and the confluence of the ductal, and the aortic arch can 
not be demonstrated. In the case of a right aortic arch, this 
will be on the right of the trachea, and the trachea will be 
between the pulmonary and the aortic arch (Figure 5.8d). 
Pulmonary artery anomalies. In pulmonary atresia, the 
leftmost vessel, corresponding to the pulmonary artery, 
shows a reduction in size. 
Thymus anomalies (Figure 5.9). In the case of thymus 
aplasia, the three vessels are located just behind the sternum, 
and the thymus cannot be visualized. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 121 
Septal anomalies. Outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD); malalignment VSD. 
Anomalies of the aorta. Critical aortic stenosis; aortic atresia; common arterial trunk. 
Crossover anomalies. Transposition of the great arteries; double-outlet right ventricle. 
Figure 5.9 Anomalies of the 3-vessel view. (a) Thymus hypoplasia, 
in a fetus at 34 weeks’ gestation with tetralogy of Fallot and 
22q11 microdeletion. (b) Normal thymus at 33 weeks’ gestation. 
Note the different dimensions. A, aortic arch; P, pulmonary artery; 
T, thymus. 
LONG AXIS OF THE LEFT VENTRICLE AND RELATED 
MALFORMATIONS
a b 

122 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Normal 
Anomalies of efferent vessel Anomalies of crossover 
Anomalies of 
septo-aortic continuity 
Assessment of right outflow tract 
Figure 5.10 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of CHD detectable on the left outflow tract view. (a) Normal. (b) 
Anomalies of outflow: critical aortic stenosis, (b1) without gross anomalies of the left ventricle or (b2) with severe endocardial fibroelastosis. 
(c) Anomalies (lack) of crossover: (c1) double-outlet right ventricle, if both great vessels are connected with the right (anterior) ventricle; 
(c2) transposition of the great arteries, if each vessel is connected with the contralateral ventricle (left ventricle–pulmonary artery and 
right ventricle–aorta). (d) Anomalies of septo-aortic continuity: (d1) simple outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD) if the septum is normally 
aligned with the anterior aortic wall; (d2) malalignment VSD, if the infundibular septum is anteriorly displaced and the aorta overrides the 
defect. In this case, to reach the final diagnosis is necessary to assess the right outflow (see Figure 5.11). Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, 
right ventricle. 
a 
b1 
b2 
d1 
c1
d2 
c2 

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 123 
Figure 5.11 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of CHD featuring a malalignment ventricular septal defect (VSD), 
detected on the left outflow tract view (a) (see also Figure 5.10). (b) If the right outflow is normal, the diagnosis remains malalignment 
VSD. (c) If the right outflow is reduced in size, the diagnosis is classic tetralogy of Fallot. (d) If the right outflow is absent (atretic), the 
diagnosis is pulmonary atresia plus VSD. (e) If the pulmonary trunk and branches are severely dilated, the diagnosis is tetralogy of Fallot 
with functionally absent pulmonary valve. (f) Finally, if the pulmonary artery does not arise from the right ventricle, but rather from the 
aorta, the diagnosis is common arterial trunk. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; SVC, superior vena 
cava; Tr, common arterial trunk. 
a 
b c
e 
f 
d 

Two different views may be used to assess the right outflow 
tract: the short and long axes of the right ventricle. 
The former is ideally more complete, since all connections 
of the right heart are displayed; however, it should 
be noted that this plane is easily achieved only if the fetus 
is lying with a posterior spine. On the contrary, the long 
axis, which depicts just the infundibular part and the 
main pulmonary artery with the semilunar valve, can be 
obtained with virtually all fetal positions. 
Long axis of the right ventricle, normal. This view is 
obtained from the long axis of the left ventricle, by curving 
the transducer towards the fetal head. 
Checklist. (1) The presence of a vessel that connects 
to the morphologically right ventricle positioned on 
the right and that can be defined as the pulmonary 
artery (acute angle bifurcation). (2) The presence of a 
semilunar valve showing normal systo-diastolic excursion 
(the leaflets disappear completely during systole, 
flattening on the pulmonary artery walls). (3) The 
presence of crossover: the direction of the pulmonary 
artery is at roughly 90° to the direction of the aorta 
displayed on the adjacent long axis of the left ventricle. 
(4) The size of the vessel is similar to (slightly larger 
than) that of the aorta visualized on the long axis of the 
left ventricle. 
124 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.12 Left and right outflows. (a) Long axis of the left ventricle 
– systole: the aorta arising from the left ventricle is shown; 
the mitral valve is closed, while the aortic semilunar valve is not 
visible since the cusps are flattened along the aortic walls. (b) Long 
axis of the left ventricle – diastole: the mitral valve opens, showing 
its leaflets, while the aortic valve closes, appearing as a bright dot 
within the left outflow tract. (c) Short axis of the right ventricle – 
systole: the whole of the right heart is visible, with the right atrium, 
the closed tricuspid valve, the tripartite right ventricle, the pulmonary 
trunk, and branches; also on the right side, the semilunar 
valve is not visible during systole, while the tricuspid valve is 
closed. (d) Short axis of the right ventricle – diastole: the pulmonary 
valve closes, while the tricuspid valve is open. Ao, aorta; 
LV, left ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.13 Left outflow tract anomalies. (a) Malalignment 
ventricular septal defect (VSD): the aorta overrides a wide septal 
defect. (b) Outlet VSD, consisting of a simple defect of the outflow 
perimembranous part of the septum. Note the normal alignment 
of the interventricular septum with the anterior aortic wall 
(arrowhead). (c) Transposition of the great arteries: two parallel 
vessels are seen arising each from one ventricle. (d) Double-outlet 
right ventricle: two vessels both arising from the right (anterior) 
ventricle are visible. In this condition, the pulmonary 
outflow is often stenotic, as in this case. (e) Critical aortic stenosis: 
endocardial fibroelastosis and a hypoplastic aortic annulus 
are visible. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; 
RV, right ventricle. 
LONG/SHORT AXIS OF THE RIGHT VENTRICLE 
AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
Pulmonary trunk anomalies. Pulmonary atresia/stenosis; absent pulmonary valve syndrome. 
a a b c 
d e 
b 
c d 

This is a longitudinal view of the fetal thorax, displaying 
the systemic venous returns. Therefore, the only 
anomaly that may be detected on this view is the rare 
absence of the inferior vena cava, replaced by an azygos 
continuation, typically associated with left atrial 
isomerism. 
Cavo-atrial junction, normal (Figure 5.15a). In 
this longitudinal view of the fetal thorax, both venae 
cavae are seen entering the right atrium (seagull 
wings view). 
Checklist. (1) The presence of both venae cavae entering 
the right atrium. (2) Both venae cavae should have the 
same size. 
Short axis of the right ventricle, normal (Figure 5.12c,d). 
To obtain this view, from the 4-chamber view, the transducer 
should perform a rotation mirroring that needed 
for the long axis of the left ventricle, i.e., towards the left 
fetal shoulder. 
Checklist (same as for the long axis of the right ventricle). 
(1) The presence of a vessel that connects to the morphologically 
right ventricle positioned on the right and that 
can be defined as the pulmonary artery (acute angle bifurcation). 
(2) The presence of a semilunar valve showing 
normal systo-diastolic excursion (the leaflets disappear 
completely during systole, flattening on the pulmonary 
artery walls). (3) The presence of crossover: the direction 
of the pulmonary artery is at roughly 90° to the direction 
of the aorta, which in this case is visible in the middle of 
the image, in cross-section. (4) The size of the vessel is 
similar to (slightly larger than) that of the aorta. 
Pulmonary trunk anomalies. In the case of moderate 
pulmonary stenosis (Figure 5.14a), the semilunar valve 
is dysplastic and thickened, with incomplete opening 
during systole. Post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary 
artery can be associated. On the contrary, in the case of 
pulmonary atresia (Figure 5.14b), the pulmonary trunk 
and the branches are often hypoplastic, although the 
vessel can appear to be of normal size if a formerly 
stenotic valve has become atretic only late in gestation, 
as may sometimes happen. In the case of pulmonary 
atresia with VSD, the main pulmonary artery may also 
be absent, with the two branches departing directly 
from the ductus arteriosus. Finally, in the case of 
absent pulmonary valve syndrome with or without 
tetralogy of Fallot – (Figure 5.14c), the pulmonary 
trunk and branches are severely dilated due to the conspicuous 
steno-insufficiency of the functionally absent 
pulmonary valve.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 125 
Figure 5.14 Right outflow tract anomalies. (a) Moderate pulmonary stenosis: note the thickened pulmonary valve cusps and the 
post-stenotic ectasia. (b) Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum: the pulmonary trunk and branches (arrows) are significantly 
hypoplastic, due to the valve atresia. Note also the thickened pulmonary valve. (c) Tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve: the 
image shows severe dilatation of the pulmonary trunk and branches, consequent to the severe insufficiency caused by the functional 
absence of the rudimentary pulmonary valve. LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.15 Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction. (a) Situs solitus: 
normal venous return, with drainage of the superior and inferior 
venae cavae into the right atrium. (b) Situs ambiguus (left 
isomerism): the inferior vena cava (?) is absent and one suprahepatic 
vein (SH) drains directly into the right atrium. The systemic 
return is abnormal and consists of an azygos continuation (not visible 
in this image) draining into the superior vena cava. IVC, inferior 
vena cava; RA, right atrium; SVC, superior vena cava. 
CAVO-ATRIAL JUNCTION AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
a 
a b 
b c 

Absence of the inferior vena cava (Figure 5.15b). In 
left atrial isomerism, the systemic return is abnormal: 
the inferior vena cava is absent, the suprahepatic veins 
drain directly into the right atrium, and there is 
an azygos continuation draining into the superior 
vena cava. 
126 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
LONGITUDINAL VIEW OF THE AORTIC ARCH 
On this view, the whole course of the aortic arch, from 
the left ventricle to the abdominal aorta, is displayed. 
The neck vessels are also visible in most instances. 
In the case of transposition of the great arteries, the 
course of the aortic arch is wider than normal, due to 
the more anterior position of the ascending aorta, 
arising from the substernal right ventricle. The two 
aspects of the normal arch and the transposed arch 
have been said to resemble an umbrella handle and a 
hockey stick, respectively. 
Figure 5.16 Longitudinal view of the aortic arch. 
This view, obtained with a ventral approach, demonstrates 
the ascending aorta, the aortic arch with the 
neck vessels (arrowheads), and the descending aorta. 
3D/4D FETAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY – CARDIO-STIC 
Background and technique. In the fetus, the main factor 
limiting the 3D assessment of a dynamic organ such as 
the heart is absence of a triggering source, which in the 
adult allows coupling of the different frames acquired 
during the cardiac cycle. This problem has been overcome 
with the spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC) 
protocol. In this technique, the array inside the transducer 
housing performs a single slow sweep, recording a 
single 3D dataset. This volume consists of a high number 
of 2D frames. STIC derives the heart rate from the periodicity 
of the movements of the cardiac structures, and 
eventually a single virtual cardiac cycle, each frame of 
which is the result of the overlay of many acquired 
frames, is reconstructed. As a result, this technique cannot 
be used in case of fetal arrhythmias (transient or persistent), 
since the abnormal fetal heart rate would 
compromise the adequacy of the acquired volume. Once 
acquired, the volume is opened and can be used offline 
for multiplanar navigation and/or four-dimensional 
image renderings using the various modes already 
described in other sections of this chapter. 
Acquisition. The volume to acquire should include the 
whole thorax, from the subdiaphragmatic venous returns 
to the upper mediastinum (3-vessel view). With such a 
volume, all echocardiographic planes may be obtained 
offline with the multiplanar mode. The best approach to 
acquire an adequate volume is to start the acquisition 
procedure while displaying an apical 4-chamber view. 
Modes of analysis. There are different rendering modes 
that may enhance the characterization of cardiac 
anatomy in normal and abnormal conditions. 
Multiplanar mode. This represents the basic mode for 
exploration and navigation of the volume. The fetal heart 
can be thoroughly assessed, and all echocardiographic 
planes needed in fetal echocardiography can be achieved 

offline (Figure 5.17). It has to be underlined that the 
facility with which a beginner as well as an experienced 
operator can navigate the volume of the heart and great 
vessels contributes significantly to a better understanding 
of the three-dimensionality of the central cardiovascular 
structures.4 
Glassbody mode. The possibility of coupling a transparent 
mode for the grayscale image with a surface mode 
for the color Doppler signal allows a display on the same 
image of the diastolic filling of the ventricles and the systolic 
ejection of blood through the great vessels, giving a 
striking 3D cast of the crossover (Figure 5.18). This 
approach also contributes to the understanding of the 
relatively complex anatomy of the outflow tracts.5 
Surface mode. This mode is used to display, with different 
threshold and postprocessing filters, the anatomic 
structures of the four chamber and, less often, of the outflows 
(Figure 5.19). In particular, this mode allows 
planes to be visualized that cannot be obtained with 2D 
ultrasound, such as the coronal view of the atrioventricular 
valves or the en-face view of the interventricular 
septum (Figure 5.20). 
Inversion mode. This mode inverts the color code 
assigned to each pixel, displaying in black the echogenic 
structures (formerly displayed in white) and, vice versa, 
in white the sonolucent pixels. This simple conversion 
allows one to produce cast-like images of the cardiac 
chambers and outflows that may resemble those seen 
during cardiac catheterization (Figure 5.21). 
Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This is one of 
the latest developments in 3D ultrasound. It allows one 
to display on a single panel a variable number of reconstructed 
2D sections, as in a computed tomograpic or 
magnetic resonance imaging scan. In particular, it displays 
parallel slices that are orthogonal to the plane of 
acquisition.6 Therefore, if the acquisition is performed 
orthogonally to the fetal body (e.g. starting from the apical 
or transverse 4-chamber view), and if the volume is 
sufficiently large, all consecutive slices from the transverse 
abdominal to the high mediastinum with the ductal 
and aortic arches will be displayed simultaneously and 
automatically (Figure 5.22). 
B-flow. Finally, the B-flow mode is able to display 
casts of cardiovascular structures, starting from grayscale 
image, without the need for Doppler. This modality 
is very helpful in characterizing complex CHD 
(Figure 5.23).7 
Diagnostic role of 4D echocardiography. The possible 
applications of 4D echocardiography are enormous. Its 
potential role in fetal cardiology teaching and training is 
huge: the possibility to display live and in three dimensions 
the four chambers and the outflows in normal and 
abnormal conditions significantly enhances the understanding 
of complex concepts such as impaired contractility 
and pump failure. In this way, also, the learning 
curve for fetal echocardiography will dramatically 
improve. The use of Cardio-STIC may also be beneficial 
if applied in the screening setting: the possibility to 
acquire a volume of the outflows rapidly while displaying 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 127 
Figure 5.17 Cardio-STIC: grayscale 
multiplanar imaging. This image 
modality allows simultaneous visualization 
of the cardiac anatomic structures 
on the three orthogonal planes. By 
positioning the caliper on the structure 
of interest, it is possible to assess its 
characteristics on the three planes. The 
image is in motion, and consists of 
a reconstructed virtual cardiac cycle 
played in a cineloop sequence. 

a simple 4-chamber view enables the operator to navigate 
it offline and extract the outflow tract views. In a 
diagnostic setting, the possibility of investigating cardiac 
defects using planes not obtainable by conventional 2D 
ultrasound, such as the coronal view of the atrioventricular 
valves, significantly increases the confidence with 
which some difficult diagnoses can be reached. In addition, 
the possibility of exploiting the potential of the various 
rendering modes in order to assess and display 
abnormal and hypoplastic vessels is likely to improve 
the characterization of rare anomalies. Finally, 4D 
echocardiography can be used advantageously also for 
peer-review and second opinions; and the expert has the 
possibility to re-do the fetal echocardiographic examination 
by navigating the volume. 
When is it useful to use Cardio-STIC? We feel that it 
may represent a good rule, if there is such a possibility, 
128 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.18 Cardio-STIC: color 
Doppler. Glassbody rendering with 
transparent maximum mode. This 
image modality allows a display of the 
3D color Doppler thanks to the transparency 
of the grayscale image. As a 
result, with appropriate adjustments of 
settings, it is possible to actually visualize 
the crossover of the great vessels. 
(a) Conventional color Doppler image 
of the left outflow: to check the 
crossover, in 2D imaging, it is necessary 
to image both the left and right 
outflows. (b) With the glassbody mode, 
the crossover is recognizable on a single 
image. Ao, ascending aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, 
right ventricle. 
Figure 5.19 Cardio-STIC: surface 
rendering. Ebstein’s anomaly. The 
use of the surface mode allows one to 
visualize in detail the abnormal tricuspid 
valve, the dysplastic leaflets of 
which are plastered down along the 
interventricular septum (arrows). Note 
also the clear depiction of the foramen 
ovale and the abnormal chordae tendinae 
of the tricuspid valve (above the 
arrows, within the ventricular cavity). 
LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

to acquire at least one grayscale and one color Doppler 
volume of the fetal heart in each patient. This can then 
be used as archived material only or may become useful 
in case of medicolegal litigation or consultation. With 
regard to abnormal cases, in the following sections on 
CHD, 4D images will be illustrated and discussed whenever 
they may significantly improve diagnostic and/or 
prognostic accuracy. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 129 
Figure 5.20 Cardio-STIC: surface rendering. Scanning 
planes not obtainable with 2D echocardiography. 
(a) Normal heart: coronal view of the atrioventricular 
plane. The reconstructed coronal view allows visualization 
of the two leaflets of the mitral valve (arrowheads) 
and the three leaflets of the tricuspid valve (arrows). 
(b) Apical muscular VSD. The possibility of displaying 
the en face view of the interventricular septum, from 
within the right ventricle, allows one to define the size 
and the location of the defect (arrowhead). RA, right 
atrium. 
Figure 5.21 Cardio-STIC: inversion mode. This image 
modality inverts the color assigned to the black and 
white pixels, providing a cast-like image of the cardiac 
chambers. This figure shows a normal fetal heart during 
diastole: note the characteristic different shapes of the 
ventricles (the right one is rounded due to the moderator 
band at the apex) and the black spots representing 
the valve leaflets with the chordae tendinae (arrows). 
The arrowheads indicate two pulmonary veins entering 
the left atrium. 
a b 

130 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.22 Cardio-STIC: tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This image modality allows one to display on a single panel a variable 
number of parallel reconstructed 2D sections that are orthogonal to the plane of acquisition. Therefore, if the acquisition is performed 
orthogonal to the fetal body, and if the volume is sufficiently large, all consecutive slices from the transverse abdominal to the high mediastinum 
with the ductal and aortic arches will be displayed automatically. These images show a normal heart: the sequential anatomy can be 
assessed, from the abdominal situs (lower row, right window) up to the aortic arch (upper row, central window). The displayed planes are 
visible on the left window of the upper row. The arrow indicates the trachea and the arrowhead the transverse aortic arch. Ao, ascending 
aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; Pa, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.23 Cardio-STIC. B-flow imaging 
demonstrating the normal venous 
returns. The rendered image shows the 
inferior and superior venae cavae 
(arrows) draining into the right atrium. 
The whole aortic arch and supra-hepatic 
veins draining into the inferior vena cava 
are also visible, Ao, descending aorta; shv, 
supra-hepatic veins). 

Definition. The essential feature of the pulmonary veins 
when abnormally connected is that they drain into a site 
other than the morphological left atrium. Total anomalous 
pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) accounts 
for approximately 2% of CHD in postnatal life. TAPVC 
is characterized by the anomalous drainage of all the 
pulmonary veins, whereas partial anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection (PAPVC) is characterized by the 
anomalous drainage of one, two, or three of the four 
pulmonary veins. 
Anatomy. Among the various classifications proposed, 
that due to Darling et al8 is the most frequently used. In 
reference to the drainage anomaly this classification distinguishes 
four types of TAPVC: 
• Type 1: supracardiac (50% of cases). The four pulmonary 
veins drain into a venous collector located 
behind the left atrium. This collector is traditionally 
termed the confluence. From this horizontal collector, 
a vertical vein runs up to reach the innominate vein; 
this then terminates in the right superior vena cava. 
At times, the vertical vein may be obstructed due to 
extrinsic compression by the bronchus and the ipsilateral 
pulmonary artery; these obstructions are rarely 
severe in the perinatal period. 
• Type 2: cardiac (25% of cases). The pulmonary veins 
drain through the coronary sinus or, more rarely, 
directly into the right atrium. Usually, there is no 
obstruction. 
• Type 3: infracardiac or infradiaphragmatic (20% of 
cases). The confluence of the pulmonary veins enters a 
descending vertical vein that passes into the abdomen 
through the esophageal orifice of the diaphragm. 
It then usually drains into the portal vein or, more 
rarely, into the ductus venosus or the inferior vena 
cava. When the infracardiac connection is to the portal 
venous system the abnormal venous return is 
almost always obstructed. 
• Type 4: mixed (5% of cases). The pulmonary veins 
drain separately to different anomalous sites. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Anomalous connection of the 
pulmonary veins is notoriously misdiagnosed prenatally, 
especially when isolated. In the few cases described prenatally, 
TAPVC is often associated with other cardiac 
anomalies in the context of heterotaxy syndromes. The 
diagnosis is suspected on the 4-chamber view. Indirect 
signs of TAPVC are: (1) moderate atrioventricular disproportion 
(Figure 5.24a), with the right sections larger 
than the left ones (in supradiaphragmatic forms) and (2) a 
pulmonary artery significantly larger than the ascending 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 131 
Figure 5.24 Anomalous pulmonary venous connection. (a) In a 4-chamber view obtained in a fetus with TAPVC, there is an atrioventricular 
disproportion, with the right sections larger than the left ones. AD, right atrium; AS, left atrium, VD, right ventricle; VS, left ventricle. 
(b) A venous confluence chamber (arrow) can be seen behind the left atrium (H, heart). (c) Spectral Doppler detects the typical pulmonary 
velocity waveform. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 
ANOMALOUS PULMONARY VENOUS CONNECTION 
Incidence. 2% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. In the apical 4-chamber view, the drainage of the pulmonary veins into the left atrium is not visualized. 
Often, a venous chamber or a venous collector are seen behind the left atrium. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High – if cardiosplenic syndromes included. 
Outcome. The prognosis depends on the association with other CHD, on the presence of obstructions, and on 
how early the postnatal diagnosis is made. If isolated and diagnosed early, mortality varies from 1% to 10%. 
a b c 

aorta. The fetal echocardiographic clues to the diagnosis 
of TAPVC include failure to demonstrate a direct pulmonary 
venous connection to the left atrium, the detection 
of a venous confluence chamber behind the left 
atrium (Figure 5.24b), and the visualization of an ascending 
or descending vertical vein.9 In cases of PAVPC, 
the visualization of at least one direct pulmonary venous 
connection to the left atrium makes the suspicion of this 
anomaly even harder to raise.10,11 Color Doppler (with 
low pulse repetition frequency (PRF) to detect the 
extremely low-velocity pulmonary venous flow) may be 
used to confirm the vascular nature of the sonolucent 
area behind the left atrium (differentiating it from the 
esophagus – Figure 5.24b). Spectral Doppler assessment 
can then be used to detect the typical pulmonary velocity 
waveform (Figure 5.24c). 4D echocardiography can 
be advantageously used to locate normal and abnormal 
pulmonary venous returns. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should take into account 
other causes of atrioventricular disproportion, such 
as aortic coarctation (see later in this chapter). The 
recognition of at least one pulmonary vein entering 
the left atrium would rule out TAPVC; on the contrary, 
the detection of a venous chamber with typical 
pulmonary venous velocity waveform at Doppler 
assessment confirms the presence of TAPVC. 
• Prognostic indicators. The presence of an obstructive 
abnormal pulmonary venous return represents 
an unfavorable prognostic indicator because it is 
one of the few real neonatal emergencies due to 
a congenital cardiac defect. Also, the association 
with heterotaxy syndromes represents a poor prognostic 
sign. 
• Association with other malformations. TAPVC is 
often associated with complex cardiac anomalies, 
often in the context of heterotaxy syndromes. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high if cardiosplenic 
syndromes are included (otherwise, it is low). 
PAPVC can be associated with rare syndromic conditions, 
such as the Cat-eye syndrome.10 
Obstetric management. In the few cases in which 
TAPVC is diagnosed prenatally, this should prompt 
in utero transfer to a tertiary referral center where cardiac 
surgery can be performed, because in the case of 
severe obstruction, it may be necessary to intervene in 
the first few hours of life. 
Postnatal therapy. Non-obstructed TAPVCs are usually 
asymptomatic at birth; nevertheless, they must be 
operated upon during the first 2 months of life in order 
to reduce operative risks to a minimum. As mentioned 
above, obstructed TAPVC represent one of the few real 
emergencies in pediatric cardiac surgery. In fact, while 
nearly all the other critical heart defects can be pharmacologically 
(prostaglandins, diuretics, etc.) or mechanically 
(controlled mechanical ventilation) managed for 24–72 
hours, immediate surgery represents the only option for 
severely obstructed TAPVCs. The neonate with TAPVC 
will show a combination of cyanosis, dyspnea, heart 
failure, anuresis, and acidosis. The operation consists of 
reconnecting the confluence of the pulmonary veins with 
the left atrium, and is generally done via median sternotomy 
with hypothermy and circulatory arrest. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In utero, 
TAPVCs have no hemodynamic consequences, unless 
associated with complex heart defects (e.g., heterotaxy 
syndromes). After birth, the prognosis depends on the 
association with the above-mentioned heart anomalies, 
on the presence of obstruction, and on how early the 
postnatal diagnosis is made. In isolated TAPVC, 
regardless of the anatomic type, if the patient comes to 
surgery early and in good clinical condition, mortality 
and morbidity rates are not high (1–10%) and longterm 
life expectancy is good. On the contrary, when the 
diagnosis, and consequently surgery, are delayed, the 
surgical mortality is high and similar to that characterizing 
heterotaxy syndromes. 
132 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECT (ASD) – TYPE II 
Incidence. Exceptionally detected in utero. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ostium secundum: wide foramen ovale; intact septum primum. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Not assessable, due to the extremely low detection rate in the fetus. Relatively 
high in post–natal life (15–15%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: 25–30%. Holt–Oram. 
Outcome. Very good. 

Definition. The normal development of the interatrial 
septum is complex and occurs in different stages, being 
completed only after birth with the closure of the foramen 
ovale. If the closure of the fossa ovalis is not complete, a 
type II atrial septal defect (ASD) occurs. It should be 
noted that only a very limited number of ASDs can be suspected 
in utero, due to the normal patency of the foramen 
ovale in the fetus. In addition, we are aware of no reports 
describing the prenatal diagnosis of sinus venosus ASDs. 
Therefore, with the exception of the few reported diagnoses 
of ostium primum ASD (partial atrioventricular 
septal defect), the only type of ASD that can be (rarely) 
suspected in utero is that involving the septum secundum. 
It should also be underlined that it is not possible at all to 
discriminate in utero between this type of defect and the 
simple patent foramen ovale, which will close in most 
instances after a few months of life. Finally, it should be 
pointed out that a normal appearance of the interatrial 
septum does not rule out the possibility of an ASD. 
Anatomy. According to the site of the defect, the ASD is 
classified as follows: 
• ASD type II (ostium secundum): wide defect of the 
fossa ovalis, due to incomplete closure of the foramen 
ovale. 
• ASD, sinus venosus: the defect extends toward the 
orifice of the superior or inferior vena cava. 
• ASD, coronary sinus: the defect extends toward the 
coronary sinus, and is often associated with anomalies 
of the coronary sinus itself. 
• septum primum defect (partial atrioventricular septal 
defect – see the section on AVSD later in this chapter). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Bearing in mind what has been 
pointed out above, this section will consider the suspicion 
rather than the diagnosis of type II ASD. In our experience, 
there are two different aspects of the interatrial septum 
that may be associated with this type of ASD, on the 
4-chamber view: (1) an extremely wide foramen ovale: 
>7–8mm in its maximum opening (Figure 5.25) and (2) 
non-visualization of the flap ‘hinges’, with a flap that 
starts bulging at its connection with the atrioventricular 
plane rather than at the upper edge of the septum primum, 
and up to its farther insertion at the level of the posterior 
atrial wall. Functional assessment with color 
Doppler (with a low PRF for low-velocity venous flows) 
allows recognition of the wide interatrial shunt, sometimes 
with bidirectional flow (Figure 5.26). 
• Artifacts. If the presence of a type II ASD is suspected, 
the first step is always to doublecheck the scanning 
view: in fact, if the plane is slightly posteriorized, the 
normal coronary sinus can be mistaken for an ostium 
primum ASD. The correct 4-chamber view is just 
cranial to the view in which the coronary sinus is visible, 
since this structure is positioned on the inferior 
surface of the heart, in the atrioventricular groove. 
This artifact is even more pronounced in the case of 
persistence of the left superior vena cava; in fact, this 
vessel usually drains into the coronary sinus, which 
dilates significantly to accomodate the increased 
venous flow coming from the cerebral area through 
the left superior vena cava (Figure 5.27a). A hint suggesting 
that the scanning view is not correct is the 
absence of the foramen ovale flap: if the transducer is 
moved a few millimeters towards the fetal head, the 
correct plane, with the interatrial septum and the 
foramen ovale flap, comes into view (Figure 5.27b). 
• Differential diagnosis. This should include a partial 
atrioventricular septal defect (Figure 5.4d), which is 
characterized by a septum primum defect, located in 
the lower part of the interatrial septum, just above the 
atrioventricular plane; and the dilated coronary sinus 
typical of a persistent left superior vena cava (see 
above). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high in 
postnatal life (5–15%, mainly trisomy 21). It is not assessable 
in the fetus due to the extremely low detection rate. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 133 
Figure 5.25 Atrial septal defect: two cases of ASD confirmed at birth. (a) On the apical 4-chamber view¸ an extremely wide (8 mm) foramen 
ovale can be seen. (b) Also in this case, on the transverse 4-chamber view, the large size of the foramen ovale is evident; the flap is seen 
in the left atrium. (c) Same case as in (b): color Doppler demonstrates the extent of the shunt. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low but 
not zero in postnatal life. ASD can be associated with the 
following conditions:12 
• Holt–Oram syndrome: Look for .ASD + syndactyly 
+ positive family history. 
• Chondroectodermal dysplasia: Look for . ASD 
(or VSD/AVSD) + thoracic hypoplasia + postaxial 
polydactyly (mainly, hands) + acromesomelia. 
• Alagille syndrome (OMIM 118450): Look for . 
ASD + vertebral anomalies (hemivertebrae) + short 
ulnae anomalies. 
• Noonan syndrome (not detectable in the fetus): Look 
for .ASD + (short stature + typical facies + pterygia). 
Obstetric management. Should an ASD be suspected 
prenatally, a thorough search for possibly associated 
cardiac and extracardiac anomalies has to be carried 
out. If the suspected ASD is isolated, it should be 
underlined once more to the parents that a definite 
diagnosis will be made only after birth and that there is 
a consistent possibility that the presence of the defect 
will not be confirmed. The obstetric management of 
the delivery is unchanged and the delivery can safely 
occur in a local hospital, because there is no risk of 
neonatal emergencies. Echocardiography should be 
performed during the first week of life to assess the 
situation and, if necessary, schedule a follow-up scan 
(patent foramen ovale). 
Postnatal therapy. A significant percentage of foramen 
ovale patencies will close during the first year of life. In 
those cases for which an interventional procedure is 
deemed necessary, closure using interventional catheterization 
has become the treatment of choice. Alternatively, 
surgical placement of a pericardial patch across the 
defect can be carried out. The procedure-related risks are 
extremely low. 
134 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.26 Atrial septal defect: this is 
the same case as in Figure 5.25(b,c). The 
combined use of M-mode and color 
Doppler, positioning the cursor across 
the foramen ovale, allows demonstration 
of the bidirectional flow, with a significant 
left-to-right component (in red), 
which is normally absent. 
Figure 5.27 Artefact: false-positive atrial septal defect. In the case 
of a persistent left superior vena cava draining into the coronary 
sinus, the latter dilates significantly to accomodate the increased 
blood flow. As a result, it displaces cranially the atria with the interatrial 
septum, with the coronary sinus being located in the atrioventricular 
groove. (a) On ultrasound, this condition makes the 
identification of the actual interatrial defect difficult, since this is 
masked by the dilated coronary sinus, which may mimic an atrial 
septal defect (?). (b) If care is taken to obtain a more appropriate 
4-chamber view (just cranial to that shown in (a), the artefact is 
removed, the normal interatrial septum is seen (arrow), and sometimes 
the coronary sinus appears as a round sonolucent area on the 
outer outline of the heart, between the left atrium and ventricle. 
a b 

Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the ASD is 
isolated, as in most instances, survival and quality of life 
are unaffected, regardless of the need for an interventional 
procedure. Only in the unlikely case in which an ASD is 
detected late, when it has already caused irreversible 
pulmonary hypertension, does the life expectancy 
decrease and there may be severe complications adversely 
affecting survival and quality of life. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 135 
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (VSD) 
Incidence. Very high. In postnatal life, VSDs account for 30% of all CHD. In utero, VSDs account for only 10% 
of detected CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view/left-outflow view: defect of the interventricular septum. It can involve the 
perimembranous (inlet or outlet) or the muscular part of the septum. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (in utero). Extremely low after birth. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (in utero). 
Outcome. Very good, if the defect is isolated. Poor if associated with syndromes or other malformative clusters. 
Definition. The VSD represents one of the most important 
sources of false-negative diagnoses in utero. This 
accounts for the striking difference in the prevalence of 
this defect if fetal and neonatal series are compared: 
VSDs account for 30–35% of all CHD detected after 
birth,13 but only for 10% of cases in fetal series.14,15 In 
addition, in the fetus, VSDs are very often associated 
with chromosomal anomalies and/or syndromic conditions,
16 whereas in the neonate, most VSDs are isolated 
and bear a relatively low risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
This consistent discrepancy is due to a selection 
bias: since the occurrence of a VSD does not conspicuously 
alter the 4-chamber view, which represents the 
basic screening view for CHD in utero, isolated VSDs 
tend to be overlooked. On the contrary, if another 
extracardiac anomaly has already been recognized, it is 
likely that this will lead the operator to have a higher 
degree of suspicion, the 4-chamber view will be more 
carefully evaluated or fetal echocardiography will be 
performed – and small VSDs may also be detected. The 
pathogenetic mechanism responsible for the VSD is a 
delay in the septal closure process: this is demonstrated 
by the fact that a high number of VSD close during the 
first year of life or, also, in utero.16,17 
Anatomy. VSDs can be located anywhere in the interventricular 
septum; they can be single or multiple, and range 
in size from 2 mm to several millimeters. VSDs are subdivided 
into perimembranous (of the inlet and outlet portions) 
and muscular types. Muscular VSDs can involve 
the inlet, trabecular or outlet portions. Another, rarer, 
type of VSD is the so-called ‘doubly committed’ VSD, in 
which the roof of the defect, located in the infundibular 
portion, is represented by the fibrous annuli of the aortic 
and pulmonary valves. Finally, there is also another 
type of VSD that has a completely different origin and 
hemodynamics – the malalignment VSD. This type of 
defect will be described in the next section, but it belongs 
to the conotruncal anomalies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view depends on 
the site of the VSD: if this involves the inlet portion of 
the muscular/perimembranous component, it will be 
diagnosed on the 4-chamber view (Figure 5.28); if the 
defect is located in the outlet portion, it will be evident 
on the left outflow tract view only (Figure 5.29a). 
Sonographically, the VSD appears as an interruption of 
the septum. Since the anatomic structures are better 
appreciated if at a 90° angle to the insonating beam, the 
best view to display the defect is a transverse 4-chamber 
view. It should be underlined that a small muscular 
defect, especially if located at the apex, may not show up 
on grayscale ultrasound, and will become visible only 
when color Doppler is superimposed (Figure 5.28b). As 
already mentioned, outlet VSDs (as well as malalignment 
VSDs) can be recognized on the left outflow tract 
view only, since the subaortic part of the septum is outside 
the plane of the 4-chamber view. Care should be 
taken in assessing the alignment between the remaining 
part of the septum, caudal to the defect, and the anterior 
aortic wall: if the septum is correctly aligned with the 
anterior wall of the aorta, then the defect will be defined 
as a simple perimembranous outlet defect (Figure 5.29a); 
if, on the contrary, the infundibular septum is anteriorly 
displaced and the aorta overrides the septum, then 
the defect will be defined as a malalignment VSD (Figure 
5.29b). On color Doppler, bidirectional flow across the 
VSD is found (Figure 5.28), unless another CHD that 
raises the pressure on one side of the heart is present at 
the same time (pulmonary atresia, aortic coarctation, 

etc.). Pulsed-wave Doppler is not useful. 4D echocardiography 
may be used to demonstrate the VSD on the en face 
view of the interventricular septum, which is easily 
obtained through multiplanar imaging, whereas it is 
extremely difficult to display with 2D ultrasound.18,19 On 
this view, the presence of a VSD can be reliably 
confirmed and its area easily measured (Figure 5.30). 
• Artefacts. An artefact can occur if the interventricular 
septum is assessed on the apical 4-chamber view: 
the absorption of the ultrasound waves by the whole 
length of the septum creates a ‘dropout’ artefact just 
below the atrioventricular plane, and this may be 
mistaken for an inlet VSD. This is why the interventricular 
septum should be electively assessed on the 
transverse 4-chamber view – at least for the part 
that is indeed visible on this plane (Figure 5.31a). 
Should this doubt arise, it is sufficient to change the 
approach from ventral to lateral in order to remove 
the artefact. There are another two artefacts that can 
occur while displaying the left outflow tract. The first 
is a pseudo-malalignment VSD, which can be created 
if the left outflow is approached too laterally (Figure 
5.31b). The second is a false outlet VSD, which is 
due to the shadow of the aortic annulus and/or to the 
origin of one of the coronary arteries: the doubt is 
solved when the level of the apparent defect is considered, 
as it is at the level or above the semilunar 
valve (Figure 5.31c). If the doubt persists, it is sufficient 
to approach the left outflow more laterally 
(from a transverse 4-chamber view): in this way, the 
septum and the anterior aortic wall are insonated 
perpendicularly, and this removes all shadows and 
consequently the artefact. 
• Differential diagnosis. The first thing to rule out is a 
false VSD, as just mentioned. The only other type of 
136 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.28 Ventricular septal defect (VSD). VSDs detectable on 
the 4-chamber view include inlet and muscular defects. (a) Small 
muscular VSD of the middle part of the septum, evident on 2D 
imaging and color Doppler (27 weeks’ gestation). (b) Another small 
muscular VSD of the middle part of the septum, which is not clearly 
evident on 2D ultrasound (left), but demonstrated on color Doppler 
(31 weeks’ gestation). (c) Double VSDs of the middle part of the 
septum, confirmed on color Doppler (right) (27 weeks’ gestation). 
RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.29 Ventricular septal defect (VSD). VSDs not detectable 
on the 4-chamber view but only on the left outflow tract view 
include: (a) outlet subaortic perimembranous VSD (color Doppler 
demonstration on the right, 31 weeks’ gestation); (b) malalignment 
VSD, with the ascending aorta overriding the VSD (color Doppler 
demonstration on the right, 27 weeks’ gestation). Ao, aorta; LV, 
left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. 
a a
b 
b
c 

CHD that can, to a certain extent, enter in the differential 
diagnosis is the AVSD, especially in its partial 
form (see Figure 5.4d): during systole, with the 
atrioventricular valve(s) closed, both a complete and, 
more so, a partial AVSD may be mistaken at first 
sight for a VSD. It is sufficient to reassess the heart 
during the next diastole to detect the wide atrioventricular 
communication in the complete form and to 
recognize the septum primum defect (which is obviously 
absent in case of a simple VSD) in the partial 
atrioventricular canal. In addition, the normal offset 
appearance of the atrioventricular plane is lost in both 
variants of AVSD. 
• Prognostic indicators. A distinction should be 
made between the cardiac prognosis and the overall 
prognosis. If isolated, a VSD has a very good prognosis; 
relatively negative prognostic signs include a large 
size (indicating that spontaneous closure is unlikely), 
a location adjacent to the conduction system (there is 
a risk of a surgical lesion with consequent need for a 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 137 
Figure 5.30 Cardio-STIC: glassbody 
mode. This image modality allows one 
to display the 3D color Doppler thanks 
to the transparency of the grayscale 
image. As a result, with adequate adjustments 
of the settings, it is possible to 
actually visualize en face the interventricular 
septum and, in this case, the 
large defect (arrowheads) highlighted 
by the contrast offered by the color 
Doppler signal. IVS, interventricular 
septum; RA, right atrium. 
Figure 5.31 Artefact: false-positive VSD. (a) On the apical 4-chamber view, the progressive ultrasound dropout across the inter-ventricular 
septum creates a false appearance of an inlet VSD (arrow); it is sufficient to change the insonation approach and obtain a transverse 
4-chamber view to remove the artefact. (b) False appearance of malalignment VSD (below the closed aortic valve: arrows), due to a wrong 
insonation approach. In this case, it is sufficient to re-obtain the left outflow tract with an adequate approach to remove the artefact. (c) False 
appearance of outlet VSD, due to ultrasound dropout caused by shadowing from the aortic valve annulus and/or by coronary arteries visualization: 
however, in this case, the false VSD is located at the level of or above the valve, which denotes the artifactual origin of the finding. 
a b c 

138 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
pacemaker), the occurrence of malalignment (in 
which case, it is no longer a simple VSD but also, 
from a hemodynamic point of view, a conotruncal 
anomaly). With regard to overall prognosis, the main 
prognostic indicator in the fetus is the site of the 
defect: in utero, inlet VSDs are associated with Down 
syndrome in up to 50% of cases, while malalignment 
VSDs are frequently associated with trisomies 18 and 
13.16 On the contrary, outlet VSDs are associated 
with a normal karyotype in most cases and are more 
likely to close spontaneously in utero, similarly to 
muscular VSDs.16 
• Association with other malformations. No preferential 
association with any given type of extracardiac 
anomaly has been reported. 
• Natural history. The VSD is one of the few lesions 
that may disappear, by spontaneous closure, during 
prenatal life. This event usually occurs to the small 
peri-membranous defects of the inlet/outlet areas 
and to the muscular ones.16,17 Hence, it is possible 
that a VSD detected at 20 weeks’ gestation disappears 
at a follow-up scan during the 3rd trimester. 
However, it should be considered that if a previously 
recognized VSD is no longer visible, it might 
actually have closed or it may also never have been 
there and have represented a false positive diagnosis 
at the previous scan. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Most 
common autosomal trisomies can be associated with 
VSDs: trisomies 21 (inlet), 18 and 13 (malalignment). 
The interventricular septum is often involved also in 
cases of rare chromosomal arrangements or unbalanced 
translocations. In different fetal series, the risk of chromosomal 
anomalies for VSDs ranges from 20% to 
40%.14–17 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. The number of syndromic conditions that feature a 
VSD among the typical signs is huge. There is no single 
syndrome that is exclusively associated with a VSD. On 
the contrary, it should be underlined that the interventricular 
septum is among the preferred targets for many 
genetic/chromosomal conditions. 
Obstetric management. Should a VSD be detected in 
a fetus, a careful assessment of the cardiac and extracardiac 
anatomy should be carried out by an expert. 
Recommendation of fetal karyotyping is controversial: 
most perinatologists are in favor, while pediatric cardiologists 
are against it. Probably, the best approach is to 
raise the issue discreetly during the initial counseling session 
and then act according to the wishes of the parents. 
The diagnosis of an isolated VSD does not alter the 
obstetric management, nor does it represent an indication 
for cesarean section. The patient can deliver in the local 
hospital, since a VSD does not represent a neonatal emergency. 
The neonate should then be referred to a pediatric 
cardiology/cardiac surgery unit for management and 
follow-up. 
Postnatal therapy. The timing of and the need for treatment 
depend basically on the size of the defect and on the 
consequent extent of the interventricular shunt. In most 
cases, the shunt is not severe enough to warrant operative 
closure during the first months of life. As already mentioned, 
the natural history of VSDs has demonstrated that 
40–60% undergo spontaneous closure by 12 months of 
life.20 However, if a VSD does not close spontaneously and 
the shunt is significant, this causes an irreversible overload 
of the pulmonary circulation (Eisenmerger complex). To 
avoid this dangerous complication, surgical correction 
should be performed in those cases at risk. The most 
widely accepted approach to the closure of a VSD is based 
on the site and size of the defect: large defects (lesion 
diameter = aortic diameter, right ventricular/left ventricular 
(RV/LV) pressure >0.7) should be closed at 3–6 
months of life. The closure procedure will be surgical for 
perimembranous, inlet and infundibular subaortic defects. 
Defects of the muscular component and of the trabecular 
septum can be closed by interventional catheterization. In 
intermediate-size VSDs (lesion diameter < aortic diameter, 
RV/LV pressure <0.5, pulmonary overload with 
QP/QS=2/1), the closure (surgical or with a device) should 
be done within the 3rd year of life. Small VSDs (RV/LV 
pressure <0.3, moderate pulmonary overload with 
QP/QS<1.5) can be left or closed with a device. Finally, 
multiple VSDs can be closed after 6 months of life, if the 
shunt is not severe.21 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In postnatal 
series, the prognosis for isolated VSDs is extremely 
favorable, with a high rate of spontaneous closure 
(up to 90% of cases, if the smallest muscular defects 
are included) and normal life expectancy both for 
untreated non-restrictive VSDs and for large ones if 
operated. In contrast, prenatal series show lower survival 
rates, as is often the case when comparing prenatal 
and postnatal data for CHD: the intrauterine 
mortality rate can reach 11% and the neonatal mortality 
rate 31%, with a 5-year survival rate of 40%.14–17 It 
is clear that these data are affected by the aforementioned 
selection bias, which leads to preferential recognition 
of VSDs associated with major extracardiac 
malformations. If all cases associated with chromosomal 
anomalies and non-chromosomal syndromes are 
excluded, the survival rate and quality of life are the 
same as those reported in postnatal cohorts. 

Definition. Malalignment VSD is characterized by a 
malalignment between the infundibular septum, anteriorly 
displaced in relation to the underlying trabecular 
component, and the ascending aorta, with this vessel 
overriding the defect. 
Anatomy. In most cases, the malalignment VSD is a 
component of a conotruncal anomaly, such as tetralogy 
of Fallot, common arterial trunk, etc. (Figures 5.10 and 
5.11). These CHDs are described elesewhere in this 
chapter. Here, only isolated malalignment VSD will be 
described. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Malalignment VSD is detected 
only on the long axis view of the left ventricle, as already 
mentioned. The 4-chamber view is unremarkable, unless 
other anomalies of the atrioventricular junction are associated. 
The defect appears as an interruption of the 
subaortic component of the interventricular septum, 
with the residual part of the septum pointing to the middle 
of the aorta (Figure 5.29b) rather than to the anterior 
aortic wall, as in simple outlet VSD (Figure 5.29a). The 
aorta will consequently override the defect. On color 
Doppler, the classic ‘Y’ shape is detected, with the two 
arms of the ‘Y’ corresponding to ejection of blood from 
both ventricles into the ascending aorta (Figure 5.29b). 
Pulsed-wave Doppler is not useful. 
• Artifacts. As already mentioned, an artifact can occur 
when displaying the left outflow tract, i.e., a pseudomalalignment 
VSD, which can be created if the left 
outflow is approached too laterally (Figure 5.31b). It 
is sufficient to change the sonographic approach, 
adopting a perpendicular insonation of the 4-chamber 
and left outflow tract views to remove all artifacts. 
• Differential diagnosis. The first issue is to distinguish 
malalignment VSD from simple outlet VSD: this is 
done by verifying the presence or absence of the 
normal alignment between the residual part of the 
interventricular septum and the anterior aortic wall 
(Figure 5.29a,b). Secondly, the possibility of an 
artifact should be ruled out. Finally, the most important 
issue is to exclude the presence of more complex 
conotruncal anomalies and confirm that the malalignment 
VSD is isolated (Figures 5.10 and 5.11). 
• Prognostic indicators. The main prognostic indicator 
is the presence/absence of associated chromosomal 
anomalies and/or non-chromosomal syndromes. If 
these are present, then the prognosis is unfavorable. 
• Association with other malformations. This occurs 
only in the context of chromosomal anomalies or 
syndromic conditions. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high (50%), 
with trisomies 18, 13, and some rare chromosomal 
arrangements. In a minority of cases, a malalignment 
VSD can also be associated with the 22q11 microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. A large number of syndromic disorders may be 
associated with a malalignment VSD. In fact, the 
conotruncal area is often involved in the case of genetic 
or chromosomal conditions. 
Obstetric management. Should a malalignment VSD 
be detected in a fetus, the first issue is to exclude 
the defect as being a component of a more complex 
conotruncal anomaly. In addition, due to the high risk 
of chromosomal anomalies and syndromic conditions, 
both karyotyping and a thorough anatomy scan should 
be performed. With regard to the karyotyping, if there 
are other anomalies suggesting the possible presence of 
the 22q11 microdeletion, such as thymus aplasia, then 
a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of 
the DiGeorge critical region (DGCR) is warranted, in 
addition to classical G-banding. As with most CHDs, 
the presence of a malalignment VSD does not change 
the mode or timing of delivery. The lesion is not 
ductus-dependent, but the left-to-right shunt can 
be significant, and therefore the neonate should be 
transferred in the early neonatal period to a pediatric 
cardiology unit. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 139 
MALALIGNMENT VSD 
Incidence. Relatively high. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Long axis of the left ventricle: defect of the subaortic component of the septum, with 
anterior displacement of the infundibular septum and consequent aortic overriding. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high (50%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high. 
Outcome. Good if isolated, unfavorable if associated with syndromic and chromosomal disorders. 

Postnatal therapy. A malalignment VSD, due to its architecture, 
cannot close spontaneously. Besides, the shunt is 
significant, and this generally leads to the need for surgical 
closure by 3–6 months of age. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the defect is 
isolated, the prognosis is good, with optimal survival rates 
and normal quality of life. If chromosomal anomalies or 
syndromes are associated, the prognosis is very poor. 
140 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (AVSD) 
Incidence. Very high. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view. Complete AVSD – common atrium; single atrioventricular valve; wide 
ventricular defect. Partial AVSD: ostium primum ASD; two separate atrioventricular valves with loss of offset 
appearance on atrioventricular plane. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high (70%) for complete AVSD. Probably less, but not assessable in 
the fetus, for partial AVSD (low detection rate). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Cardiac outcome is good in isolated forms and in Down syndrome. Much poorer in forms associated 
with cardiosplenic syndromes. 
Definition. AVSD is also defined as atrioventricular canal 
or endocardial cushion defect; the last term underlines the 
embryologic origin of the defect, which derives from an 
abnormal fusion of the endocardial cushions at an 
embryonic age of 34–36 days. The blood enters the ventricles 
through the common atrioventricular valve and 
then divides over the residual interventricular septum. 
Anatomy. An AVSD consists of concurrent anomalies 
of the atrial septum, the atrioventricular plane and the 
interventricular septum. The complete form is characterized 
by a common atrium, a single atrioventricular valve 
(usually with five leaflets), deriving from a lack of separation 
of the two atrioventricular annuli, and a wide defect 
of the interventricular septum. As a result, the central 
crux of the heart is lacking. In most cases, the two ventricles 
are of normal size: in this case, the lesion is defined as 
balanced AVSD. If, on the contrary, one of the two ventricles 
is hypoplastic, the AVSD is defined as unbalanced. 
Incomplete or partial AVSD is characterized by an 
ostium primum ASD, two separate atrioventricular 
valves (with a cleft of the mitral valve undetectable in the 
fetus) and, occasionally, a small VSD (intermediate variant). 
AVSD, especially if unbalanced, can be associated 
with cardiosplenic syndromes. If this is the case, then 
other anomalies, such as double-outlet right ventricle, 
complete heart block, or pulmonary atresia, may be associated. 
The association of AVSD with tetralogy of Fallot 
is typical of Down syndrome. In a minority of cases, aortic 
coarctation can also be associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is made 
on the 4-chamber view. 
Complete AVSD (Figure 5.32) There is a common 
atrium, due to absence of the interatrial septum (scant 
remnants can be seen in some cases), and a common 
atrioventricular valve, deriving from the fusion of the 
two orifices. As a consequence, the normal offset aspect 
of the atrioventricular plane is lost, and this structure 
appears as a bar ‘doming’ towards the ventricles during 
the systole. A defect of the interventricular septum is 
always associated. The two ventricles can be of normal 
size, or one of the two can be severely hypoplastic, 
especially in the case of cardiosplenic syndromes (Figure 
5.33). The ventriculo-arterial connections should be 
checked, to rule out concurrent anomalies at this level, 
such as tetralogy of Fallot and double-outlet right ventricle. 
Color Doppler assessment reveals, in a complete, 
balanced AVSD, the common atrioventricular diastolic 
filling, with a Y-shaped color Doppler image (Figure 
5.32d). Insufficiency of the common atrioventricular 
valve should also be assessed (Figure 5.32c). In the case 
of unbalanced complete AVSD, color Doppler may help 
to define the degree of ventricular hypoplasia or, in the 
case of severely hypoplastic chambers, the absence of 
diastolic filling (Figure 5.33d). Pulsed-wave Doppler 
may be used to quantify common valve regurgitation, if 
present. 4D echocardiography may be used to assess the 
anatomy of the atrioventricular common valve, 
although it plays a secondary role in this case. 
Partial AVSD (Figure 5.34) The defect of the septum 
primum should be recognized, above the atrioventricular 
plane, on a transverse 4-chamber view. Also in this case, 
the offset aspect of the atrioventricular plane is lost, 
but the valves are separate. 

• Differential diagnosis. The differentiation from a 
simple inlet VSD is simple, as in the latter the atrial 
septum is normal and the offset aspect of the 
atrioventricular plane is unremarkable. With unbalanced 
AVSD, differentiation from a hypoplastic left 
heart or tricuspid atresia (according to the side of 
the hypoplastic ventricle) can be difficult (Figure 
5.33c,d). Assessment of the atrioventricular plane, 
with recognition of the common valve and the presence 
in hypoplastic left heart syndrome of an atretic 
threadlike aorta may help to resolve any doubt. 
Partial AVSD is difficult to diagnose due to the fact 
that its sonographic appearance is strikingly similar to 
that of a normal heart. 
• Prognostic indicators. The main poor prognostic indicator 
is the association with other CHD (especially 
cardiosplenic syndromes); significant regurgitation of 
the common atrioventricular valve can also represent 
a relatively bad prognostic indicator. If the AVSD is 
part of a complex syndrome, then the overall prognosis 
will be that of the underlying condition. 
• Association with other malformations. The association 
with cardiosplenic syndromes is consistent, ranging 
from 25% to 50% in most prenatal series.14,15,22,23 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high 
(40–70%). Complete balanced AVSD is the single anomaly 
most commonly associated with Down syndrome 
in the fetus.14,15,22,23 Much more rarely, AVSD can also be 
associated with other autosomal trisomies (13 and 18). 
On the contrary, if the AVSD is in the context of a cardiosplenic 
syndrome, the risk of a chromosomal anomaly 
is virtually absent, since this complex type of CHD 
seems to protect from such anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. 
In addition to cardiosplenic syndromes, AVSD can be 
associated with other syndromic conditions and skeletal 
dysplasias:12 
• Chondroectodermal dysplasia: Look for .AVSD (or 
ASD) + thoracic hypoplasia + postaxial polydactyly 
(hands) + acromesomelia. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 141 
Figure 5.32 Atrioventricular septal defect. (AVSD) complete, 
balanced (22 weeks’ gestation). This is characterized by a common 
atrium, a single atrioventricular valve, and a ‘high’ VSD of variable 
size. (a,b) on 2D ultrasound, during systole (a), the single atrioventricular 
plane, the loss of the normal offset appearance of the 
atrioventricular valves, and the interventricular and interatrial 
septal defects are seen. During diastole (b), the loss of the crux of 
the heart is seen. (c,d) On color Doppler, during systole (c), the 
insufficiency of the common atrioventricular valve can be seen, 
when present (arrowhead); during diastole, (d), the classic Yshaped 
sign of the ventricular inflow is shown. CA, common 
atrium; LV, left ventricle. 
Figure 5.33 Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) complete, 
unbalanced in atrial isomerism (21–22 weeks’ gestation). 
(a) Moderate ventricular disproportion (right ventricle larger 
than left). However, the azygos continuation (arrowhead) adjacent 
to the descending thoracic aorta should arouse suspicion of 
a situs abnormality. (b) Unbalanced AVSD, with severe hypoplasia 
of the right ventricle (arrow). (c) Unbalanced AVSD, with 
severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle (arrow). (d) In the same 
case as in (c), color Doppler demonstrates overriding of the atrioventricular 
valve and obstruction of the left part of the 
valve, responsible for the hypoplasia. CA, common atrium; 
RV, right ventricle. 
a b a c 
c d 
b d 

• Short rib–polydactyly: Look for.AVSD (inconstantly 
associated) + micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia + 
postaxial polydactyly. 
Obstetric management. If a balanced complete AVSD 
is detected in a fetus, and other cardiac defects are 
excluded (isomerism, double-outlet right ventricle, etc.), 
karyotyping is mandatory because of the extremely high 
risk of Down syndrome, which in the fetus is 50–70%. On 
the contrary, if the AVSD is a component of a cardioplenic 
syndrome, karyotyping may be avoided. With regard to 
partial AVSD, we believe that karyotyping is also warranted 
(regardless of the scanty data available in the fetus), 
because of the consistent association with Down syndrome 
reported in postnatal series. Obstetric management 
is not altered by detection of an AVSD: the lesion does not 
represent a neonatal emergency, if other cardiac defects are 
not associated. There is no need for in utero transport to a 
referral center. After birth, the neonate should be referred 
to a pediatric cardiology unit, which will take care of the 
subsequent management and follow-up. However, if 
AVSD is associated with cardiosplenic syndromes and/or 
other CHD, the delivery should be arranged in a tertiary 
referral center to allow adequate perinatal management. 
Postnatal therapy. Partial AVSD is generally asymptomatic, 
being basically an ASD. Only in a few cases is 
the cleft of the mitral valve (which is a component of 
the defect), so severe as to warrant treatment in the 
early neonatal period, especially if the left ventricle is 
hypoplastic: these are the worst cases, which need an 
early surgical approach. In complete balanced AVSD, 
radical surgery is generally performed between 3 and 
6 months of life: the surgical procedures include closure 
of the VSD and ASD with a patch and reconstruction 
of the two atrioventricular valves. The approach to 
unbalanced AVSD is much more difficult – it is a surgical 
procedure similar to that needed in the case of a univentricular 
heart, especially if the dominant chamber is the 
right one: in this case, a Norwood three-stage procedure 
is needed (see the section on hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome later in this chapter). 
142 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.34 Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) (29 weeks’ gestation). This is characterized by an atrial septal defect (ASD) of the 
ostium primum type (absence of the septum primum), with two atrioventricular valves, which do not show the normal offset aspect. (a,b) 
On 2D ultrasound, during systole (a), on the apical 4-chamber view, the lack of the normal offset aspect is seen (arrowheads). While in 
diastole (b), two separate atrioventricular valves are demonstrated. (c) Color Doppler helps to confirm the presence of the ASD and, when 
present, of the VSD (arrows). (d) In systole, but on the transverse 4-chamber view, the loss of the offset appearance of the atrioventricular 
valves is confirmed (arrowheads). (e) In diastole, the ostium primum defect is shown, just above the atrioventricular plane (arrow). 
(f) Color Doppler demonstrates flow across the ostium primum defect (arrow), across the normal foramen ovale (to the right of the ostium 
primum), and across the small VSD (to the left of the ostium primum). RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
d e f 
c 

Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The life 
expectancy of neonates with a partial AVSD is good, 
with a normal quality of life. The only cases with a 
significantly worse prognosis are those associated with a 
hypoplastic left ventricle and severe insufficiency of the 
abnormal mitral valve, which need early surgery. With 
respect to classic balanced complete AVSD, if surgical 
correction is performed when indicated (i.e., at 3–6 
months of life), the operative mortality rate is < 5%, with 
a similarly low incidence of complications (< 5%) and an 
89% intervention-free survival rate at 20 years. The 
association with Down syndrome does not alter life 
expectancy, and, conversely, the occurrence of an AVSD 
in individuals with Down syndrome does not seem to 
have any bad effect on prognosis, either. On the contrary, 
unbalanced AVSD has a very poor prognosis, with 
a high infant mortality rate, especially in the context of 
cardiosplenic syndromes.21,24 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 143 
TRICUSPID DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. 1% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view. The tricuspid valve appears thickened and hyperechoic; the leaflets show 
limited systo-diastolic excursion. Color Doppler demonstrates the degree of valvular insufficiency. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. If the lesion is isolated and of moderate severity, survival is very good. If there is associated pulmonary 
atresia, the prognosis depends on the features of this anomaly. 
Definition. There is a wide range of heterogeneous 
lesions that can be defined as tricuspid dysplasia. In the 
most severe cases, the leaflets are severely dysplastic, 
the chordae tendinae are hypoplastic, and consequently 
the degree of insufficiency will be high. At the other end 
of the spectrum, there are benign cases showing only 
mild thickening and limited malfunction. The latter cases 
are compatible with a virtually normal life. 
Anatomy. The mild forms may show only small nodular 
thickenings at the level of the free margins of the leaflets; 
in severely abnormal valves, the leaflet can be highly 
distorted, with anomalous insertion of the chordae tendinae 
on the ventricular walls. Tricuspid dysplasia rarely 
occurs as an isolated lesion: it is often associated with 
Ebstein’s anomaly and/or pulmonary atresia with intact 
ventricular septum. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the apical 4-chamber view, the 
leaflets of the tricuspid valve appear thickened and hyperechoic 
(Figure 5.35a) and show reduced systo-diastolic 
excursion with incomplete closure during systole. Color 
Doppler can be used to document the insufficiency of the 
dysplastic valve (Figure 5.35b): if the insufficiency is 
severe, the regurgitant high-velocity jet reaches the roof 
of the atrium and causes an inversion of the velocity 
waveform at the level of the ductus venosus. If tricuspid 
dysplasia is detected, it is of the utmost importance to 
assess the right pulmonary outflow, because pulmonary 
atresia is often associated. Spectral Doppler can be used 
to quantify the regurgitation. In the case of severe tricuspid 
insufficiency, cardiomegaly due to conspicuous right 
atrial enlargement and possibly signs of frank cardiac 
failure (e.g. pericardial effusion or hydrops) can be associated. 
It is important to note that the assessment of 
this type of lesion may benefit from 4D echocardiography: 
this technique allows a better appreciation of the 
anatomy and functional deficit of the dysplastic valve. In 
fact, 3D surface reconstruction allows visualization of the 
abnormal valve in planes that cannot be obtained with 
conventional 2D imaging (Figure 5.36). 
Figure 5.35 Tricuspid dysplasia (33 weeks’ gestation). (a) 4- 
chamber view demonstrating right atrial enlargement due to the 
severe dysplasia of the tricuspid valve (thickened and hyperechoic 
leaflets). (b) Color Doppler demonstrates the severe systolic regurgitation: 
the high-velocity jet reaches the posterior atrial wall and 
curves along the atrial wall towards the foramen ovale. The arrow 
indicates the left outflow tract. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

• Differential diagnosis. It is sometimes very difficult to 
differentiate some mild forms of tricuspid dysplasia 
from Ebstein’s anomaly, but it should be noted that 
the outcome of the two lesions is similarly favorable. 
On the contrary, it is extremely important in the 3rd 
trimester to differentiate moderate tricuspid dysplasia 
from premature constriction/closure of the ductus 
arteriosus: in both, the right ventricle and atrium can 
be dilated, but in the latter, the tricuspid valve is 
anatomically normal: the regurgitation is due to the 
high intraventricular pressure. Any doubt is solved 
when the 3-vessel view is assessed with color and spectral 
Doppler: in the case of premature constriction of 
the ductus arteriosus, there is a high velocity across a 
small ductus and the velocity waveform is characterized 
by an extremely high peak velocity and a PI <1.3, 
with high flow also during diastole.25 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor prognostic signs are 
the presence of heart failure (hydrops, ascites, pericardial 
and pleural effusions, and polyhydramnios), 
tachyarrhythmia, massive right atrial enlargement 
from severe tricuspid insufficiency, and absence of 
forward flow across the pulmonary valve (functional 
pulmonary atresia). However, these signs are usually 
present only if the resulting dysplasia is associated 
with pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. It should also 
be noted that, due to the physiopathology of the fetal 
heart, the tricuspid valve is the first site to be involved 
in the case of cardiac overload also from possible 
non-cardiac causes of high-output cardiac failure, 
such as twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome or sacrococcygeal 
teratoma. Therefore, the presence of such 
conditions can be considered a very poor prognostic 
sign. Finally, it should be noted that trivial tricuspid 
regurgitation, usually not associated with an underlying 
valve dysplasia, has recently been included among 
the soft markers of Down syndrome in both the 1st 
and in the 2nd trimesters.26 
Obstetric management. In the rare cases of severe tricuspid 
dysplasia with conspicuous insufficiency and heart 
failure, the perinatal mortality rate is very high: survival 
depends on delivery in a tertiary referral center allowing 
prompt transfer of the neonate to a pediatric cardiac 
surgery unit and/or neonatal intensive care unit. For less 
severe cases, if the degree of regurgitation is deemed 
severe enough to cause cyanosis at birth, delivery should 
take place in a tertiary referral center with an intensive 
care unit. If tricuspid regurgitation is trivial, there is no 
need for in utero transport, and the neonate can be 
assessed echocardiographically and clinically after a few 
days of life. 
Postnatal therapy. In the mild variant of tricuspid dysplasia, 
the simple switch from the fetal to the neonatal circulation, 
with consequent reduction of pressure levels in the 
right heart, leads to a dramatic improvement in the clinical 
situation, resulting in an immediate increase in oxygen 
saturation. On the contrary, the perinatal mortality 
rate is very high for the most severe cases, especially if 
heart failure is already present. However, isolated tricuspid 
dysplasia is rarely so severe as to cause heart failure. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In mild to moderate 
cases, life expectancy and quality of life are virtually 
normal. The rare forms of severe tricuspid dysplasia 
causing heart failure are responsible for a high rate of 
perinatal death. 
144 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.36 Tricuspid dysplasia with additional tissue on the 
valve, associated with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum (33 weeks’ gestation). 3D rendering enhances the visualization 
of dysplasia of the valve, the chordae tendinae and the 
papillary muscles. (a) 2D imaging, showing the thickened and 
hyperechoic tricuspid valve, with additional tissue on the leaflet 
(arrows), which determines severe insufficiency and atriomegaly. 
(b) 3D surface-rendering demonstrating the free movement of the 
additional tissue towards the atrium following the high-pressure 
regurgitant jet across the incompletely closed valve (arrow). (c) 
During diastole, the additional tissue is pushed within the right 
ventricle. (d) Positioning the region of interest within the right 
ventricle, it is possible to display the severe dyplasia, which 
involves the leaflets, the chordae tendinae, and the papillary muscles. 
The additional tissue is shown by the small arrows. LV, left 
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
c d 

Definition. Ebstein’s anomaly is characterized by a 
malformative complex of the tricuspid valve. The valve 
is downwardly displaced into the right ventricle. As 
a consequence, a variable part of the right ventricle is 
atrialized. 
Anatomy. The septal and posterior leaflets of the 
tricuspid valve do not insert at the annular level as 
usual, but remain adherent to the ventricular walls. 
These leaflets appear plastered down into the right ventricular 
wall, while the anterior leaflet, which has a normal 
insertion at the level of the annulus, is redundant 
(spinnaker-like) and shows multiple attachments on the 
walls of the right ventricle, limiting its excursion. The 
valve is always severely dysplastic. As a result, in 
Ebstein’s anomaly, the valve can be both stenotic and 
severely insufficient. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the most severe cases, on the 
transverse or apical 4-chamber view, the first finding is 
conspicuous cardiomegaly, mainly due to right atrial 
enlargement (Figure 5.37a). The septal and posterior 
leaflets of the dysplastic tricuspid valve appear to be 
inserted lower than the atrioventricular plane (Figure 
5.37a). The mean distance between the mitral and 
tricuspid attachments of the leaflet on the septum is 
> 8 mm, but can be lower in mild cases of Ebstein’s 
anomaly. The tricuspid leaflets appear thickened and 
show reduced systo-diastolic excursion. The right ventricle 
can be hypoplastic or dilated, if the valve is severely 
insufficient. Color Doppler assessment allows quantification 
of the severity of the regurgitation (Figure 5.37b). 
Finally, the concurrent presence of pulmonary atresia 
should be confirmed or excluded by checking the right 
outflow tract. 4D echocardiography allows detailed 
characterization of the abnormalities of the tricuspid 
valve (see pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum, Figure 5.19). 
• Differential diagnosis. It is sometimes difficult to 
differentiate isolated tricuspid dysplasia from mild 
cases of Ebstein’s anomaly, although there is little difference 
in terms of prognosis (what matters is the 
degree of insufficiency). What is important to differentiate 
from Ebstein’s anomaly is premature closure of 
the ductus arteriosus: both share severe tricuspid insufficiency, 
but in premature closure, the tricuspid is normal 
and there is high-velocity turbulent flow across 
the ductus arteriosus, which is absent in Ebstein’s 
anomaly. It is also important to differentiate the isolated 
form of Ebstein’s anomaly from the tricuspid 
dyplasia/insufficiency that is frequently seen in pulmonary 
atresia with intact ventricular septum. 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor sonographic prognostic 
indicators are: the presence of heart failure, with fetal 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 145 
Figure 5.37 Ebstein’s anomaly (35 weeks’ gestation). (a) Image 
showing the significant displacement of the tricuspid annulus 
within the right ventricle, with the dysplastic posterior and septal 
leaflets adhering to the interventricular septum (arrows). The consequent 
severe insufficiency is responsible for the huge cardiomegaly. 
(b) Color Doppler demonstrating the severe tricuspid insufficiency, 
with aliasing and turbulence at the level of the downwardly 
displaced valve (orange area). 
EBSTEIN’S ANOMALY 
Incidence. 1% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the apical 4-chamber view, the tricuspid valve is severely abnormal: the leaflets are 
thickened and hyperechoic, and the septal and posterior leaflets are plastered down into the right ventricular wall. 
Color Doppler investigation demonstrates the constant insufficiency of the valve. The frequently associated 
pulmonary atresia can be detected on the right-outflow views. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low: 3–5%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The prognosis is poor for most of the cases detected in utero. Mild Ebstein’s anomaly is rarely detected 
before birth. 
a b 

hydrops; massive cardiomegaly due to severe right 
atrial enlargement; an enlarged right ventricle with 
thin and acontractile walls; and absence of forward 
flow in the pulmonary artery, indicative of functional 
and/or anatomic atresia. 
• Association with other malformations. Ebstein’s anomaly 
is usually sporadic and not associated with other 
major anomalies. As far as the heart is concerned, ASD 
and pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum 
are the defects most commonly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low 
(3–5%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be discussed 
with the parents, as the incidence of chromosomal 
anomalies is low. The mother should be referred to a tertiary 
center for delivery: the possibility of respiratory distress 
and/or of pump failure in severe cases may require 
resuscitation and active cardiovascular management. 
Postnatal therapy. In severe cases, the neonate shows heart 
failure, cardiomegaly and cyanosis. In favorable cases, 
with the fall in pulmonary resistance that occurs after a 
few days of life, the tricuspid regurgitation decreases significantly 
and the oxygen saturation improves. These cases 
usually remain asymptomatic for years, and surgical 
correction (tricuspid valvuloplasty with right ventricular 
folding and closure of the ASD) can be delayed for several 
years. The short- and long-term results of this elective 
surgery are good, with an early mortality rate of lesser 
than 5% and a 20-year survival rate of greater than 90%, 
with a reintervention rate of 5%. However, most of the 
cases detected in the fetus have a different course: they 
need intensive respiratory assistance, and nitric oxide and 
prostaglandin E1 infusion to decrease pulmonary resistance 
and prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus. If pulmonary 
atresia is associated, it may be necessary to 
proceed to radiofrequency or surgical opening of the pulmonary 
valve and to a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt 
(modified Blalock–Taussig shunt) to mantain adequate 
pulmonary blood flow. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Defining the outcome 
of Ebstein’s anomaly is difficult, bearing in mind 
that there are cases who die in utero and cases who live 
an almost normal life. As already mentioned, most of 
the cases detected in utero are at the worse end of the 
spectrum, often showing severe cardiomegaly and heart 
failure. This is due to the fact that only those cases 
in which the 4-chamber view is severely abnormal are 
recognized in utero. In fetal series, the overall intrauterine 
mortality rate is as high as 40%; 20–30% die in the 
neonatal period and the remaining 30% survive more 
than 1 month. Neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly requiring 
intensive care have a 50% mortality rate, but if they 
survive more than 1 month, then the life expectancy 
increases. 
146 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TRICUSPID ATRESIA 
Definition. In tricuspid atresia, the right atrioventricular 
connection is absent due to complete atresia or imperforation 
of the tricuspid valve. 
Anatomy. Tricuspid atresia is characterized by absence 
of the right atrioventricular connection. The valve can be 
completely atretic, with the connection being replaced by 
a fibrous bar, or, rarely, can be imperforate. The small 
rudimentary right ventricle is displaced anterosuperiorly 
and fills through a constantly associated inlet VSD. 
The ventriculo-arterial junction can be concordant or, 
less often, discordant. In rare instances, a double outlet 
from the left or the hypoplastic right ventricle can be 
associated. A type II (ostium secundum) ASD is often 
associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
4-chamber view: there is a dominant left ventricle, a 
Incidence. Low: 0.7–2% of CHD in the fetus and neonate, respectively. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view: the right atrioventricular valve is atretic, the right ventricle 
is hypoplastic, and a VSD is constantly associated. The outflow tract views should be sought to exclude 
ventriculo-arterial discordance, which can be associated in 30% of cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low: 2%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Good. In cases without ventriculo-arterial discordance, survival rates reach 65–70% at 15 years. Life 
expectancy decreases in case of ventriculo-arterial discordance and/or if other malformations are associated. 

rudimentary right ventricular chamber, and a small VSD 
allowing filling of the right ventricle (Figure 5.38a). The 
tricuspid valve is absent and replaced by hyperechoic 
fibrous tissue. Color Doppler can be used to confirm the 
absence of right atrioventricular filling, to demonstrate 
flow across the VSD, and to assess the ventriculo-arterial 
connection (Figure 5.38b). 4D echocardiography may 
help in assessing the ventriculo-arterial connection. 
• Differential diagnosis. The diagnosis of tricuspid atresia 
is relatively simple. However, care should be taken 
to identify the side of the hypoplastic chamber so as 
not to mistake a tricuspid atresia for a hypoplastic left 
heart (see later in this chapter) or vice versa, given the 
completely different prognoses of the two lesions! 
Another rare anomaly to be differentiated from tricuspid 
atresia is an unbalanced complete AVSD with 
a dominant left ventricle: in this case, recognition of 
the common atrioventricular valve and the frequent 
association of cardiosplenic syndrome may orientate 
the diagnosis towards unbalanced AVSD. 
• Prognostic indicators. The association of ventriculoarterial 
discordance and/or of a double outlet connection 
represents one of the most important poor 
prognostic factors. A restrictive VSD is also a relatively 
poor prognostic factor, possibly indicating the 
need for early surgery. 
• Association with other malformations. Except for the 
already-mentioned cardiac anomalies, there is no particular 
association with extracardiac malformations. 
Fetal growth retardation (FGR) is frequently 
observed in tricuspid atresia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low (2%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be 
discussed with the parents, as the incidence of chromosomal 
anomalies is low. Fetal growth should be monitored, 
given the relatively high incidence of FGR. It is 
advisable for delivery to occur in a tertiary referral 
center, although in most cases the VSD provides a wide 
enough shunt so that the lesion is not ductus-dependent. 
However, in the few cases in which the VSD is restrictive, 
the lesion becomes ductus-dependent and should 
be managed accordingly. In addition, the frequent association 
of impaired prenatal growth should further support 
the need for in utero transport to a tertiary referral 
center. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical corrective procedures aim at 
bypassing the hypoplastic right ventricle, creating a connection 
between the right atrium and the pulmonary 
trunk. The Fontan operation consists of a cavopulmonary 
shunt. This is obtained with the following steps: 
• The pulmonary trunk is disconnected from its valve 
and the two orifices are closed. 
• The superior vena cava is cut prior to its entrance in 
the right atrium. 
• The distal stump is then sutured to the upper wall of 
the right pulmonary artery, while the proximal stump 
is sutured to the inferior wall of the same artery. 
• An atrial septal defect is created and a synthetic 
Goretex or Dacron conduct is placed in the right 
atrium to connect the inferior vena cava to the superior 
vena cava so that the whole of the systemic return 
is directed into the pulmonary artery. 
• Alternatively, the pulmonary trunk can be connected 
directly to the roof of the right atrium. 
In general, the Fontan operation is performed at 18–30 
months of life; it cannot be done earlier due to the relatively 
high pulmonary pressures occurring in the neonate. 
As a result, if the neonate is severely hypoxic, or in case of 
contraindications to the Fontan operation (e.g. small pulmonary 
branches) the only chances of survival are related 
to a palliative systemic-to-pulmonary shunt, such as the 
Glenn operation (anastomosis between the superior vena 
cava and the right pulmonary artery). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. According to 
a number of authors, if candidates for the Fontan procedure 
are selected carefully, the 3-year survival rate 
is 80%, with most patients in New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) class I/II. The best results, in terms 
of survival and cardiac function, are obtained if surgery 
is performed at 4–7 years of age; survival decreases 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 147 
Figure 5.38 Tricuspid atresia (22 weeks’ gestation). (a) On the 
4-chamber view, the atresia of the right atrioventricular valve, the 
hypoplastic right ventricle, and the small inlet VSD (arrow) are evident; 
note also the ASD (ostium secundum), which is frequently 
associated with tricuspid atresia. (b) On color Doppler, the absence 
of the right inflow is confirmed. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

significantly if the correction is carried out later than 
7 years of age. According to other series, with longer 
follow-up, the survival curve also continues to decrease 
several years after the correction, with survival rates of 
70%, 65%, and 50% at 5, 10, and 15 years, respectively. 
This steady loss of patients is due to progressive 
deterioration of ventricular function. This makes the 
Fontan operation a good palliative procedure, but not a 
corrective operation. The operative mortality rates for 
palliative aortopulmonary shunting procedures are low, 
averaging 5%. If a successful Fontan operation cannot 
be performed, long-term survival is nonetheless reasonably 
good, with survival rates of 85% and 50% at 10 
and 20 years, respectively. 
148 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
PULMONARY STENOSIS 
Incidence. Very low in the fetus; up to 9% of all CHD in the neonate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the right outflow tract views, the pulmonary valve appears thickened and hyperechoic, 
with reduced systo-diastolic excursion. Post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary trunk and moderate late-onset right 
ventricular hypertrophy can be present. On color Doppler, there is high-velocity turbulent flow across the 
pulmonary valve. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Moderate. 
Outcome. Favorable. In syndromic cases (Noonan), the overall prognosis depends on the underlying condition. 
Definition. Pulmonary stenosis is a narrowing of the 
pulmonary outflow due to a dysplastic semilunar valve. 
The critical form of pulmonary stenosis will not be 
described here, but in the next section, together with 
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. 
Anatomy. Pulmonary stenosis is usually due to partial 
fusion of the pulmonary valve cusps, which causes 
incomplete opening and a doming appearance of the 
semilunar valve during systole. Less frequently, the 
stenosis can be due to dysplasia and nodularity of cusps 
that are not fused. The degree of obstruction is variable 
and usually progressive. This tendency to worsen with 
time is present both in prenatal and in postnatal life,15,27 
and also explains why pulmonary stenosis is frequently 
overlooked in utero. The right ventricle is usually unremarkable 
until late in gestation, when it may develop 
moderate myocardial hypertrophy. However, the classic 
tripartite aspect of the right ventricle is not lost (inlet, 
trabecular part, outlet). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the right outflow 
views (long/short axis of the right ventricle): the pulmonary 
valve is thickened, hyperechoic and hypomobile 
(Figure 5.39a). The valvular cusps remain visible in the 
lumen of the vessel throughout the cardiac cycle, while 
the normal valve disappears during systole as the cusps 
flatten along the arterial walls. Post-stenotic ectasia 
of the pulmonary trunk is often associated (Figure 
5.39a,b). On the 4-chamber view, moderate late-onset 
right myocardial wall thickening and hypertrophy may be 
seen in a few cases of moderately severe stenosis; however, 
the ejection function is almost never depressed (Figure 
5.39c). Color Doppler investigation of the right outflow 
tract demonstrates high-velocity flow across the pulmonary 
valve, with a color signal that shows laminar flow 
up to the annular level and turbulent flow with a mosaic 
pattern from the annulus onwards (Figure 5.39b). In some 
cases, the dysplasia of the valve can also cause regurgitation, 
which is never severe. Spectral Doppler sampling 
allows quantification of the transvalvular gradient: mild 
to moderate stenoses are characterized by peak velocities 
of 1.5–2 m/s, whereas moderately severe stenoses show 
peak velocities of 3–3.5 m/s. 4D echocardiography may 
be used to study the abnormal pulmonary valve. 
• Differential diagnosis. This is virtually absent. If the 
valvular anomaly is overlooked, the right ventricular 
hypertrophy may be mistaken for an indirect sign of 
aortic coarctation (see later in this chapter). 
• Prognostic indicators. A doming almost fixed valve 
recognized in the 2nd trimester is likely to seal and 
become atretic later in gestation. A concurrent moderate 
nuchal thickening or simple hygroma is one of the 
fetal findings, together with pulmonary stenosis, more 
commonly associated with Noonan syndrome. 
• Natural history. As already pointed out, pulmonary 
stenosis may actually appear only in the 3rd trimester 
or worsen signficantly after 28–30 weeks’ gestation, 
sometimes evolving into pulmonary atresia.15,27 

Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Occasionally, pulmonary stenosis may be associated 
with Down syndrome. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is moderate. 
The only risk is Noonan syndrome, which is not prospectively 
diagnosable in utero. Furthermore, when pulmonary 
stenosis occurs in the context of Noonan 
syndrome, it is usually of late onset. 
Obstetric management. Should pulmonary stenosis be 
detected in a fetus, the need for karyotyping is questionable 
and should be discussed with the parents. Obstetric 
and labor management are not changed and delivery can 
occur in a local hospital, unless the stenosis has evolved 
into pulmonary atresia at the last pre-partum follow-up 
scan. After birth, the neonate should be referred to a 
pediatric cardiology unit for confirmation of the diagnosis 
and follow-up. 
Postnatal therapy. Individuals with mild forms of pulmonary 
stenosis may remain asymptomatic and show no 
need for surgery. In those patients in which the stenosis 
worsens with time and for whom an intervention is 
deemed necessary, the procedure of choice is balloon 
valvuloplasty by interventional catheterization, which 
achieves good results in most cases. If the valve is difficult 
to dilate, surgical valvulotomy should be performed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
extremely good, with normal life expectancy and quality 
of life in most cases. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 149 
Incidence. Relatively low: 1–5% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the right outflow tract views, the pulmonary valve is absent/imperforate and the 
pulmonary trunk/branches may be moderately small or severely hypoplastic. On the 4-chamber view, the right 
ventricle is hypoplastic if the tricuspid valve is atretic, and dilated if the tricuspid valve is insufficient. 
Risk of chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Moderate to good, despite the fact that surgery is only palliative in most cases. 
Figure 5.39 Moderate pulmonary stenosis (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) 2D imaging demonstrates a dysplastic (hyperechoic and thickened) 
pulmonary valve (arrows), which does not open completely during systole. Note the slight post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary trunk. 
(b) On color Doppler, the blood flow changes from laminar to turbulent, with aliasing and increased velocity when it passes through the 
stenotic valve. (c) Only in rare cases, and late in gestation, does moderate pulmonary stenosis cause hypertrophy of the free myocardial 
wall of the right ventricle (arrowheads) – evident on the 4-chamber view. Ao, ascending aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SVC, 
superior vena cava; Pa, pulmonary artery. 
PULMONARY ATRESIA WITH INTACT VENTRICULAR SEPTUM (PAIVS) 
Definition. Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum (PAIVS) is characterized by an absent right 
ventriculo-arterial connection, often associated with 
concurrent significant anomalies of the tricuspid valve 
and the right ventricle. 
Anatomy. In PAIVS, the whole right heart is abnormal, 
with a wide range of lesions. The primary lesion is atresia 
of the pulmonary valve: this can be completely absent or 
can be the consequence of a critical pulmonary stenosis 
in which the semilunar valve cusps have fused. In the 
a b c 

former instance, the pulmonary trunk and branches will 
be severely hypoplastic, even threadlike; if the atresia is 
the final stage of a former critical stenosis, the pulmonary 
vessels can be moderately small or normal in size. In most 
cases of PAIVS, the tricuspid valve is atretic or severely 
dysplastic, with the type of abnormality determining the 
appearance of the right ventricle. If the tricuspid valve 
is atretic, the whole complex becomes a hypoplastic 
right heart syndrome (tricuspid and pulmonary atresia, 
hypoplastic right ventricle), which is the mirror image of 
the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. On the contrary, if 
the tricuspid valve is dysplastic and severely insufficient, 
as in most cases, the right ventricle will be severely 
dilated. It should be underlined that in about one-third of 
cases of PAIVS, fistulas connecting the right ventricular 
chamber with coronary circulation are found: these are 
indeed sinusoids, the difference being that the fistulas are 
acquired lesions whereas the sinusoids are remnants of 
the embryonic circulation. When multiple, these sinusoids 
may cause severe coronary artery stenosis, and 
this in turn may be responsible for a dependency of the 
coronary circulation on the right ventricle. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of 
PAIVS is not suspected on the views of the outflow tracts 
but on the 4-chamber view, as for the left heart counterpart, 
represented by critical aortic stenosis (see the next 
section of this chapter). In fact, severe anomalies of the 
tricuspid valve and the right ventricle are associated in 
virtually all cases of PAIVS. Once the suspicion has been 
raised, direct evidence of pulmonary atresia is then 
sought on the right outflow tract views, where the 
absence/imperforation of the pulmonary valve together 
with the reduced size of the pulmonary trunk and 
branches are detected. The abnormalities found on the 
4-chamber view depend on the anatomy of the tricuspid 
valve: if the tricuspid valve is dysplastic, then severe right 
atrial enlargement and right ventricular dilatation are 
usually present, due to the conspicuous insufficiency of 
the atrioventricular valve (Figure 5.40a) if, on the contrary, 
it is atretic, the right ventricle will be extremely 
hypoplastic, the whole cluster of right heart anomalies 
featuring the hypoplastic right heart syndrome (Figure 
5.40c). Direct evidence of the primary lesion, namely the 
atresia of the pulmonary valve, is recognized on right outflow 
tract views: as already mentioned, if the valve is 
absent, the pulmonary trunk and branches will be barely 
visible (Figure 5.41a,b); if the atresia is the final stage of a 
critical stenosis, then the pulmonary vessels will be only 
moderately reduced in size or normal, while the valve will 
appear sealed and doming towards the pulmonary valve 
without opening (Figure 5.41c). Color Doppler investigation 
allows detection of the reverse flow at the level of the 
ductal arch on the 3-vessel view, which demonstrates the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation (Figure 
5.41b,c). On the 4-chamber view, color Doppler may 
allow detection of the coronary sinusoids, if present. 
Spectral Doppler can be used to quantify the regurgitation 
of the tricuspid valve. 4D echocardiography allows 
characterization of the tricuspid valvular abnormalities 
(Figure 5.40b). 
• Differential diagnosis. The main entity to be differentiated 
from PAIVS is pulmonary atresia with VSD 
(PAVSD), which represents a completely different 
defect, both embryologically and hemodynamically. 
However, this task is easily carried out by displaying 
the interventricular septum on the left outflow view: if 
the septum is intact, the diagnosis will be PAIVS, 
whereas if there is a malalignment VSD with aortic 
150 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.40 Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. The diagnosis is suspected on the 4-chamber view, where the aspect of 
the right ventricle depends on the functional status of the tricuspid valve: (a) if the tricuspid valve is dysplastic and insufficient, the right 
ventricle and atrium are dilated (33 weeks’ gestation); (b) if the tricuspid valve has an abnormal septal attachment (arrow), then there is 
an associated Ebstein’s anomaly (24 weeks’ gestation); (c) if the tricuspid valve is atretic, then the ventricle is hypoplastic (arrowheads) 
and the whole malformative complex mirrors the hypoplastic left heart syndrome (tricuspid atresia, hypoplastic right ventricle, pulmonary 
atresia – hypoplastic right heart; 21 weeks’ gestation). LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b c 

overriding, then the diagnosis will be PAVSD (see later 
in this chapter). In the case of Ebstein’s anomaly with 
severe tricuspid regurgitation and right atrial enlargement, 
it is sometimes hard to determine whether the 
pulmonary valve is patent and the forward flow is 
reduced due to the concurrent tricuspid insufficiency, 
which represents a low-pressure outflow for the blood 
in the right ventricle, or whether the pulmonary valve 
is indeed atretic. Careful evaluation of the pulmonary 
outflow with low-pulse repetition frequency color 
Doppler may help resolve the doubt. 
• Prognostic indicators. It has been demonstrated that 
PAIVS has a worse prognosis if the right ventricle 
is dilated, whereas survival is higher if the ventricle 
is either moderately diminutive or hypoplastic.27 
Another poor prognostic factor is the presence of 
coronary sinusoids and, above all, of a right ventricledependent 
coronary circulation, which cannot be 
diagnosed with certainty in the fetus. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Should PAIVS be detected in a 
fetus, karyotyping is not mandatory, and this option 
should be discussed with the parents. The mother should 
be referred to a tertiary center for delivery, due to the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation. In fact, 
prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) infusion in the early neonatal 
period is mandatory to prevent closure of the ductus 
arteriosus until surgery is scheduled. 
Postnatal therapy. The best approach to the neonate 
with PAIVS is still controversial, although most authors 
agree that, to attempt to rescue the right ventricle, 
prompt reopening of the right outflow is considered the 
top priority. This task can be carried out with a surgical 
valvulotomy, often associated with aortopulmonary 
shunting. This allows later reassessment of the functional 
recovery of the right ventricle, which is the key parameter 
to consider for the selection of the most appropriate 
surgical procedure. If the right ventricle is indeed functioning, 
then a biventricular repair can be perfomed (closure 
of the atrial septal defect and of the aortopulmonary 
shunt, associated with removal of the residual infundibular 
obstruction if needed). Alternatively, if doubts about 
the right ventricular function are still present, a one and 
a half ventricular repair can be selected (the same procedures 
as above, together with a cavopulmonary anastomosis). 
If the right ventricle remains hypoplastic or 
acontractile, then a univentricular Fontan-like repair is 
chosen. This multistep approach yields an early mortality 
rate of 15–35% and a late mortality rate of 20%, 
with a 30% rate of biventricular repair, a 60% rate 
of one and a half ventricular repair, and a 10% rate of 
univentricular repair. In recent years, perforation of the 
pulmonary valve with radiofrequency or laser via interventional 
catheterization, followed by balloon dilatation, 
has become the procedure of choice. In this 
protocol, if after 2–3 weeks of PGE1 infusion the right 
ventricle does not regain its contractility and, despite a 
successful decompression, is unable to provide at least a 
75% oxygen saturation at rest, an aortopulmonary 
shunt is additionally performed. This type of approach 
using interventional catheterization seems to yield better 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 151 
Figure 5.41 Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. The diagnosis, suspected on the 4-chamber view (Figure 5.40) is confirmed 
on the right outflow tract view. (a) 2D-dimensional imaging demonstrating the severely hypoplastic pulmonary trunk and branches (arrowheads); 
in this case, it was a functional atresia, demonstrated by the apparently patent valve (31 weeks’ gestation; see text). (b) On the 3- 
vessel view, color Doppler demonstrates reverse flow across the ductus arteriosus and the hypoplastic pulmonary artery, due to the valve 
atresia (arrowhead) (this is the same case as in Figure 5.40(c): hypoplastic right heart). (c) If the atresia of the pulmonary valve is a late evolutionary 
event of a former moderate stenosis, then the size of the pulmonary artery is not affected, and the atresia is demonstrated by reverse 
flow across a normally sized pulmonary artery (34 weeks’ gestation) (arrow). Ao, aorta; D and DA, ductus arteriosus; HRH, hypoplastic 
right heart; PA, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b c 

results than those obtained with the above-mentioned 
multistep protocol: the early mortality rate is 0–20% 
and the rate of biventricular repair reaches 75%. 
However, if the hypoplasia of the right ventricle is severe 
(presence of the inlet part only) or in the case of right 
ventricle-dependent coronary circulation, the opening of 
the pulmonary valve is impossible or contraindicated, 
since this would often lead to severe left ventricular 
ischemia. Both circumstances require a Rashkind septostomy 
and an aortopulmonary shunt to warrant an 
adequate pulmonary blood flow. Later, these patients 
may require a Fontan operation or, as a last resort, 
cardiac transplantation. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. PAIVS can cause 
intrauterine demise, if the degree of tricuspid insufficiency 
is severe and heart failure ensues relatively early in 
gestation. These cases show a 40% intrauterine mortality 
rate, with an additional early neonatal mortality 
of 35–45%. On the contrary, if the tricuspid valve is 
atretic or only moderately dysplastic, the disease is well 
tolerated in utero and cardiac decompensation is rare. In 
fetal series, PAIVS is associated with an intrauterine 
mortality rate of 10% (excluding cases undergoing 
termination of pregnancy) and a survival rate beyond 
the 1st month of life of 63%.28 Post-natal prognosis 
depends, as already pointed out, on the following: 
• The size of the right ventricle and the anatomy of the 
tricuspid valve. In the case of moderate ventricular 
hypoplasia, the mortality rate is less than 5%, the life 
expectancy is almost normal, and additional surgical 
procedures are rarely necessary. In the case of severe 
ventricular hypoplasia, the mortality rate ranges from 
15% to 35% and both the life expectancy and the 
quality of life depend on the need for additional 
surgery. 
• The presence of severe coronary stenoses and/or of a 
right ventricle-dependent coronary circulation. These 
poor prognostic features are often found in cases with 
extremely hypoplastic right ventricles, in which the 
mortality rate can exceed 70%. 
152 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
HYPOPLASTIC LEFT HEART SYNDROME (HLHS) 
Incidence. HLHS occurs in approximately 1 in 10 000 live births. 
Diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view: complete absence of the left ventricle (mitral and aortic atresia) or a small 
globular left ventricle with endocardial fibroelastosis. Retrograde flow in the aortic arch and ascending aorta is 
present on color Doppler. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (up to 15%) in the fetus; 3–4% in postnatal life. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Poor, with high postnatal mortality and morbidity. 
Definition. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) 
includes a spectrum of heterogeneous conditions characterized 
by severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle and 
left ventricular outflow tract. 
Anatomy. There are two forms of hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome: the first is characterized by mitral and aortic 
atresia, the second by aortic atresia and a hypoplastic 
but patent mitral valve.29 In the former type, there is no 
communication between the left atrium and the left ventricle 
due to mitral atresia or imperforation. As a result, 
the left ventricle is a virtual cavity, often recognizable 
only from the outside of the heart on the basis of the 
course of the anterior and posterior coronary branches 
(autopsy). In the other form of HLHS, the mitral valve is 
hypoplastic but patent; in this case, the left ventricle is 
hypoplastic but has a lumen that can be easily recognized. 
It should be stressed that other cardiac anomalies, 
characterized by severe hypoplasia of left cardiac 
sections, that are unable to support systemic circulation,
30 are included under the term HLHS. These are represented 
by some forms of critical aortic stenosis, by the 
Shone complex (which is characterized by anomalies of 
the mitral valve, coarctation of the aorta, and subaortic 
stenosis), and by unbalanced atrioventricular septal 
defect with right ventricular dominance. Aortic coarctation 
is associated in 70% of cases of HLHS. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, either a 
small globular ventricle with endocardial fibroelastosis 
(Figure 5.42a) or a slit-like ventricle (mitral and aortic 
atresia; Figure 5.42b,c) are detected on the left side of the 
heart. By definition, the hypoplastic left ventricle never 
reaches the apex of the heart (Figure 5.42). The mitral 
valve is atretic or with a hypoplastic annulus. On the 
long-axis view of the left ventricle, it is possible to 
observe with difficulty a threadlike ascending aorta and 
the extremely hypoplastic annulus of the aortic valve. 

On the 4-chamber view, color Doppler confirms the 
absence of filling of the left ventricle (Figure 5.42c) and 
demonstrates reverse (left-to-right) flow across the foramen 
ovale and mitral regurgitation, in those cases characterized 
by a patent and dysplastic mitral valve. On the 
3-vessel view, color Doppler demonstrates the retrograde 
flow in the hypoplastic aortic arch (Figure 5.42d). 
Lastly, it should be underlined that, due to the severity of 
the anomalies, HLHS is among the CHDs that may also 
be diagnosed at 13–16 weeks. Spectral Doppler and 4D 
echocardiography do not play a significant diagnostic 
role in this type of CHD. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
between critical aortic stenosis, severe coarctation, 
and hypoplastic left heart syndrome may be difficult 
at times. Failure to demonstrate forward blood flow 
across the mitral or aortic valve favors the diagnosis 
of HLHS. 
• Prognostic indicators. The cases in which the size 
of the ascending aorta is >2 mm at birth can be selected 
for Norwood correction. However, most of the cases 
detected in utero do not belong to this group, having 
severely hypoplastic threadlike ascending aorta. 
• Natural history. HLHS can occur as such from the 
beginning or can be the final evolved stage of critical 
aortic stenosis and, rarely, of aortic coarctation. In 
addition, there are anecdotal cases reported by centers 
of proven experience where a diagnosis of a normal 
heart at echocardiography performed at 20 weeks 
was followed by the recognition of HLHS in the 3rd 
trimester. 
• Association with other malformations. Cardiac 
anomalies (dextrocardia and tricuspid dysplasia) and 
extracardiac anomalies (vertebral, urinary, and gastrointestinal 
anomalies) are associated in 15–20% of 
cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(up to 15%) in the fetus, but lower in postnatal life 
(3–4%). The most frequent chromosomal anomaly is 
monosomy X (45X), followed by trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should HLHS be detected in the 
fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because of the high risk 
of aneuploidy. In the case of continuation of pregnancy, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, as 
the systemic circulation is ductus-dependent due to the 
aortic atresia. 
Postnatal therapy. HLHS represents a neonatal emergency 
and therefore should be managed by infusion of 
prostaglandin E1 to keep the ductus patent until surgery. 
Surgical solutions to HLHS are neonatal heart transplantation 
or a series of palliative operations aiming in 
the beginning at reconstructing the systemic ventricular 
outflow using the only residual ventricular pump represented 
by the right ventricle. However, as already underlined, 
a high proportion of fetal cases are excluded from 
any type of surgery, because of the extreme degree of 
aortic hypoplasia. The three-stage Norwood palliation 
converts the cardiac system into a univentricular heart 
with the systemic circulation supported by the reconstructed 
right ventricle, the Fontan circulation. The 
Norwood procedure is performed in three stages. Stage I, 
which is carried out soon after birth, consists of a complex 
prosthetic reconstruction of the entire ascending 
aorta, the arch, and the aortic isthmus, obtained by 
connecting the trunk of the pulmonary artery with the 
neo-aorta (after separation of the bifurcation of the pulmonary 
branches) and creating a pulmonary systemic 
shunt. Stage II is done at 3–6 months of age and consists 
of a direct terminolateral anastomosis between the superior 
vena cava and the right pulmonary artery: bidirectional 
cavopulmonary anastomosis. In stage III, the two 
circulations are completely separated, directing the 
blood coming from the inferior vena cava towards the 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 153 
Figure 5.42 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. (a) At 22 weeks’ 
gestation, on the 4-chamber view, the severe hypoplasia of the left 
ventricle, transformed into a virtual cavity due to the mitral atresia 
(arrowhead) is evident. (b) At 32 weeks’ gestation, there is severe 
hypoplasia of the left ventricle, which is slit-like (arrowhead). (c) In 
the same case as in (a), color Doppler demonstrates the mitral atresia 
(absence of left ventricular filling). (d) On the 3-vessel view, the 
reverse flow across the hypoplastic aortic arch (in red, arrowhead) 
(associated tubular hypoplasia) confirms the aortic atresia. 
a b 
c d 

pulmonary arteries, usually through an extracardiac 
duct (total cavopulmonary). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Despite the recent 
brilliant achievements of pediatric cardiosurgery, HLHS 
continues to be the congenital cardiac defect with the 
highest mortality. Survival beyond the neonatal period, 
based on the data reported in fetal series, and excluding 
termination of pregnancy, varies from 4% to 25%. In 
the neonatal series, the survival rate after the Norwood 
operation (stages I and II) is, in the best centers, 65% and 
55% at 1 month and 1 year respectively. The discrepancy 
between these data is justified by the fact that the 
neonatal series include a selected population of ideal candidates 
for the Norwood procedure, and not all neonates 
born with HLHS. It should also be borne in mind that 
in a significant percentage of cases, a hypoxic cerebral 
deficit develops between the first and second operations. 
154 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
AORTIC STENOSIS 
Definition. Obstructions to left ventricular outflow can 
be classified on the basis of the site of the obstruction 
into valvular, subvalvular, and supravalvular stenosis. 
The single variant that is consistently detected in the 
fetus is the valvular one; in this case, the valvular ring is 
often of normal size and the stenosis is the result of the 
valvular dysplasia. 
Anatomy. In valvular stenosis, the anatomy of the valve 
may be completely distorted, with dysplastic cusps of 
mucoid appearance, or mostly preserved, with distinct 
valvular cusps that are fused along the commissures. The 
valve may have three cusps, be bicuspid or, exceptionally, 
be mono- or quadricuspid. When associated with other 
anomalies of the left heart, the annulus is frequently 
hypoplastic. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound picture of aortic 
valvular stenosis depends on the severity of the obstruction. 
On the 4-chamber view, in moderate to severe aortic 
stenosis, the left ventricle appears globose and hypertrophic, 
with a good systolic function. In critical aortic 
stenosis, the picture depends on the function of the mitral 
valve: if the mitral valve is damaged, either concurrently 
or secondary to the aortic valve lesion, then severe atrioventricular 
insufficiency is present, and this leads to severe 
left atrial enlargement (Figure 5.43a); if, on the contrary, 
the mitral valve is hypoplastic, then the valve is almost 
closed and only a reduced regurgitation is present (Figure 
5.43b). The left ventricle is usually globose and dilated, 
and its contractility is severely impaired. In these cases, the 
ventricular endocardium and, to a lesser extent, the papillary 
muscles of the mitral valve are brightly hyperechoic 
because of secondary ischemia-induced fibroelastosis 
(Figure 5.43c). On the long-axis view of the left ventricle, 
the aortic valvular cusps appear thickened and almost 
immobile (Figure 5.43d). Occasionally, a post-stenotic 
ectasia of the ascending aorta is seen, although, in the 
most severe forms, this vessel is frequently hypoplastic. In 
critical aortic stenosis, color Doppler can be used to assess 
mitral regurgitation (Figure 5.43b) and to reveal inversion 
of the interatrial shunt on the 4-chamber view. It also 
allows demonstration of retrograde flow in the aortic arch 
on the 3-vessel view. In moderate to severe aortic stenosis, 
color Doppler demonstrates, on the long-axis view of the 
left ventricle, the turbulent flow across the stenotic aortic 
valve. Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the pressure 
gradient in moderate to severe aortic stenosis. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to demonstrate the 
impaired contractility and the severe dilatation of the left 
ventricle in the most severe cases (Figure 5.44). 
• Differential diagnosis. Isolated mitral dysplasia is 
extremely rare. Mitral regurgitation might suggest the 
presence of cardiomyopathy, but in this case the cardiac 
anatomy is unremarkable. 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor prognostic signs are the 
presence of endocardial fibroelastosis and the association 
with other anomalies of the left heart (Shone 
complex). 
Incidence. About 3% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. On the long-axis view of the left ventricle, the aortic valvular cusps appear thickened and hypomobile; 
occasionally, a hypoplastic annulus and/or post-stenotic dilation are present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low in the valvular form. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low in the valvular form. 
Outcome. Unfavorable in the critical forms already evident in the 2nd trimester. 

• Association with other malformations. In about 
30–40% of cases, aortic valvular stenosis is associated 
with mitral anomalies, subvalvular aortic stenosis, 
and aortic coarctation. Association with extracardiac 
anomalies is exceedingly rare. 
• Natural history. Aortic stenosis tends to progress during 
fetal life: the degree of obstruction can worsen or 
it can evolve into a hypoplastic left heart.31,32 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in the 
valvular form. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low in the 
valvular form. 
Obstetric management. The evolving nature of critical 
aortic stenosis should be considered during prenatal 
counseling, especially with regard to the possibility 
of achieving a biventricular repair. In critical aortic 
stenosis, karyotyping is not mandatory and should 
be discussed with the parents. In the case of continuation 
of pregnancy, delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center, in order to ensure adequate neonatal 
management. In fact, critical aortic stenosis is often 
ductus-dependent. 
Postnatal treatment. After birth, the key point, after 
removal of the valvular obstruction, is to evaluate 
whether or not the left ventricle will be able to maintain 
the systemic circulation. In fact, the surgical approach 
and the ultimate prognosis will depend on this parameter. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In aortic stenosis, 
the prognosis depends on the severity and the gestational 
age at which the diagnosis is made. In fact, analysis of 
major prenatal case series reveals a truly ill-fated prognosis 
for cases of critical aortic stenosis recognized in the 
2nd trimester, with a significant risk of fetal death and 
low survival beyond the neonatal period.31,32 After birth, 
the prognosis depends on the capability of the left ventricle 
to support the systemic circulation after removal of 
the obstruction of the left outflow. In the more favorable 
forms, the midterm mortality rate is as low as 10%. The 
marked difference in terms of mortality and morbidity 
among prenatal and postnatal cases is related to the 
greater severity of the lesions disclosed during the 2nd 
trimester of pregnancy. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 155 
Figure 5.43 Critical aortic stenosis: 4-chamber view. (a) Variant 
associated with severe mitral dysplasia and insufficiency: the mitral 
valve apparatus is abnormal and hyperechoic, and the insufficiency 
determines the atriomegaly. (b) Color Doppler demonstrates 
the insufficiency of the mitral valve. (c) Variant associated 
with severe mitral stenosis: the extremely high intraventricular 
pressure, due to simultaneous obstruction of the mitral and aortic 
valves, leads to endocardial fibroelastosis (hyperechoic rim of the 
left ventricle) and dilatation of the ventricle. (d) Direct evidence of 
severe annular stenosis is obtained from the left outflow view, 
which shows a moderately hypoplastic ascending aorta (a) and 
severe narrowing of the annulus (arrow). LA, left atrium; LV, left 
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.44 Critical aortic stenosis. 3D inversion-mode image 
demonstrating severe dilatation of the left ventricle (arrows). Ao, 
descending thoracic aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 
c d 

Definition. Coarctation of the aorta refers to an area of 
narrowing of the thoracic aorta in the region of insertion 
of the arterial duct, most commonly between the left 
subclavian artery and the ductus arteriosus (isthmus). 
Commonly, coarctation of the aorta encompasses a 
spectrum of lesions, ranging from segmental narrowing 
to severe tubular hypoplasia of the whole transverse 
arch. In particular, tubular hypoplasia refers to a uniform 
narrowing of the transverse arch, whereas segmental 
coarctation is usually determined by a localized 
shelf-like lesion, often with a degree of proximal tapering 
of the aortic arch towards the lesion; the two lesions 
are often associated.33 
Anatomy. From the anatomic standpoint, discrete coarctation 
is characterized by a posterior eccentric fold (posterior 
shelf) inside the isthmus, opposite to the orifice of 
the arterial duct. When this closes at birth or soon afterwards, 
it causes further narrowing of the aortic lumen. 
In 30–40% of cases, coarctation is an isolated heart 
defect (above all in infant and child forms), but in the 
remaining 60–70% of cases, which account for the great 
majority of symptomatic patients in the first month of 
life, other cardiac anomalies (VSD, aortic and mitral 
valve anomalies, transposition of the great arteries, and 
double-outlet right ventricle) are associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Even with good visualization of 
the fetal aortic arch, prenatal diagnosis of discrete coarctation 
is very difficult, if not impossible. However, when 
associated with tubular hypoplasia of the entire arch, the 
ultrasound diagnosis is less difficult and can be reasonably 
made during the prenatal period. Sonographic findings 
possibly suggesting the presence of coarctation 
include direct and indirect signs, the latter being burdened 
with a significant percentage of false positives. 
Indirect signs include a significant prevalence of the right 
cardiac sections over the left ones on the 4-chamber view 
(Figure 5.45a) and of the pulmonary artery over the 
ascending aorta on the outflow views and on the 3-vessel 
view (Figure 5.45b). Direct evidence of coarctation, 
when possible, can be gathered by assessing the 3-vessel 
and trachea view: on this plane, the ductal arch appears 
significantly larger than the aortic arch (Figure 5.45c). 
The transverse part of the aortic arch is severely reduced 
in size, especially if tubular hypoplasia of the whole arch 
is present (Figure 5.45c). On color Doppler, a complete 
or partial inversion of the flow in the distal part of the 
156 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA 
Incidence. About 4–5% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. Indirect signs: significant prevalence of right cardiac sections over left ones and a prevalence of the 
pulmonary artery with respect to the ascending aorta. Direct signs: reduced size of the transverse aortic arch in 
comparison with the ductal arch. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high: 29%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Good in isolated cases, especially if the transverse part of the arch is not involved. 
Figure 5.45 Coarctation of the aorta. (a) On the 4-chamber view, the ventricular disproportion, which is an indirect sign of coarctation, 
is evident (the right ventricle is larger than the left). (b) The 3-vessel view demonstrates the severe narrowing of the aorta (A), between the 
pulmonary artery (P) and the superior vena cava (C). (c) In this case, the coarctation was severe (tubular hypoplasia): the extreme discrepancy 
between the size of the ductal arch (DA) and that of the hypoplastic transverse part of the arch (AO) is evident. 
a b c 

arch and/or in the ascending aorta (Figure 5.42d) and a 
left-to-right interatrial shunt can be seen. However, it 
should be recalled here that prenatal diagnosis of coarctation 
of the aorta remains challenging,14,15,34 with a high 
rate of false-positive and false-negative diagnoses. 
Spectral Doppler is of little use in coarctation. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to assess the discrepancy 
in the size of the aortic and ductal arches. 
• Artefacts. Particular attention should be paid in the 
evaluation of the aortic arch on longitudinal views 
not to mistake, in the case of severe coarctation, the 
prevalent and dilated ductal arch for a normal aortic 
arch. This is why the 3-vessel and trachea view is currently 
the preferred option for the comparative assessment 
of the ductal and aortic arches. 
• Differential diagnosis. The marked prevalence of the 
right heart sections over the left on the 4-chamber 
view, present in the critical form of coarctation, should 
be differentiated from hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
and from total anomalous pulmonary venous connection 
(TAPVC: see earlier in this chapter). However, 
the former is characterized by a sealed or atretic mitral 
valve, which is mainly normal in coarctation. As far as 
TAPVC is concerned, the recognition of a single pulmonary 
vein entering the left atrium on color Doppler 
rules out this diagnosis. On the aortic arch views 
(transverse and longitudinal), coarctation should be 
differentiated from interruption of the aortic arch: in 
the latter case, a malalignment VSD is almost always 
associated. 
• Prognostic indicators. Unfavorable prognostic indicators 
include presence of other anomalies of the left 
heart as well as association with extracardiac anomalies 
and low birthweight.35 
• Associations with other malformations. Coarctation is 
often associated with other malformations of the left 
heart and with VSD.14,15,34,35 In the presence of mitral 
valve anomalies and subaortic stenosis, it can be part 
of Shone syndrome. Extracardiac malformations are 
frequently associated with coarctation (25–30% of 
cases): these include urinary, gastrointestinal, central 
nervous system, and facial anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, reaching 
29%34,35 – mainly monosomy X, but also trisomies 
21 and 18 and 22q11 microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. A detailed anatomic scan should 
be performed by an expert to exclude the presence 
of extracardiac anomalies. Karyotyping is indicated 
because of the high risk of chromosomal disorders. If 
there is a suspicion of any anomaly of the aortic arch, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, in 
order to allow early transfer of the newborn to the pediatric 
cardiology unit for final diagnosis and correct 
neonatal management; in fact, critical coarctation of the 
aorta is a ductus-dependent defect. 
Postnatal treatment. The surgical techniques commonly 
used are resection of the coarcted tract with terminoterminal 
and terminolateral anastomoses, a subclavian flap, 
and widened aortoplasty. Long-term follow-up studies 
(> 5 years) have reported a 20% recoarctation rate. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
depends on the severity of the lesion, on the presence 
of associated cardiac and extracardiac lesions that 
can significantly influence operative mortality and the 
life expectancy, and on correct perinatal management. 
The overall mortality rate is less than 5% for isolated 
coarctation. In symptomatic neonatal cases with associated 
cardiac lesions, the mortality rate is about 20%, 
ranging from 2% in cases associated with VSD to 40% 
in cases associated with complex cardiac anomalies or 
when the preoperative clinical condition is poor. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 157 
Incidence. About 1% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. Indirect signs: discrepancy in ventricular and great artery size is present in IAA type A and C 
(prevalence of right ventricle over left and of the pulmonary artery over the ascending aorta), whereas in type B, 
only a discrepancy in great vessel size is observed (prevalence of pulmonary artery over the ascending aorta) 
Direct sign: visualization of lack of continuity of the aortic arch on upper mediastinal views. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Preoperative death occurs in 5% of cases and the survival rate at 4 years after repair is 63%. 
INTERRUPTION OF THE AORTIC ARCH 

Definition. Interruption of the aortic arch (IAA) is a rare, 
severe form of CHD characterized by complete anatomic 
discontinuity between two adjacent segments of the 
aortic arch. 
Anatomy. IAA can be subdivided into three groups 
according to the site of interruption: 
• Type A: the interruption is distal to the left subclavian 
artery. 
• Type B: the interruption is between the left carotid 
and left subclavian arteries. 
• Type C: the interruption is between the innominate 
artery and the left carotid artery. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis of IAA and of 
its subtypes depends on the observation of some reliable 
anatomic indicators that point to the correct differential 
diagnosis.36 Since a significant number of cases of IAA 
type A and C have a left/right ventricular discrepancy, 
easily visualized on the 4-chamber view, this sign should 
be considered as a hint to check the great vessels. In 
fact, angling towards the outflow tracts to image the 
great vessels reveals a significant discrepancy in the size 
of the great arteries and, in most cases, a VSD. In particular, 
the ascending aorta is significantly smaller than the 
main pulmonary artery. It should be noted that if the 
VSD is large and malaligned as in IAA type B, only a 
significant discrepancy in great vessel size is observed. 
As for coarctation of the aortic arch, care must be taken 
on the longitudinal view not to mistake the prevalent 
ductal arch for a normal aortic arch. Again, the 3-vessel 
and trachea view is the reference plane for detecting 
aortic arch anomalies. 
With regard to ultrasound differentiation of the various 
subtypes, type B can be difficult to distinguish from 
type A. In type B, the ascending aorta has a straighter 
course to the innominate and left carotid arteries, the 
typical ‘V’ shape (Figure 5.46b), whereas in type A there 
is a slight curvature after the origin of the innominate 
artery (Figure 5.46c), related to the persistence of the 
aortic arch segment between the origin of the left 
carotid and subclavian arteries.36 A conal malalignment 
VSD with a leftward and posterior displacement of the 
conal septum is typically found in most cases of IAA, 
especially type B. In addition as already reported, discrepancy 
in ventricular and great artery size is usually 
present in the setting of IAA type A and C, whereas in 
type B only a discrepancy in great vessel size is 
observed. The use of color Doppler may facilitate 
assessment of the continuity (or absence thereof) of the 
ascending aorta with the descending part; it also facilitates 
assessment of the course of the ascending aorta 
and neck vessels (Figure 5.47). Spectral Doppler is of 
limited use, while 4D echocardiography has been 
demonstrated to facilitate the assessment of aortic arch 
anomalies, especially with B-flow and inversion-mode 
renderings.37 
158 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.46 Interruped aortic arch (IAA). Prenatal echocardiography and schematic representation of the normal aortic arch and interruption 
of the aortic arch (IAA). (a) long-axis view of the normal aortic arch and its three branches. (b) IAA type B; the ascending aorta 
fails to curve, but courses straight cranially, to divide into the innominate artery and the left carotid artery (the typical V shape). (c) IAA 
type A; note the slight curvature after the origin of the innominate artery and the location of the interruption after the left subclavian artery. 
A, ascending aorta; I, innominate artery; C, left carotid artery; S, subclavian artery. Modified from36. 
a b c 

• Differential diagnosis. It is possible to distinguish 
between IAA and coarctation of the aorta on ultrasound. 
In IAA, the ascending aorta runs with a 
straight course to its branches, unlike coarctation, 
where the aortic curvature is normal and there is continuity 
with the descending aorta. 
• Association with other malformations. VSD is almost 
always present. A right aortic arch and anomalies of 
the left ventricular outflow are frequently associated 
in type B. Association with extracardiac anomalies 
(central nervous system, urinary, gastrointestinal and 
facial) is more frequent in type B. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Type B IAA is associated 
with the 22q11 microdeletion in about half of cases, 
both prenatally and postnatally.36,38,39 In fact, type B 
is usually syndromic, being the most common cardiac 
defect occurring in DiGeorge syndrome, a developmental 
disease characterized by thymic and parathyroid 
gland hypo/aplasia associated with conotruncal malformations 
and due to the 22q11 microdeletion (see 
Chapter 10). The other subtypes of IAA are rarely associated 
with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should IAA be detected in a 
fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be carried out 
by an expert to detect possible additional anomalies, 
such as thymus hypoplasia, which increase the risk of 
22q11 microdeletion even more.39 Fetal karyotyping 
with FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is indicated 
in type B IAA. Timing and mode of delivery are 
unchanged, but the delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center in order to reach a definite diagnosis 
and to adequately manage the situation in the 
neonatal period. 
Postnatal treatment. The surgical management of IAA is 
controversial. Primary anastomosis and patch aortoplasties 
combined with end-to-end anastomosis have significant 
complications, including recurrence and aneurysm 
formation. Pulmonary autograft patch aortoplasty 
together with end-to-side anastomosis is an alternative 
approach to surgical management, and does not require 
cardiopulmonary bypass. In a large case series,40 preoperative 
death occurred in 5% of cases and the survival 
rate at 4 years after repair was 63%. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Risk factors for 
postinterventional death are low birth weight and major 
associated cardiac anomalies. The discrepancies among 
the clinical features and, above all, the remarkable difference 
with regard to association with the 22q11 
microdeletion suggest that type A and type B IAA could 
be two separate pathogenetic entities, with the latter type 
carrying a worse prognosis. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 159 
Figure 5.47 Interruption of the aortic arch (IAA). Color 
Doppler shows the course of the ascending aorta and neck vessels. 
(a) In type B IAA, the ascending aorta has a straighter course to 
the innominate and the left carotid arteries (the typical ‘V’ shape) 
(arrow). (b) In type A, there is a slight curvature after the origin of 
the innominate artery related to the persistence of the aortic arch 
segment between the origin of the left carotid and subclavian 
arteries (arrow). i, innominate artery; c, left common carotid 
artery; s, left subclavian artery Modified from reference 36. 
AORTIC ARCH ANOMALIES (RIGHT AORTIC ARCH, 
DOUBLE AORTIC ARCH, AND VASCULAR RING) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Diagnosis. On the 3-vessel and trachea view: right aortic arch: aortic arch on the right of the trachea; double arch: 
‘N’ shape with bifurcation of the aortic arch in front of the trachea; vascular ring: abnormal retrotracheal vessel. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high for the right aortic arch (22q11 microdeletion). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Excellent in the case of isolated anomalies; if associated with major CHD, final outcome will depend on 
the severity of these. 
a b 

Definition. Aortic arch anomalies comprise a variety 
of congenital abnormalities of the position or branching 
pattern, or both, of the aortic arch. They result 
from aberrant development of one or more components 
of the embryonic pharyngeal arch system. These 
anomalies can be divided into those causing a vascular 
ring around the trachea and esophagus, usually determining 
compression of both structures, and those that 
do not. 
Anatomy. The left or right position of the aortic arch is 
defined in relation to the mainstem bronchus, which is 
crossed by the descending thoracic aorta, and does not 
refer to the side of the midline on which the aorta 
descends. In left aortic arch, the descending thoracic 
aorta crosses over the left mainstem bronchus and 
descends left to the midline along the spine. Three vessels 
arise from the aortic arch: first, the innominate 
artery branching into the right carotid and right subclavian 
arteries; second, the left carotid artery; and third, 
the left subclavian artery. Usually, the first aortic arch 
vessel gives rise to the carotid artery, which is opposite 
to the side of the aortic arch (i.e., the right carotid 
artery in left aortic arch and the left carotid artery in 
right aortic arch). The ductus arteriosus joints the aorta 
distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. 
Normally, the ductus arteriosus is left-sided, but it can 
be bilateral or right-sided. The most common types of 
right aortic arch (RAA) branching are: 
• mirror-image branching (left innominate artery, right 
carotid artery, right subclavian artery) 
• retroesophageal left (aberrant) subclavian artery with 
a normal caliber 
• retroesophageal diverticulum of Kommerell 
• right aortic arch with left descending aorta. 
The presence or absence of a vascular ring in the setting 
of a right aortic arch depends on the branching of the 
brachiocephalic vessels and the location of the ductus 
arteriosus. The most frequently encountered forms of 
vascular ring are (in decreasing order of frequency) double 
aortic arch, right descending right arch with aberrant 
origin of the left subclavian artery from a retroesophageal 
diverticulum (Kommerel), and left descending right arch 
(retroesophageal). 
In the case of a double aortic arch, both right and 
left aortic arches are present: i.e., the ascending 
aorta splits into two limbs encircling the trachea 
and esophagus, with the two limbs joining to form a 
single descending aorta. There are several forms, 
including widely open right and left arches or hypoplasia/
atresia of one arch (usually the left). This anomaly 
is commonly associated with a patent ductus 
arteriosus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As previously described, the 
aortic arch can be examinated on the 3-vessel and trachea 
view. A RAA is diagnosed when the ductus and 
aorta form a U-shaped configuration, the trachea 
located between them (Figure 5.8d, 5.48a and b, and 
5.49).37,41 In addition, any branch coursing behind the 
trachea (e.g. a left aberrant subclavian artery) should 
be considered as an abnormal aberrant branch (Figure 
5.48b). Color Doppler is extremely useful to trace the 
course of the abnormal vessels in the upper mediastinum 
(Figure 5.48b). Spectral Doppler may be used 
to differentiate the innominate vein from arterial 
160 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.48 Aortic arch anomalies: 3-vessel and trachea view. (a) In the normal spatial relationships, the trachea (arrow) is located on 
the right of the aortic arch. (b) In right aortic arch, the trachea (arrow) is located between the aortic and ductal arches. Sometimes, as 
in this case, a retrotracheal vessel (sling) can be identified. (c) In double aortic arch, the arches feature an upside-down ‘N’, with the 
oblique bar of the ‘N’ representing the second arch. The trachea (arrow) in this case is located between the two aortic arches, although 
several spatial arrangements are possible. (d) In some cases, the aortic arch is normally positioned on the left of the trachea (arrow), but 
the neck vessels can have an abnormal origin and course. In this case, there was an aberrant retrotracheal right subclavian artery 
(arrowhead). See the text for details. 
a b c d 

vessels. In this group of anomalies, 4D echocardiography 
plays a central diagnostic and prognostic role, 
being able to demonstrate anomalies that were hard or 
impossible to identify until recently by 2D ultrasound 
(e.g. aberrant subclavian arteries).6,37 In addition, it 
permits a much easier diagnosis of all aortic arch 
anomalies. Inversion-mode and B-flow are the renderings 
of choice (Figure 5.49). 
• Association with other malformations. RAA with 
mirror-image branching is often associated with other 
complex cardiac anomalies (tetralogy of Fallot and 
common arterial trunks). VSD is the cardiac anomaly 
most commonly associated with vascular ring. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
Vascular ring and isolated RAA can be associated with 
the 22q11 microdeletion.40,41 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low in 
cases of vascular ring. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping with a FISH 
analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is indicated in the 
case of RAA. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Vascular rings 
encircle the trachea and the esophagus, often causing 
symptomatic compression of both structures. 
Compression of the trachea causes upper airway 
obstruction that impairs inspiratory and, to a lesser 
degree, expiratory airflow. The extent of respiratory 
impairment depends upon the severity of compression, 
which can vary considerably. In addition to the airway 
symptoms, patients may experience swallowing problems 
related to the esophageal compression. The 
prognosis of patients with RAA and vascular rings 
depends on several factors, including the severity of 
tracheal/esophageal compression and the association 
with other cardiac and extracardiac anomalies. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 161 
Figure 5.49 Right aortic arch (RAA): 3D inversion-mode rendering. 
The image shows, from above, an RAA with the asterisk (*) 
indicating the position of the trachea, between the RAA and the 
ductal arch (DA). The arrowheads indicate the neck vessels. The 
left ventricle (LV) is evident on the upper part of the image. 
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT (TOF) 
Definition. Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is a cardiac malformation 
characterized by: 
• subaortic VSD caused by malalignment between the 
infundibular and the trabecular septum 
• an aorta overriding the VSD 
• obstruction of varying severity of the right outflow 
tract 
• consequent hypertrophy of the right ventricle (after 
birth). 
Incidence. Accounts for about 7–9% of CHD in infants. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle: an anterior malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding 
aorta. Sweeping further cephalad from this view, a small pulmonary artery should be detected. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Good/extremely good in isolated cases. Poor if chromosomal and/or extracardiac anomalies are 
associated or in the case of unfavorable cardiac anatomy. 

Its incidence reaches 9–11% after birth, but due to the 
prevalence of complex cardiac anomalies, its incidence 
in utero is reduced to about 3%. 
Anatomy. The extent of the anatomic obstruction to the 
right outflow tract is determined by the degree of deviation 
of the infundibular septum, the hypertrophy of the 
septum and anterior wall of the right ventricle, and the 
association of pulmonary valvular stenosis. In the fetus, 
because of the frequent absence of pulmonary stenosis 
and the presence of physiologic shunts, the tetralogy often 
becomes a di- or trilogy, with the right ventricular hypertrophy 
being absent and the pulmonary stenosis present 
only in the more important cases and/or developing late in 
gestation. Although the TOF spectrum comprises numerous 
variants and subtypes, TOF with absent pulmonary 
valve, which is characterized by severe dilatation of the 
pulmonary trunk and branches due to severe stenosis and 
insufficiency of the functionally absent pulmonary valve, 
certainly represents a well-known entity with an unfavorable 
prognosis, which needs to be addressed separately 
(see the following section). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As for most conotruncal anomalies, 
the 4-chamber view is unremarkable, unless anomalies of 
the atrioventricular plane are associated. Only in TOF 
with absent pulmonary valve can the 4-chamber view be 
abnormal due to the presence of cardiomegaly.42 Classic 
TOF is diagnosed on the long-axis views. On the long axis 
of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with an overriding 
aorta can be seen (Figure 5.50a). Sweeping further 
cephalad from this view, on the right outflow tract view, 
the smaller pulmonary artery can be detected (Figure 
5.50b). The pulmonary artery may have a diameter within 
the normal range, but the aorta/pulmonary artery diameter 
ratio will be abnormal. As mentioned above, the hypertrophy 
of the right ventricle is absent, whereas the infundibular 
stenosis is not a constant finding in the 2nd trimester. 
Color Doppler can be used to demonstrate flow through 
the VSD toward the aorta (Figure 5.29 and 5.50c) from 
both left and right ventricles and flow through the smaller 
pulmonary outflow tract and arterial duct. In utero, it is 
unusual to detect any significant acceleration of blood 
across the right outflow tract, even in the presence of an 
obvious reduction of the vessel size. Moreover, stenosis is 
frequently absent at the time of diagnosis in the 2nd 
trimester, to become evident later on in gestation; in a few 
cases, a narrow pulmonary outflow may progress to atresia.
43 This is why serial ultrasound monitoring is important 
in order to demonstrate antegrade flow through the pulmonary 
artery late in gestation to exclude the potential 
need for prostaglandin therapy after birth. Spectral 
Doppler is of limited value, as is 4D echocardiography. 
The latter may be of help if anomalies of the aortic arch are 
associated. 
• Differential diagnosis. As already mentioned, in utero 
TOF cannot be differentiated from an isolated 
malalignment VSD if evident pulmonary stenosis is 
absent. Therefore, in the absence of pulmonary outflow 
obstruction, it is always necessary to consider 
the possible evolution from malalignment VSD in 
TOF. Another important concept is that the degree of 
aortic overriding is variable, and cannot be fully 
appreciated in utero. Therefore, when the aorta 
emerges about 50% from the right ventricle, differentiation 
of TOF from a Fallot-like double-outlet right 
ventricle can be difficult, the two being distinguished 
only by the degree of aortic overriding. With regard to 
the differential diagnosis with other conotruncal 
anomalies, it should be considered that common arterial 
trunk (CAT) and pulmonary atreria with VSD 
(PAVSD) share with TOF the presence of a malalignment 
VSD. Hence, if aortic overriding is found, the 
right outflow tract should be evaluated: if a small pulmonary 
artery is connected to the right ventricle, the 
diagnosis is TOF; if this is atretic, it is PAVSD; if the 
pulmonary artery originates from the single emerging 
vessel, it is CAT (Figure 5.11). 
• Prognostic indicators. Unfavorable prognostic 
elements are the presence of extracardiac anomalies 
(including chromosomal anomalies), severe 
162 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.50 Tetralogy of Fallot. (TOF): the typical signs of TOF are shown. (a) The left outflow tract view shows a malalignment VSD 
with an overriding aorta. (b) The right outflow tract view shows the narrowing of the pulmonary trunk, consistent with an infundibular 
stenosis. (c) On the left outflow tract, color Doppler demonstrates the overriding aorta draining from both ventricles. Ao, aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b c 

pulmonary artery stenosis, and the absent pulmonary 
valve variant (see below). 
• Association with other malformations. Association 
with extracardiac anomalies is frequent, in particular 
gastrointestinal and thoracic ones (esophageal and 
duodenal atresia, and diaphragmatic hernia), even 
independently of chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (up to 20% in 
fetal case series), with equal distribution between trisomies 
21 and 18.14,15,44 There is a minor association with 
microdeletion 22q11, except in the variant with absence of 
the pulmonary valve, where the association is about 25%.42 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. 
Obstetric management. Should TOF be detected in a 
fetus, a detailed fetal anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert to exclude the presence of extracardiac 
anomalies, bearing in mind the relatively high association 
rate. Fetal karyotyping including FISH analysis for 22q11 
microdeletion is indicated, especially if additional anomalies 
of the aortic arch are associated. Although the shunt 
is significant in classic TOF, it is better to plan the delivery 
in tertiary referral centers in order to warrant optimal 
multidisciplinary management of possible associated malformations. 
In addition, if the pulmonary outflow is significantly 
obstructed, a need for early shunting may arise. 
Postnatal treatment. The treatment of this defect is surgical 
in all cases. However, the type of approach will 
depend on different anatomic features that may be 
ascertained only after birth. These include the degree of 
pulmonary trunk and branch stenosis, the presence of 
multiple VSDs, and the presence of coronary anomalies. 
All of these feature have an impact on the type of treatment. 
In most cases, definitive surgical correction will be 
performed at 3–6 months of age, depending on the orientation 
of the reference cardiosurgical center, with a 
surgical mortality rate of less than 2.5%. The surgical 
approach includes removal of the outflow obstruction 
(infundibolectomy), together with closure of the VSD 
with a patch and, if necessary, pulmonary valvulotomy. 
However, if pulmonary outflow obstruction is significant, 
an early intervention is needed in order to ensure 
an adequate blood flow to the lungs and, consequently, 
an acceptable oxygen saturation. This is obtained with a 
palliative aorto-pulmonary shunting procedure, the 
modified Blalock–Taussig operation. This consists of the 
interposition of a GoreTex conduct between the left subclavian 
artery and the left pulmonary artery. 
Prognosis, treatment, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
will depend on several factors, including karyotype, 
associated extracardiac malformations, and cardiac 
anatomy. This last factor is extremely important as no two 
cases of TOF are identical, as Lev and Eckner45 pointed 
out over 40 years ago. Prenatal counseling should therefore 
take into consideration all of these aspects in addition 
to the well-established fact that the pulmonary outflow 
obstruction may evolve during pregnancy.43 With regard 
to survival, case series of patients with isolated TOF report 
long-term survival rates as high as 80–90%. The variant 
with an absent pulmonary valve has significantly lower 
survival rates and will be discussed below. In conclusion, if 
no unfavorable prognostic factors are found in utero, and, 
above all, after birth, TOF is an easily correctable heart 
defect, with excellent survival and good quality of life. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 163 
ABSENT PULMONARY VALVE SYNDROME (APVS) 
Definition. Absent pulmonary valve syndrome (APVS) is 
a rare cardiac abnormality characterized by the existence 
of a dysplastic or rudimentary pulmonary valve, associated 
in most instances with severe dilatation of the 
pulmonary trunk and branches due to the concurrent 
occurrence of valve stenosis and regurgitation. In most 
cases, this condition is associated with TOF and absence 
of the arterial duct, although cases with a patent ductus 
arteriosus and/or occurring as an isolated anomaly have 
been reported.42,46 
Anatomy. Two variants of APVS have been recognized 
in the fetus: the more frequent is characterized by an 
absent pulmonary valve with severely dilated pulmonary 
Incidence. It accounts for about 6–9% of tetralogy Fallot cases, and less than 1% of CHD in fetuses. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle: an anterior malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding 
aorta. Very large pulmonary trunk and branches, sometimes seen also on the 4-chamber view, due to severe dilatation. 
Pulmonary valve functionally absent. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (25%). Mainly but not only microdeletion 22q 11. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Poor, if chromosomal and/or extra-cardiac anomalies are associated and for the risk of life-threatening 
tracheomalacia. Discrete/good in the other cases. 

trunk and branches associated with a malalignment 
VSD, overriding aorta (TOF) and ductal agenesis; 
the rarer variant is defined by the presence of an intact 
ventricular septum and a lower degree of pulmonary 
artery dilatation, and is associated in most instances with 
a patent ductus arteriosus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the left outflow view, a 
malalignment VSD with an overriding aorta can be seen. 
Sweeping further cephalad from this view, severe dilatation 
of the pulmonary trunk and branches can be seen 
(Figure 5.51a): the ultrasound aspect is so typical that, 
seen once, it will never be forgotten! Unlike most 
conotruncal malformations, APVS can be suspected on 
the 4-chamber view: evident cardiomegaly and an abnormal 
cardiac axis are the two key features; on some occasions, 
the pulmonary trunk may be so dilated to become 
visible also on this view (Figure 5.51b). Color Doppler 
allows detection of the severe stenosis and insufficiency of 
the functionally absent pulmonary valve (Figure 5.51c). 
Spectral Doppler can be use to quantify the steno-insufficiency 
of the rudimentary pulmonary valve. 4D echocardiography 
effectively demonstrates the degree of 
pulmonary artery dilatation (Figure 5.51a) and can also 
be used to characterize the severely dysplastic pulmonary 
valve. The differential diagnosis is non-existent, due to 
the very typical ultrasound aspect of APVS. 
• Association with other malformations. The association 
with extracardiac (central nervous system and 
gastrointestinal) malformations is frequent – often in 
the context of a chromosomal aberration. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high 
for APVS–TOF. There is a 20–25% association rate with 
22q11 microdeletion; other severe aneuploidies may also 
be associated (trisomy 13 and triploidy).42,46 On the contrary, 
the variant with an intact ventricular septum is 
rarely associated with aneuploidies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping including 
FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is warranted 
in all cases of APVS–TOF. In this variant, a 
thorough search for associated extracardiac anomalies 
should also be carried out by an expert. Serial ultrasound 
monitoring should be provided, in order to 
detect the possible prenatal onset of heart failure, 
which is due to the severe pulmonary insufficiency. 
The delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center in order to ensure adequate neonatal management, 
which may require resuscitation and, in some 
cases, tracheotomy. 
Prognosis, treatment, and quality of life. The outcome of 
the cases detected prenatally is poor due to the severity 
of the defect and the frequent association with genetic 
and extracardiac anomalies. The overall prognosis is 
guarded, regardless of the surgical correction of the 
defect, due to the common occurrence of bronchomalacia. 
This life-threatening lesion is virtually ubiquitous if 
severe cardiomegaly and marked branch pulmonary 
dilatation are present. 
Figure 5.51 Fallot with absent Pulmonary valve. (a) Cardio-STIC. The marked dilated branch pulmonary arteries (small arrows) are 
shown in top left panel and better demonstrated in rendered image. The big arrows indicate the restrictive pulmonary annulus. (b) 4-chamber 
view showing cardiomegaly and the severely dilated pulmonary trunk (arrow). (c) Color Doppler showing the antegrade and retrograde 
flow due to the pulmonary insufficiency, the arrow indicates the restricitve annulus. RV, right ventricle; LPA left pulmonary artery; 
RPA, right pulmonary artery; Ao, ascending aorta. 
164 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
a b c 

Definition. Double-outlet right ventricle (DORV) 
encloses a spectrum of lesions characterized by a double 
ventriculo-arterial connection originating from the right 
ventricle, a VSD, and a variable spatial relationship of 
the great arteries. 
Anatomy. DORV is not a single defect but rather 
includes a wide range of lesions that may have completely 
different hemodynamic characteristics. The basic 
feature of DORV is the fact that both great vessels arise 
for more than 50% from the same ventricle. The spatial 
relationship of the two arteries is variable: they can show 
a normal relationship, with the aorta posterior and the 
pulmonary artery anterior and to the left, or they can be 
malposed, with the aorta arising behind the sternum and 
the pulmonary trunk posterior and above the VSD. The 
position and the commitment of the VSD is similarly 
variable: the defect can be sub-pulmonary, subaortic, 
doubly committed, or far from the two outlets for the 
interposition of the muscular septum (non-committed). 
In addition, the pulmonary outflow or (much less 
frequently) the aortic outflow may be obstructed, due to 
pulmonary stenosis/atresia or aortic coarctation. The 
result of this significant anatomic variability is that 
DORV comprises cases that are hemodynamically similar 
to tetralogy of Fallot and cases that share several features 
with transposition of the great arteries. The most 
frequent variants, in decreasing order of frequency, are 
the Fallot type (subaortic VSD, great vessels in normal 
spatial relationship, and pulmonary artery obstruction), 
the Taussig–Bing type (subpulmonary VSD and malposed 
great arteries), and the type with subaortic VSD 
but without pulmonary stenosis. In a significant number 
of cases, other major cardiac defects are associated: ventricular 
hypoplasia (almost always due to straddling and 
overriding of one of the two atrioventricular valves), 
aortic coarctation, AVSD, and cardiosplenic syndromes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. It should be noted that, as for all 
conotruncal anomalies, the 4-chamber view is unremarkable, 
unless severe anomalies of the atrioventricular 
junction are associated. DORV is recognized on the 
outflow tract views: the crossover is lacking and the 
great vessels have a parallel course and arise from the 
anterior ventricle (Figure 5.52). As already pointed out, 
the spatial relationship of the two vessels should be evaluated, 
as these may be in normal relationship or malposed 
(Figure 5.52a,b). The assignment of the great 
vessels is based on the following features: 
• The pulmonary artery has an acute-angle bifurcation 
not far from the semilunar valve. 
• The aorta is characterized by the first neck vessel 
branching off at almost 90° at a certain distance 
from the semilunar valve (Figure 5.52b). Note that if 
one of the vessels is hypoplastic, it may be difficult to 
identify it. 
Color Doppler may contribute to ascertaining the 
spatial relationship of the great vessels (Figure 5.52c) 
and the site of the VSD. However, it should be underlined 
that in the case of moderate pulmonary outflow 
tract obstruction, no transvalvular acceleration is seen 
on color Doppler. The diagnosis of outflow obstruction 
in DORV is based on comparison of the vessel 
size (Figure 5.52a,b) rather than on increased transvalvular 
velocity. The definition of the spatial relationship 
of the great vessels is of the utmost importance, 
since it identifies the type of surgical approach 
required, and this in turn affects the prognosis. Also, 
DORV may change through the course of pregnancy: 
in the 3rd trimester, the degree of pulmonary outflow 
obstruction can worsen significantly and, at the same 
time, ventricular hypoplasia can develop, especially if 
the atrioventricular valves show straddling or overriding. 
Spectral Doppler has a limited diagnostic role. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to confirm the absence 
of crossover and to ascertain possible associated 
anomalies of the aortic arch (Figure 5.53). 
• Differential diagnosis. The most difficult issue is the 
differentiation from the other conotruncal anomalies: 
in some cases, the distinction between DORV and TOF 
or a transposition of the great arteries may be challenging 
(Figure 5.53). However, it should be pointed out 
Incidence. 3–6% of CHD in the fetus; 2% in post-natal life. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Double ventriculo-arterial connection from the right ventricle. VSD constantly associated. 
Variable spatial relationships of the great vessels. Pulmonary atresia and other major cardiac defects commonly 
associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very high: 12–45%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Extremely variable, depending on the cardiac anatomy and associated cardiac and extra-cardiac lesions. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 165 
DOUBLE-OUTLET RIGHT VENTRICLE (DORV) 

that the surgical approach and prognosis are similar for 
the DORV variants and the conotruncal lesions with 
similar hemodynamics. The differences lie in the rate of 
associated chromosomal and extracardiac anomalies. 
• Prognostic indicators. If DORV is not associated 
with extracardiac or chromosomal anomalies, a poor 
prognostic feature is the not infrequent association 
with other cardiac defects (AVSD, cardiosplenic syndromes, 
aortic coarctation, and straddling/overriding 
of the atrioventricular valves with consequent hypoplasia 
of the underlying ventricle). If DORV is associated 
with chromosomal anomalies or syndromic 
conditions, the prognosis is very poor, and is dictated 
by the associated abnormalities. 
• Association with other malformations. There is a 
high risk of association with extracardiac (mainly 
gastrointestinal and central nervous system) anomalies, 
regardless of the association with chromosomal 
aberrations. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high. 
The rate is 12–45%, with a prevalence of trisomies 18, 
13, and, to a lesser extent, 22q11 microdeletion and 
trisomy 21.14,15,44 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of chromosomal anomalies. In addition, a 
thorough search for associated cardiac and extracardiac 
anomalies should be performed. The changing nature of 
DORV during the course of pregnancy should be addressed 
in the prenatal counseling session. The delivery should be 
organized in a tertiary referral center, so that the neonate 
can be transferred to a pediatric cardiology unit for confirmation 
of the diagnosis and adequate management. 
Postnatal therapy. The cardiologic management depends 
on the type of DORV: if the VSD is subaortic and there 
166 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.53 Differential diagnosis between DORV and TGA, 
which share an absence of crossover. Use of the inversion mode 
may assist in the assessment of the ventriculo-arterial connections. 
(a) In this case of DORV, the anterior vessel is the malposed aorta, 
while the posterior one, arising in part over a VSD, is the pulmonary 
artery. (b) In the case of TGA, each vessel is seen to be 
connected with a different ventricle. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; 
Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
Figure 5.52 Double-outlet right ventricle (DORV). This comprises 
a spectrum of anomalies of the great vessels, which may 
have different sizes due to left or right outflow obstruction, in different 
spatial relationships (see text). (a) DORV with an anterior 
malposed aorta and a posterior moderately stenotic pulmonary 
artery (arrow); this is one of the most common arrangements seen 
in the fetus. (b) DORV with an anterior malposed aorta, which is 
also reduced in size due to a concurrent interruption of the aortic 
arch; note the straighter course of the aorta and the ‘V’ shape of 
the first neck vessels (arrowheads). (c) Color Doppler can be used 
to confirm the connection of the great vessels with the anterior 
ventricle, if there is any remaining doubt regarding the differential 
diagnosis with transposition of the great arteries. 
a
b
c 

is no outflow obstruction, the lesion is not ductus-dependent; 
on the contrary, if aortic coarctation or pulmonary 
atresia are associated, the DORV becomes a neonatal 
emergency. In the former case, the neonate will become 
symptomatic when the pulmonary resistances decrease. 
Early correction (closure of the VSD with a patch) avoids 
the need for pulmonary banding, which is done only if 
the neonate fails to thrive or develops unresponsive cardiac 
failure. In DORV with subaortic VSD and pulmonary 
outflow obstruction, the management is similar 
to that of tetralogy of Fallot (see earlier in this chapter). 
In DORV with a subpulmonary VSD, the arterial switch 
operation or the REV (reparation a l’etage ventriculaire) 
is performed. In DORV with subpulmonary VSD and pulmonary 
outflow obstruction, most surgeons currently 
adopt the REV procedure modified by Rastelli. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall 
survival of DORV detected prenatally is 46–50% (if terminations 
of pregnancy are excluded), due to the strong 
association with aneuploidy and extracardiac anomalies. 
If postnatal series are considered, the overall surgical 
mortality rate for biventricular repair is as low as 
13%, while the 10-year survival rate is about 86%. The 
mortality is much higher if other major cardiac lesions 
are associated, which is not infrequent. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 167 
Figure 5.54 Common arterial trunk (CAT), type I (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) The main pulmonary artery with the two hypoplastic 
branches (arrowheads) is seen branching off the truncus (Ta) just above the truncal valve. (b) On the left ouflow tract view, color Doppler 
demonstrates the truncus overriding a malalignment VSD and the common stenosis of the truncal valve (aliasing and turbulence), due to 
the frequently abnormal truncal valve. (c) The 3-vessel view, shows the pulmonary artery (arrowheads) branching off from the truncus 
(arrow). 
a b c 
COMMON ARTERIAL TRUNK (CAT) 
Incidence. Accounts for about 1% of CHD in utero and at birth. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with overriding aorta and a dysplastic 
truncal valve can be seen; the pulmonary arteries are visualized arising from the main trunk. 
Risk of chromosomal syndromes. High: 15–28%. Trisomes 13, 18 and 22q11. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Prognosis depends on the association with extracardiac anomalies and on unfavorable cardiac anatomy, 
if present. 
Definition. Common arterial trunk (CAT) is characterized 
by a single great artery arising from the base of 
the heart, which supplies the systemic, coronary, and 
pulmonary blood flow, and by a VSD. 
Anatomy. CAT results from a septation failure during 
development of the ventricular outlets and the proximal 
arterial segment of the heart tube. According to the 
Collett and Edwards classification47 CAT can be divided 
into different anatomical subtypes with respect to the 
origin of the pulmonary arteries: 
• Type I: the main pulmonary trunk arises from the 
truncal artery just distal to the truncal valve. 
• Types II and III: the pulmonary trunk is absent and 
the two pulmonary branches arise from the posterior 
aspect of the truncus but close to each other (type II) 
or more lateral and widely separated (type III). 

The former type IV of the original classification now 
corresponds to pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal 
defect (PAVSD – see the following section). CAT 
accounts for 1% of cardiac lesions detected in fetal life. 
The frequency is similar to that reported in infancy, even 
though the type of lesion is not easily detected if obstetric 
ultrasound screening is limited to the 4-chamber view. 
The intrauterine incidence of this type of congenital heart 
disease is probably higher than in postnatal life, but there 
is an increased rate of natural fetal wastage. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In CAT, the 4-chamber view is 
usually normal. The constant malalignment VSD is best 
displayed on the long axis view of the left ventricle 
(Figure 5.54). Although the truncal valve is commonly 
connected to both ventricles, it may sometimes straddle 
one ventricle preferentially, especially if there is dominance 
of one ventricle.48 Visualization of the pulmonary 
arteries is essential to distinguish CAT from PAVSD and 
to identify the CAT subtype. In fact, when the pulmonary 
arteries are visualized arising from the main trunk, the 
diagnosis of CAT is straightforward (Figure 5.54a,c). In 
the case of PAVSD, the hypoplastic pulmonary arteries 
are supplied by the ductus arteriosus and/or by the major 
aorto-pulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs). As 
already noted, in type I CAT, the main pulmonary trunk 
arises from the posterolateral aspect of the common 
trunk and bifurcates into two pulmonary arteries (Figure 
5.54a). In types II and III, the pulmonary arteries arise 
separately. The truncal valve is often dysplastic, and may 
be regurgitant or stenotic (Figure 5.54b). Color Doppler 
may be used to evaluate the steno-insufficiency of the 
truncal valve and to trace the course and connection of 
the pulmonary trunk/arteries. Spectral Doppler may help 
to quantify the degree of truncal valve stenosis and insufficiency. 
The use of 4D echocardiography has proved 
significantly helpful in the identification of the small 
pulmonary branches in type II/III CAT and in the 
characterization of the pulmonary trunk anatomy in 
PAVSD (especially with inversion mode and B-flow) 
(Figure 5.55). 
• Differential diagnosis. Differentiation of CAT from 
PAVSD is often difficult. In fact, this differential 
diagnosis represents the most challenging task to be 
faced when diagnosing CAT in the fetus: types II 
and III CAT and PAVSD share reduced dimensions 
of the pulmonary branches and the prevalence of 
the aortic vessel. When doubts arise, the following 
anatomic details should be sought to make the final 
diagnosis: the aortic/truncal valve, the atretic pulmonary 
valve, and the direction of flow within the 
arterial duct. The semilunar valve is always dysplastic 
(from two to five cusps) and typically stenotic 
and/or insufficient in CAT, whereas it is frequently 
unremarkable or only mildly abnormal in PAVSD. 
The atretic pulmonary valve is difficult to detect in 
PAVSD, but if it is demonstrated (in those infrequent 
cases in which the pulmonary trunk is not 
extremely hypoplastic), then CAT can be excluded. 
Finally, accurate color Doppler mapping of the great 
vessels may help to detect reversed flow in the arterial 
duct and main pulmonary artery as well as aortopulmonary 
collaterals in PAVSD, or the branching 
point of the pulmonary arteries in the truncal vessel 
in types II and III CAT.48 
• Association with other malformations. When CAT 
is diagnosed in a fetus, care should be taken to identify 
possible additional heart and great vessel anomalies, 
which occur in 20–30% of cases. Associated 
cardiac defects include absence of ductus arteriosus 
(50% of cases), IAA, RAA, and atrioventricular 
valve atresia.48 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. There is a 
high rate of association with the 22q11 microdeletion 
(20–30% of cases) and, to a lesser extent, with trisomies 
18 and 13.48 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. 
Obstetric management. A detailed fetal anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert to exclude the 
presence of extracardiac and cardiac anomalies. Fetal 
karyotyping is warranted because of the high risk of 
chromosomal anomalies, and should include FISH 
168 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.55 Common arterial trunk (CAT), type III: pulmonary 
branches arising directly and separately from the truncus, without 
a main pulmonary artery (22 weeks’ gestation). In some cases, the 
use of the inversion mode may allow detection of the small pulmonary 
arteries, which are not easy to detect on 2D images. This 
image shows the two pulmonary arteries (arrowheads) arising on 
different sides of the truncus (T), which overrides a malaligment 
VSD (and is connected with both right and left ventricles, RV and 
LV). The neck vessels are indicated by arrows. 

analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion. Delivery should 
take place in a tertiary referral center to ensure confirmation 
of the diagnosis and and adequate neonatal management. 
In fact, in CAT there may be significant 
reduction of the pulmonary blood flow due to stenosis of 
the pulmonary branches, or aortic arch anomalies (IAA) 
may lead to early surgical correction, which is otherwise 
scheduled after 1–2 months of life. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical repair should be done in the 
first 2–3 months of life. Operative repair consists of 
detachment of the pulmonary arteries from the truncus 
and attachment to the right ventricle with a conduit, 
closure of the VSD, and repair of the truncal valve, 
if necessary. In recent series, the overall operative mortality 
rate is as low as 5%, if no severe truncal valve 
abnormalities are present. The association of IAA may 
lead to a need for earlier surgical correction. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis depends 
on the presence of extracardiac and chromosomal anomalies 
and of unfavorable cardiac anatomy (e.g. severe 
truncal valve regurgitation, IAA, and straddling with ventricular 
hypoplasia). 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 169 
PULMONARY ATRESIA WITH VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (PAVSD) 
Incidence. PAVSD accounts for about 1% of CHD in the fetus. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with overriding aorta can be seen. Sweeping 
further cephalad from this view, an atretic pulmonary artery can be detected with difficulty. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 13–20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Prognosis is favorable in isolated PAVSD, if confluent pulmonary branches supplied by the ductus 
arteriosus are present. 
Definition. Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal 
defect (PAVSD) is characterized by absence of the right 
ventriculo-arterial connection. The pulmonary trunk is 
usually severely abnormal and can be completely absent 
in some cases, with the pulmonary branches dependent 
on the arterial duct or MAPCAs. 
Anatomy. PAVSD, which can be considered as an extreme 
form of TOF, comprises an heterogeneous group of 
lesions sharing absence of the right ventriculo-arterial connection. 
There is a malalignment VSD with an overriding 
aorta, while the right ventricular outflow tract is, in most 
cases, similar to that of TOF, with the muscular outlet 
septum being anteriorly displaced. In most cases, the 
muscular outlet septum fuses directly with the parietal 
musculature of the right ventricle, obliterating the ventriculopulmonary 
junction. The anatomy of the hypoplastic 
pulmonary vessels is variable. In the most frequent 
arrangement, the right and left pulmonary arteries may be 
confluent (communicating with each other) and supplied 
by the ductus arteriosus. Alternatively, the central pulmonary 
arteries may be confluent and coexist with 
MAPCAs. The third pattern of arterial supply is complete 
absence of the central pulmonary arteries, the lungs being 
directly supplied by multiple MAPCAs.49 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The 4-chamber view is usually 
normal; in some cases, minor leftward rotation of the 
cardiac axis and/or cardiomegaly can be appreciated.7 
The malalignment VSD is best visualized on the longaxis 
view of the left ventricle (Figure 5.56A). When the 
right and left pulmonary arteries are present, they are 
commonly smaller than normal and confluent, with the 
characteristic appearance of a ‘flying seagull’ (Figure 
5.56b), and their size is usually dependent on the source 
of arterial supply.49,50 The pulmonary vascular bed may 
be supplied with blood flow from a ductus arteriosus, 
from MAPCAs (Figure 5.56c), or from a combination of 
both. Color Doppler contributes to demonstrating the 
overriding of the aorta, and demonstrates the retrograde 
blood flow across the ductus arteriosus, confirming the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation. The 
use of color Doppler is also important to demonstrate 
the presence of MAPCAs branching off the descending 
thoracic aorta (Figure 5.56c). Spectral Doppler has a 
limited diagnostic role to play in PAVSD. 4D echocardiography 
has recently been demonstrated to be very 
helpful in the definition of the vascularization pattern of 
the pulmonary arteries.7 In particular, the use of B-flow 
imaging and/or the inversion mode can demonstrate the 
confluent pulmonary arteries and the MAPCAs better 
than 2D ultrasound can (Figure 5.56d and 5.57). 
• Differential diagnosis. Differentiation of PAVSD from 
CAT can be very difficult. Types II and III CAT 
and PAVSD share the reduced dimensions of the 
pulmonary branches and the prevalence of the aortic 
vessel. When doubts arise, the following anatomic 

details should be sought to make the final diagnosis: 
the aortic/truncal valve, the atretic pulmonary valve, 
and the direction of flow within the arterial duct. The 
semilunar valve is always dysplastic (from two to five 
cusps) and typically stenotic and/or insufficient in 
CAT, whereas it is frequently unremarkable or only 
mildly abnormal in PAVSD. The atretic pulmonary 
valve is difficult to detect in PAVSD, but if demonstrated 
(in those infrequent cases in which the pulmonary 
trunk is not extremely hypoplastic), CAT can 
be excluded. Finally, accurate color Doppler mapping 
of the great vessels may help to detect reversed flow in 
the arterial duct and main pulmonary artery as well as 
aortopulmonary collaterals in PAVSD, or the branching 
point of the pulmonary arteries in the truncal vessel 
in types II and III CAT.48 
• Association with other malformations. Associated cardiac 
defects include absence of the ductus arteriosus 
(in about half of the cases), IAA, and right-sided aortic 
arch. Extracardiac malformations can also be associated, 
including CNS and gastro intestinal anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. PAVSD is frequently 
associated with 22q11 microdeletion (20% of cases). 
Association with trisomies 13 and 18 has also been 
reported. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. A detailed fetal anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert to exclude the presence 
of extracardiac anomalies. Fetal karyotyping, 
including FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion, is 
indicated. Delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center to allow proper neonatal management. 
170 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.56 Pulmonary atresia with ventricular 
septal defect (PAVSD). (a) on the left outflow tract 
view, the malalignment VSD with the overriding 
aorta is seen. (b) 3-vessels view; the ascending aorta 
(Ao) and the severely hypoplastic and confluent pulmonary 
branches are visible (arrows). (c) Color 
Doppler demonstrates a major aortopulmonary collateral 
artery (MAPCA) (arrow) departing from the 
descending aorta. (d) With B-flow rendering two 
MAPCA (arrow) departing directly from the 
descending aorta are clearly seen. Modified from7. 
Figure 5.57 Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect 
(PAVSD) B-flow imaging and STIC. With B-flow, the abnormal 
arrangement of the vascular distribution to the lungs is demonstrated: 
the rendered image shows 2 MAPCA departing from ventral 
aspect of descending aorta. In systole, the 2 MAPCA are more 
evident (arrows). 
a b 
c d 
c 

Postnatal therapy. The ultimate goal of surgical therapy 
is to construct completely separated, in series pulmonary 
and systemic circulations.49 This may be achieved as a 
single or staged procedure, depending on the complexity 
of the central pulmonary arteries and pulmonary blood 
supply, as well as institutional preference. The reported 
surgical mortality rate has been relatively low and good 
functional results have been achieved, especially when 
left and right pulmonary arteries are confluent and are 
supplied by the ductus arterious, but data obtained from 
pediatric series are likely to differ from fetal series, as 
usual, and therefore the above-mentioned results cannot 
be simply extended to the prenatally recognized cases. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Along with 
the presence of extracardiac and genetic anomalies, 
the prognosis of PAVSD is greatly influenced by the 
anatomy of the pulmonary arteries and by the sources of 
the pulmonary blood supply, appreciation of which helps 
to provide a fully informative prenatal counseling. 
Isolated PAVSD presents a difficult management plan, 
since variations in blood supply to the pulmonary arterial 
tree may be complex and create significant variations in 
the development of the pulmonary arteries. The presence 
of central pulmonary arteries of appropriate size and the 
relationship of the two branches are of surgical relevance. 
The central pulmonary arteries are considered ‘confluent’ 
when they maintain free communication with each other. 
The most favorable arrangement, from a surgical point of 
view, is that in which the two pulmonary branches are 
confluent and are supplied by the arterial duct. On the 
contrary, the complete absence of the central pulmonary 
arteries, with the lungs being directly supplied by multiple 
MAPCAs, represents the worst scenario, being associated 
with a significantly worse prognosis; also, it is the most 
difficult to treat postnatally. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 171 
COMPLETE TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES (TGA) 
Definition. Complete transposition of the great arteries 
(TGA) is defined by the presence of a discordant 
ventriculo-arterial connection, with the pulmonary 
artery arising posteriorly from the left ventricle and the 
aorta connected anteriorly to the right ventricle. 
Anatomy. The basic anomaly is the ventriculo-arterial 
discordance. TGA can be isolated (simple TGA) or can be 
associated with VSDs, pulmonary outflow obstruction, 
or aortic arch anomalies (coarctation or interruption). 
Much more rarely, atrioventricular valve abnormalities, 
including straddling and overriding, may be present. In 
two-third of the cases, significant anomalies of the coronary 
pattern, not diagnosable in utero, are associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The 4-chamber view is unremarkable, 
as for all conotruncal anomalies, unless major 
anomalies of the atrioventricular junction are associated. 
The diagnosis is made on the outflow tract views: there 
is no crossover, and the two arteries follow a parallel 
course. The aorta arises from the anterior right ventricle, 
whereas the pulmonary artery is connected posteriorly 
with the left ventricle (Figure 5.58a,b). If present, the 
VSD can also be displayed on the left outflow tract view 
(Figure 5.58c). The sizes of the vessels should be compared 
in order to detect possible obstructions, consisting 
mainly of valvular anomalies for the pulmonary artery 
and arch coarctation/interruption for the aorta. On 
longitudinal views, the aortic arch has a wider angle of 
curvature because of the anteriorized connection of the 
ascending aorta (a ‘hockey club’ aspect, in comparison 
with the ‘umbrella handle’ aspect of the normal arch). 
Finally, particular attention should be paid in the case of 
TGA with an intact ventricular septum to signs indicative 
of a restrictive foramen ovale (bulging or thickening: 
Figure 5.58d).50 Color Doppler may help in the characterization 
of the ventriculo-arterial connection (Figure 
5.58b), in the recognition of small VSDs (Figure 5.58c), 
and in the detection of pulmonary/aortic outflow obstruction. 
Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the transvalvular 
gradient. 4D echocardiography can effectively 
demonstrate the absence of crossover and the parallel 
course of the great vessels (Figure 5.53b). 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all CHDs sharing 
an absent crossover, namely corrected TGA (cTGA: 
Incidence. Relatively frequent, accounting for 2–5% of CHD in the fetus and the neonate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ventriculo-arterial discordance, with the right ventricle connected to the aorta and the left 
connected to the pulmonary artery. VSDs, pulmonary stenosis and arch abnormalities may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Extremely good in classic forms; good in the case of less favorable cardiac anatomy. 

see the next section) and DORV. cTGA can be differentiated 
from TGA thanks to the atrioventricular discordance 
(absent in TGA), which can be detected on 
the 4-chamber view. As far as the differentiation from 
DORV is concerned, as already mentioned, doubts 
may arise when distingushing TGA-like DORV, but 
in this case the outcome of the lesion is the same as for 
classic TGA. The differentiation from the other forms 
of DORV is based on the recognition, on 2D ultrasound, 
color Doppler, or 4D echocardiography, of 
the different connection of the two vessels in DORV 
(Figures 5.52,5.53, and 5.58a,b). 
• Prognostic indicators. The occurrence of significant 
right outflow obstruction is a relatively bad prognostic 
indicator, being a contraindication to the classic 
arterial switch operation. 
• Association with other malformations. None is 
known. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Like cTGA and 
cardiosplenic syndromes, TGA seems to protect from 
aneuploidy. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not definitely 
indicated, as the risk of chromosomal anomalies is very 
low. Similarly, the risk of associated extracardiac anomalies 
is trivial. Care should be take in differentiating 
TGA from cTGA, considering the significantly different 
management of the two lesions. Serial follow-up scans 
are warranted, especially in the case of TGA 
with intact ventricular septum, in order to recognize a 
restrictive foramen ovale if present. This diagnosis 
should prompt immediate transfer of the neonate to the 
interventional catheterization room in order to perform 
a life-saving Rashkind atrioseptostomy. According 
to some authors, the delivery of a fetus diagnosed with 
TGA and a restrictive foramen ovale should be organized 
with a cardiac hemodynamist in the delivery room 
because of the high risk of immediate neonatal decompensation.
50,51 In case of TGA with VSD or non-restrictive 
foramen ovale, the neonate may be transferred to 
the pediatric cardiology unit in the first hours of life in 
order to ensure assessment of oxygen saturation and 
proper planning of the Rashkind atrioseptostomy. 
Postnatal therapy. In the case of TGA with an intact ventricular 
septum, the Rashkind procedure is always necessary, 
to provide adequate oxygenation and proper 
planning of corrective surgery. Prostaglandin E1 infusion 
is always necessary to avoid closure of the arterial duct 
and increase oxygen saturation. The option of choice for 
surgical correction of TGA is the arterial switch operation, 
which consists of the following: (1) transection of 
the aorta and pulmonary artery from the ventricular outflows 
above the semilunar valves; (2) excision of the 
coronary arteries from the aortic root, with a cuff of 
aortic wall; (3) connection of the ascending aorta to the 
pulmonary root and of the coronary arteries to the repositioned 
aorta; (4) closure using a patch of the parietal 
defects of the aortic root from which the coronary arteries 
had been detached; (5) connection of the pulmonary 
artery to the aortic root, with the interposition of a synthetic 
conduit, if necessary. The arterial switch operation 
is performed during the first days of life in the case of 
TGA with intact ventricular septum, and in the first 
weeks in the case of TGA with VSD. In particular cases 
only, the palliative atrial switch (Senning or Mustard procedure) 
operation is performed, usually at 3–6 months of 
life. This type of surgery aims at redirecting the pulmonary 
venous blood flow towards the right ventricle, which 
becomes the systemic one, and, vice versa, diverting the 
172 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.58 Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) (24 weeks’ 
gestation). (a) On the left outflow tract view, the ventriculoarterial 
discordance and the absence of crossover (two parallel vessels) 
are demonstrated, with the pulmonary artery arising from the 
left ventricle and the anterior aorta arising from the right ventricle. 
(b) Color Doppler helps in defining the ventriculo-arterial connection 
and the parallel course of the vessels. (c) It may also be used to 
detect small VSDs (arrows), which may not be visible on grayscale 
ultrasound. (d) In the case of TGA with an intact ventricular septum, 
a restrictive foramen ovale (arrowheads) indicates the need for 
immediate postpartum Rashkind atrioseptostomy (see text). 
a b 
c d 

caval blood flow towards the left ventricle. In case of 
TGA with DIV plus severe pulmonary stenosis, an 
aortopulmonary shunt is performed. If the pulmonary 
outflow obstruction is moderately severe, the final intervention 
(reparation a l’etage ventriculaire, REV) will be 
performed at about 12 months of life. This surgical 
procedure consists of the following steps: resection of 
the infundibular septum; creation of a tunnel connecting 
the left ventricle with the aorta; and direct anastomosis 
of the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery. Alternatively, 
the Rastelli procedure consists of connection of 
the right ventricle with the pulmonary artery through a 
prothetic conduit; widening of the VSD; and interposition 
of a patch connecting the aorta with the left ventricle. As 
for all procedures in which prothetic conduits are used, 
the patients will need one or more replacements of the 
conduit during their lives. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. TGA represents a 
keystone in the validation of prenatal screening of CHD, 
as it represents the ideal model of CHD to be screened: it 
has a high early neonatal mortality risk, which disappears 
if early neonatal management is properly planned; 
and, once corrected, this CHD has a greater than 90% 
long-term survival rate in good functional conditions. 
Bonnet et al51 have demonstrated that prenatal diagnosis 
does indeed make a difference, being responsible for a 
20% reduction in surgical mortality, in comparison with 
cases detected postnatally. Once corrected, patients with 
TGA experience a 15-year survival rate of 86%. In comparison, 
patients undergoing palliative surgical procedures 
(Mustard or Senning) have a 15-year survival rate 
of 80%, with an increased risk of major postoperative 
complications and sequelae (rhythm abnormalities, right 
ventricular dysfunction, and sudden death). 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 173 
CORRECTED TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES (cTGA) 
Definition. Corrected transposition of the great arteries 
(cTGA) features atrio-ventricular and ventriculo-arterial 
discordance. The double discordance functionally corrects 
the circulation. 
Anatomy. The key anomaly is the double atrioventricular 
and ventriculo-arterial discordance, with the left 
atrium connected via a tricuspid valve to a morphologically 
right ventricle from which the aorta emerges; conversely, 
the right atrium is connected via the mitral valve 
to a morphologically left ventricle from which the pulmonary 
artery emerges. The discordance between cardiac 
situs and position is frequently associated, with 
dextrocardia in situs solitus and levocardia in situs 
inversus. Other major cardiac lesions, involving VSD, 
Ebstein-like attachment of the left-sided tricuspid valve, 
pulmonary outflow obstruction and rhythm disturbances, 
are frequently associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Unlike the other conotruncal 
anomalies, the key plane for the diagnosis of cTGA is 
the 4-chamber view, in which the atrioventricular discordance 
is diagnosed (Figure 5.59a,b). In particular, 
the atrioventricular discordance is diagnosed when the 
morphologically right ventricle, with the moderator 
band and a trabecular wall, is connected to the left 
atrium, and conversely, the left ventricle, forming 
the apex of the heart, is connected to the right atrium. 
Additional features that may increase the confidence of 
the diagnosis are the different attachments of the chordae 
tendinae of the two atrioventricular valves: the leftsided 
tricuspid valve papillary muscles attach to the 
ventricular apex, whereas the right-sided mitral valve 
papillary muscles attach to the lateral free wall (Figure 
5.59b). Assessment of the outflow views demonstrates 
the pulmonary artery arising from the right-sided left 
ventricle (Figure 5.59d) and the aorta connected with 
the left-sided right ventricle (Figure 5.59e). Recognition 
of dextrocardia in situs solitus should always prompt 
assessment of central connections to exclude the presence 
of cTGA. Anomalies of the tricuspid valve, VSDs 
(Figure 5.59c), pulmonary and aortic outflow obstruction, 
and complete heart block are frequently and variously 
associated (Figure 5.59f). The heart block 
is progressive, frequently appearing only in the 3rd 
trimester or after birth, and is due to the abnormal 
Incidence. Very low, <1% of CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4 chamber view: double atrioventricular and ventriculo-arterial discordance. 
Frequent association with other CHDs, including VSD, outflow obstruction, and ventricular hypoplasia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Good short-term outcome. Poor in the long-term because of the development of unresponsive heart 
failure. 

position of the conduction tissue.52 Color Doppler 
may be helpful in the assessment of the spatial relationship 
of the great arteries and in the detection of the 
VSD. Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the 
transvalvular gradient in the case of pulmonary stenosis. 
4D echocardiography can effectively demonstrate 
the inverted position of the ventricle by inversion-mode 
renderings. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes principally TGA, 
from which cTGA is easily distinguished by the double 
discordance. The abnormal arrangement of the 
great vessels may sometimes need to be differentiated 
from a DORV. 
• Prognostic indicators. Severe anomalies of the 
atrioventricular valves, responsible for ventricular 
hypoplasia, represent ominous prognostic signs. 
• Association with other malformations. Renal 
anomalies are the extracardiac malformations most 
frequently associated with cTGA.52 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Also cTGA, like TGA and cardiosplenic syndromes, 
seems to protect from aneuploidy.52 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is virtually 
absent. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is not indicated, 
owing to the extremely low risk of chromosomal 
anomalies. Delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center if there is evident outflow obstruction, major 
atrioventricular anomalies or congenital heart block 
with low cardiac output. 
Postnatal therapy. If it is not associated with other major 
anomalies, cTGA does not need to be operated upon. The 
optimal management of cTGA is controversial. There are 
pros and cons regarding the submission of patients with 
cTGA to the double (atrial and arterial) switch operation. 
The early results of this complex surgical procedure seem 
promising, but a longer follow-up is needed to draw any 
conclusions. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
of cTGA is one of the most controversial and 
debated issues in pediatric cardiology. The frequency 
and severity of the associated cardiac lesions represent 
the most important determinants of survival and mortality. 
In particular, severe insufficiency of the left-sided tricuspid 
valve and impaired systolic function of the right 
(systemic) ventricle are the main indicators of a poor 
prognosis: by 45 years of age, 67% of individuals with 
associated lesions showed heart failure, in comparison 
with 25% of individuals with isolated cTGA.53 
174 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.59 Corrected transposition of the great arteries (cTGA) (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) On the 4-chamber view, the morphologic right 
ventricle (mRV) is connected with the left atrium, and, vice versa, the morphologic left ventricle is connected with the right atrium. Note 
the moderator band in the mRV and the Ebstein-like appearance of the left-sided tricuspid valve. (b) On the transverse 4-chamber view, the 
differential insertion of the papillary muscles is evident: the tricuspid ones attach to the apex of the ventricle, whereas the mitral one 
attaches to the lateral free ventricular wall. (c) Color Doppler is used to demonstrate a small VSD not visible on grayscale ultrasound 
(arrow). (d) The right outflow tract view demonstrates the pulmonary artery (with the bifurcation) arising from the right-sided left ventricle. 
(e) The left outflow tract view demonstrates the aorta arising from the left-sided mRV. (f) A complete heart block can sometimes 
appear in the 3rd trimester. Note the dissociation between the atrial (A) and ventricular (V) frequencies. 
a b c 
d e f 

Definition. Situs anomalies are often considered confusing, 
in part because of the overlapping features of some 
anomalies, such as situs ambiguous with polysplenia and 
situs ambiguous with asplenia. The literature also contributes 
to this confusion, because some authors use the 
terms ‘situs inversus’ and ‘situs ambiguous’ interchangeably. 
Greater understanding can be achieved by defining 
the terms commonly used to describe situs anomalies. 
The term situs refers to the position of the heart and viscera 
relative to midline. The normal anatomic configuration 
of the viscera (liver, vena cava, trilobed lung on the 
right; spleen, abdominal aorta, bilobed lung on the left) 
and of the atria (atrium morphologically right located on 
the right, atrium morphologically left located on the left) 
is called situs solitus. In situs inversus there is usually 
a mirror-like position of the organs. A position of the 
organs different from situs solitus and situs inversus is 
called situs ambiguous or heterotaxy. Situs ambiguous 
or heterotaxy is not characterized by a single set of 
abnormalities but by a spectrum of abnormalities. The 
two major subcategories of situs ambiguous are situs 
ambiguous with polysplenia and situs ambiguous with 
asplenia. 
Anatomy. Situs ambiguous with polysplenia (also 
known as bilateral left-sidedness or left atrial isomerism) 
is associated with paired left-sided viscera while rightsided 
viscera may be absent. Bilateral morphological left 
atrial appendages, multiple cardiac anomalies, congenital 
heart block, bilateral morphologic left (bilobed) 
lungs, multiple splenules, a malpositioned stomach, a 
midline liver, and an interruption of the inferior vena 
cava with azygos continuation are all associated with left 
isomerism. In contrast, situs ambiguous with asplenia 
(bilateral right-sidedness or right atrial isomerism) features 
paired right-sided viscera while left-sided viscera 
may be absent. Typical findings are bilateral morphologic 
right atrial appendages, multiple cardiac anomalies, 
bilateral morphologic right (trilobed) lungs, an 
absent spleen, and a midline liver. A malpositioned 
inferior vena cava and aorta, are frequently seen. 
Cardiac malformations are more complex in right isomerism 
postnatally. 
The most common cardiac and/or venous anomalies 
associated with right atrial isomerism24 are abnormal 
axis and heart position, often opposite to the stomach, 
common atrium, unbalanced AVSD, abnormal ventriculoarterial 
connection (mainly DORV or TGA), TAPVC, 
stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary artery, and inferior 
vena cava and abdominal aorta located either on the 
same side of the spine or centrally (vena cava is always 
anterior to the aorta). The most common cardiac and/or 
venous anomalies associated with the left atrial isomerism24 
are shift of the cardiac axis or abnormal position 
of the heart, unbalanced AVSD, ASD, absence of 
the intrahepatic tract of the inferior vena cava with azygos 
continuation, bilateral superior vena cava, hepatic 
veins draining directly into the right atrium, and complete 
heart block. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound markers for 
immediate evaluation of this syndrome are as follows: 
Left atrial isomerism 
• Contralateral and not homolateral position of the 
heart with respect to the stomach (heart on the right – 
stomach on the left, and vice versa) 
• Interruption of the intrahepatic tract of the inferior 
vena cava with azygos continuation (Figure 5.60b) 
• Unbalanced AVSD (Figure 5.33, 5.61a) 
• Early fetal heart block. 
When interruption of the inferior vena cava with 
azygos continuation is present, on the axial view of the 
abdomen, the azygos is close and lateral to the abdominal 
aorta (and not anterior as with the inferior vena 
cava) (Figure 5.60b). This latter anomaly is also evident 
on the 4-chamber view: behind the left atrium, two 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 175 
HETEROTAXY SYNDROMES 
Incidence. These account for about 4% of CHD at birth. 
Diagnosis. Any arrangement of internal organs other than situs solitus or situs inversus: heart and stomach on 
opposite sides; abnormal relationship of abdominal aorta and inferior vena cava; midline liver. Almost always 
associated with major CHD. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Depends on type and severity of associated cardiac malformations. Right atrial isomerism: increased 
mortality in the case of obstructed pulmonary veins with presence of a right outflow tract obstruction. Left atrial 
isomerism: increased mortality when complete heart block is present. 

vessels (rather than one) of similar size but different 
pulsatility are identified (Figure 5.61a, b). The azygos 
continuation usually drains into the superior vena cava 
in the upper mediastinum. 
Right atrial isomerism 
• Contralateral rather than ipsilateral position of 
the heart with respect to the stomach (heart on the 
right – stomach on the left, and vice versa) 
• Anomalous position of the abdominal aorta and the 
inferior vena cava, both positioned centrally or on the 
same side of the spine (Figure 5.60c) 
• Unbalanced AVSD (Figure 5.33) or other structural 
heart disease 
Color Doppler can be used to characterize the major cardiac 
anomalies and to trace the course of the abnormal 
pulmonary or systemic venous returns (Figure 5.24b) 
and to detect atrioventricular insufficiency or ductus 
dependence. Spectral Doppler may be used to support 
the identification of abnormally located pulmonary 
venous returns (Figure 5.24c). 4D echocardiography has 
been employed in the location of the azygos continuation,
54 and can be of help in locating the normal/abnormal 
pulmonary veins.10 
• Differential diagnosis. Isomerisms must be differentiated 
from situs inversus, where all the organs have 
a mirror image with respect to the norm, and from 
isolated dextrocardia, where the other organs are 
arranged normally and associated cardiac malformations 
may be absent. 
• Prognostic indicators. The worst prognostic indicator 
is association of complete heart block with AVSD, 
which often leads to intrauterine demise. As already 
mentioned, the prognosis is also unfavorable in a significant 
percentage of cases characterized by obstructed 
TAPVC and stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary artery. 
• Association with other malformations. Intestinal 
malrotation is frequent in both types of isomerism, 
occasionally with signs of occlusion. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Only one case of 
association with the 22q11 microdeletion has been 
reported. Otherwise, the cardiosplenic syndromes are 
not associated with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. There are sporadic 
cases of syndromes described featuring isomerism-like 
visceral arrangement. In addition, a recessive autosomal 
inheritance pattern with reduced penetrance has been 
reported in a few cases of isomeric syndromes. 
Obstetric management. Among fetuses with structural 
cardiac anomalies, abnormal visceral situs is strongly 
predictive of a normal karyotype. Delivery must take 
place in any case in a tertiary referral center, in order 
to transfer the newborn to a pediatric cardiology/ 
cardiosurgery unit for final diagnosis and adequate 
neonatal management. 
176 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.60 (a) Situs solitus: the abdomen is seen in cross-section at the level of the stomach (S). The normal relationship of the aorta 
(A) and inferior vena cava (C) in the upper abdomen is seen. (b) In left atrial isomerism, interruption of the intrahepatic tract of the inferior 
vena cava with azygos continuation: axial view of the abdomen. The azygos vein (AZ) is close and lateral to the abdominal aorta (AO) 
(and not anterior, as with the inferior vena cava). (c) In right atrial isomerism, anomalous position of the abdominal aorta (A) and the inferior 
vena cava, both of which are positioned on the same side of the spine. S, stomach. 
Figure 5.61 Left atrial isomerism. (a) Unbalanced atrioventricular 
septal defect. Note the azygos continuation (arrowhead) close 
to the descending aorta. CA, common atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
(b) On the 4-chamber view, behind the left atrium two (rather than 
one) vessels (arrowheads) of equal size are identified. (H, heart). 
a 
a b 
b c 

Postnatal treatment. In some cases of left atrial 
isomerism, there is no need for any treatment, because 
the associated anomalies may be of limited clinical significance. 
Surgery is needed for those newborns with 
complex lesions – which account, unfortunately, for the 
majority of cases. The main indication for early correction 
is in those cases where a TAPVC is present, typically 
right isomerism, and often burdened by obstructive 
problems. The percentage of success increases in cases 
of biventricular correction whereas it is significantly 
lower for univentricular correction mainly submitted to 
a Fontan-type treatment. In these cases, the presence of a 
double superior vena cava in the absence of a communicating 
vein requires a Glenn operation, which leads to an 
increase in morbidity. 
In addition, the visceral anomalies may adversely affect 
the long-term outcome of patients with heterotaxy. 
Varying degrees of malrotation and malfixation of the 
bowel and gastric volvulus are common in both left and 
right isomerism, with a predominance in left isomerism. 
Children with right isomerism and asplenia who survive 
cardiac palliation are at great risk of dying from sepsis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
certainly unfavorable in the case of right isomerism 
with TAPVC and stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary 
artery. In cases of right isomerism, Hashmi et al55 have 
reported a 75% mortality rate in patients operated in 
the neonatal period and a 51% mortality rate in those 
requiring operation later. The prognosis is relatively 
better in children subjected to biventricular correction 
in comparison with those needing univentricular correction 
complicated by an anomaly of the venoatrial 
connection. In cases of left isomerism, occasionally 
there may be no complex heart defects requiring 
surgery in the neonatal period. During the postnatal 
period, the complexity and severity of cardiac anomalies 
is greater in right isomerism. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 177 
CARDIAC TUMORS 
Incidence. Very low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, the tumors appear as single or multiple, usually hyperechoic, 
nodules attached to the cardiac walls and/or septum. Tachyarrhythmias or hydrops can be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (rhabdomyomas with tuberous sclerosis). 
Outcome. Good, unless the tumors cause valve obstruction with consequent heart failure and death. The 
prognosis is variable in the case of association with tuberous sclerosis. 
Definition. Cardiac tumors are mesenchymal or amartomatous 
nodules arising from the cardiac layers and 
located in the heart or the pericardium. 
Anatomy. Rhabdomyomas are the most common tumors, 
accounting for two-thirds of the cardiac masses detected 
in the fetus and neonate.56 These tumors are encapsulated 
and are often multiple. Characteristically, they are of late 
onset and often shrink significantly in the neonatal 
period.57 Teratomas are the second most common histotype, 
accounting for about 15% of cardiac tumors. They 
are usually single and encapsulated, and tend to grow 
within the pericardial cavity, fairly frequently leading to 
large pericardial effusions. Other tumors – fibromas, 
hemangiomas, and myxomas – have occasionally been 
described in the fetus.58 They are usually single tumors. 
Myxomas are located in the atrium and have a stalk that 
allows free movement during the cardiac cycle. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Rhabdomyomas are usually 
detected on the 4-chamber view: they are hyperechoic, 
well-defined and round or oval (Figure 5.62a,b). These 
tumors may arise anywhere in the myocardium, and in a 
few cases may completely replace some areas of the 
myocardium, appearing as hyperechoic regional myocardial 
thickening; however, in these rare cases, classic nodules 
are always associated and lead to the diagnosis. 
Fibromas (Figure 5.63) have sonographic characteristics 
similar to those of the rhabdomyoma, but are almost 
always single. A cardiac myxoma has been described only 
once in the fetus, with an appearance consistent with that 
reported after birth: a moderately hyperechoic stalked 
tumor floating freely during the cardiac cycle.58 It should 
be underlined that all of these tumors evolve during the 
course of pregnancy: they appear in the late 2nd trimester, 
growing steadily until 32–35 weeks, when they reach a 
plateau. After birth, rhabdomyomas can shrink significantly 
or disappear macroscopically. It has been speculated 
that this biphasic behavior may be related to the 
maternal hormonal milieu, which may stimulate tumor 
growth in the 3rd trimester. After birth, the neonate is no 
longer in contact with maternal estrogens, and this allows 

the tumor to shrink, as the mitotic hormonal stimulus 
is withdrawn. Color Doppler assessment may help in 
detecting dynamic outflow obstruction if the tumor is 
located in the ventricular outflow (Figure 5.62c,d), and/or 
in checking the patency of an atrioventricular valve if the 
nodule is located just below the atrioventricular plane. 
Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the outflow 
obstruction. 4D echocardiography is of little use in case of 
cardiac tumors. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes hyperechogenic 
foci and the rare dystrophic calcifications. The differentiation 
from hyperechogenic foci is simple, since 
these do not have any continuity with the myocardium, 
being located on the chordae tendinae of the atrioventricular 
valves, and are very small. As far as the rare 
form of diffuse rhabdomyomatosis is concerned, this 
can rarely be mistaken for a cardiomyopathy, since 
other well defined tumors are usually associated and 
lead to the final diagnosis. 
• Prognostic indicators. The tumor volume is the 
main prognostic factor: it is much more common for 
large tumors to obstruct the atrioventricular inlets 
or the outflows. The occurrence of tachyarrhyhmias, 
which have been related to mechanical stimulation 
of the atrioventricular conduction system by tumors 
located at that level, and the possibly associated 
hydrops from cardiac failure are also poor prognostic 
factors. 
• Association with other malformations. No association 
has been reported, with the significant exception 
of tuberous sclerosis tumoral lesions if this congenital 
disorder is associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high for multiple rhabdomyomas, which account 
for 90% of all cases, but is absent for the other histotypes. 
Tuberous sclerosis (OMIM 191100) is a dominantly 
inherited disorder showing genetic heterogeneity 
and high penetrance. It is characterized by the presence 
of hamartomas in multiple organ systems. Clinically, 
epilepsy, learning difficulties, behavioral problems, and 
skin lesions are the most commonly encountered problems. 
Renal angiomyolipomas may cause renal compression 
and hemorrhage. In utero, cerebral calcifications and 
subependymal nodules, possibly responsible in the 
neonate for epilepsy, seizures, and hydrocephalus, have 
occasionally been described on magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) and ultrasound in fetuses with rhabdomyomas. 
Mental retardation of variable degree complicates 
20–30% of cases. Tuberous sclerosis can be diagnosed at 
birth, with recognition of the typical café-au-lait spots, 
but in other cases the disease may also appear late in 
infancy (up to 18 months of life). Ninety percent of 
fetuses diagnosed with multiple rhabdomyomas will 
eventually develop tuberous sclerosis after birth. 
178 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.62 Rhabdomyomas. (a) Three tumors (R) are seen on 
the left outflow tract view. (b) More cranially, another large tumor 
is seen, partially obstructing the left outflow. (c) and (d) Recording 
of the Doppler velocity waveform at the level of the ascending aorta 
demonstrates moderate dynamic stenosis, with moderately elevated 
peak velocity (150 cm/s). Ao, aorta; RV, right ventricle; LV; left 
ventricle; CCA, common carotid artery. 
Figure 5.63 Cardiac fibroma at 22 weeks’ (a,b) and 30 weeks’ 
(c,d) gestation. (a) Sagittal view, showing the relationships between 
the homogeneously hyperechoic tumor mass, the liver, the 
diaphragm, and the cardiac chambers. (b) Axial view of the base of 
the heart. The round shape of the tumor is evident. (c) At 30 weeks’ 
gestation, the sagittal view shows the increased size of the tumor. 
(d) The axial view confirms the increased volume of the tumor. 
a a b 
c d 
b 
c d 

Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not mandatory, 
as the risk of chromosomal anomalies is low. Obstetric 
management is based on follow-up of the tumors: if 
these show active growth and threaten to cause complete 
valve obstruction, then early delivery may be 
a valid option. If tachyarrhythmia is associated, transplacental 
antiarrhythmic therapy with digoxin should 
be attempted, although rhythm disturbances secondary 
to cardiac tumors are often unresponsive. Delivery 
should be organized in a tertiary referral center, in 
order to provide cardiologic and respiratory assistance 
if needed. 
Postnatal therapy. Cardiac tumors do not require any 
medical/surgical treatment in 85% of cases, due to the 
significant regression of the lesions that occurs postnatally. 
In the case of multiple rhabdomyomas, examination 
including cerebral MRI, electroencephalography, 
renal ultrasound, and ocular fundus examination should 
be scheduled and serially repeated in order to disclose or 
confirm the presence of tuberous sclerosis. The remaining 
15% of cases are symptomatic at birth, and as such may 
need medical and/or surgical intervention. In particular, 
in the case of tumors causing severe pleuropericardial 
effusions, responsible for cardiac tamponade and low 
cardiac output, an emergency pericardiocentesis should 
be performed, followed by surgical resection of the pericardial 
tumor. In case of tumor-induced tachyarrhythmias, 
medical antiarrhythmic treatment is indicated 
(digoxin, flecainide, or sotalol), and, if the rhythm disturbance 
is unresponsive, surgical removal of the tumor(s) 
is carried out. In the limited number of cases in which the 
tumors (rhabdomyomas) cause hemodynamically significant 
valve obstruction, surgical resection of the mass is 
always indicated. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The surgical mortality 
rate for cardiac tumors is extremely low. Survival 
rates are high, and deaths (due to refractory cardiac failure 
and tachyarrhythmias) are usually confined to the 
first months of life. The long-term prognosis is guarded 
in the case of tuberous sclerosis, because of the 30% risk 
of mental retardation and the other possible sequelae 
possibly requiring repeated surgery. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 179 
CARDIOMYOPATHIES (CMP) 
Incidence. Extremely low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, concentric, biventricular thickening of the myocardial walls with 
variable impairment of cardiac function. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Variable (Noonan syndrome). 
Outcome. Extremely variable. Depends on the degree of compromise of cardiac function and on possible 
underlying genetic disorders. 
Definition. The term cardiomyopathy (CMP) identifies a 
primary or secondary disorder of the myocardium that 
causes impairment of cardiac function of variable severity. 
Most CMPs have neonatal onset, but in a few cases 
they may arise in the late 3rd trimester. 
Anatomy. Primary CMPs are due to an architectural 
anomaly of the myocytes. The final consequence is compromise 
of cardiac diastolic and/or systolic function of 
variable degree. In the fetus, a detailed diagnosis of the 
type of CMP is not possible, and only an initial assessment 
of these disorders, mainly based on the sonographic 
appearance of the myocardium, is feasible. The 
primary forms that have been described in the fetus are 
familial hypertrophic CMP, dilatative CMP, and spongious 
CMP (or myocardial dysplasia). Among the secondary 
forms, those most frequently seen in utero are 
high-output CMP of the recipient twin in monochorionic 
pregnancies complicated by twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome and the CMP that is frequently observed 
in severe renal malformations (autosomal recessive polycystic 
renal disease, bilateral renal agenesis, etc.). Rarely, 
CMPs secondary to storage diseases are detected in the 
late 3rd trimester. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
transverse 4-chamber view, since the thickness of free 
myocardial walls is best appreciated if displayed at 90° 
to the insonating beam. CMPs are easy to detect when 
severe, since in these cases cardiac function is highly 
depressed. What is extremely difficult is early recognition 
of a CMP when myocardial function is still apparently 
normal: it is the authors’ personal experience that 
in a small number of cases that have later developed 

frank CMP, in the 2nd trimester scan the myocardium 
appeared very bright, although of normal thickness 
and contractility (Figure 5.64a); then, in the early 3rd 
trimester, the myocardial walls thickened and acquired 
the classic aspect of CMP (Figure 5.64b). Color Doppler 
may help to detect small VSDs, which are sometimes 
associated with CMPs, and to evaluate the outflows to 
exclude dynamic subaortic stenosis due to the thickened 
myocardium, which may obstruct the aortic outflow 
during systole. In CMP, the degree of cardiac function 
impairment benefits from the use of 4D echocardiography, 
which, especially with the inversion mode, is able to 
show in detail the degree of diastolic underfilling or systolic 
compromise (Figure 5.64c). In the few cases in 
which a storage disease shows prenatal onset, the cardiac 
findings are unmistakable (Figure 5.65a). The socalled 
spongious CMP, which has also been referred to 
as non-compaction of the ventricle or myocardial dysplasia, 
can also have a fetal onset (Figure 5.65b). 
• Differential diagnosis. CMP should be differentiated 
from the mild hypertrophy of the right ventricle that 
is sometimes detected in the fetus late in gestation and 
that regresses shortly after birth. However, the key 
feature of most CMPs is that the myocardial thickening 
involves both ventricles. Also, in the case of CHD 
characterized by severe pressure/volume overload, 
myocardial thickening is typically unilateral, whereas 
the contraction of the contralateral ventricle is generally 
unremarkable. 
• Prognostic indicators. The degree of impairment 
of systolic function is the most important prognostic 
factor: cases associated with severe pump failure and 
that are often complicated by hydrops have a very 
high perinatal mortality rate. The association of tachyarrhythmias, 
due to compression/involvement of the 
conduction system, is also an ominous finding. 
• Association with other malformations. No significant 
association with extracardiac anomalies has been 
described, unless the CMP is in a syndromic context. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low, if the extremely rare cases in which storage disease 
have a prenatal onset are excluded. The only conditions 
that can present with CMP are Noonan syndrome, and 
the extremely rare Toriello–Carey syndrome and 
Leopard syndrome: 
• Noonan syndrome:12 Look for . CMP + pulmonary 
outflow obstruction + nuchal edema. 
• Toriello–Carey syndrome:12,59 Look for . CMP + 
corpus callosum agenesis + positive family history. 
180 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.64 Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 4-chamber view. (a) At 23 weeks’ gestation, the only abnormal finding was a mildly 
bright aspect of the myocardium (not easily detected on the image). (b) At 35 weeks’ gestation, the severe hypertrophy involving the free 
walls and the septum is evident (arrows). (c) 3D inversion mode image demonstrating significant impairment of ventricular relaxation, 
evidenced by the extremely reduced amount of blood in the ventricles (arrows). 
Figure 5.65 Cardiomyopathies. (a) Storage disease cardiomyopathy 
at 38 weeks’ gestation. Note the severe thickening of 
the myocardial walls and septum. (b) Spongious cardiomyopathy 
(or myocardial dysplasia, non-compaction of the myocardium) at 
36 weeks’ gestation. Note the presence of several myocardial 
recesses (arrows) highlighted by the power Doppler. LA, left 
atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; R 
and arrows, myocardial recesses. 
a b c 
a b 

Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is not indicated, 
because of the extremely low risk of chromosomal 
anomalies and the usual late onset of CMPs. Early delivery 
may be considered in selected cases showing initial 
heart failure when pulmonary maturation is virtually 
guaranteed. A cesarean section at 34–26 weeks’ gestation 
may allow neonatal cardiac assistance and resuscitation 
with improved survival. In the case of arrhythmias, 
transplacental therapy should be attempted, although 
rhythm disturbances associated with CMP are usually 
refractory to antiarrhythmic drugs. Delivery should be 
organized in a tertiary referral center where the abovedescribed 
neonatal procedures are available. 
Postnatal therapy. Aortopulmonary shunting is necessary 
only if severe dynamic subaortic stenosis is detected 
after birth. If cardiac decompensation is refractory to all 
remedies, cardiac transplantation may represent the only 
option to save the infant’s life. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival rates 
and overall prognosis are extremely variable, and 
depend mainly upon the degree of impairment of cardiac 
function and the etiology of the myocardial lesion. 
Storage diseases are almost invariably lethal in a few 
years; familial hypertrophic CMP has a variable phenotypic 
expression even within the same family, with 
cases requiring early cardiac transplantation and cases 
who manage to reach adulthood in acceptably good 
conditions and in NYHA functional class I–II. Of note, 
in familial hypertrophic CMP, significant clinical 
improvements and, in selected cases, complete regression 
of the hypertrophy, have been obtained with the 
ß-blocker propanolol.60 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 181 
REFERENCES 
1. Carvalho JS, Ho SY, Shinebourne EA. Sequential segmental analysis 
in complex fetal cardiac abnormalities: a logical approach to 
diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 105–11. 
2. Yoo SJ, Lee YH, Cho KS, Kim DY. Sequential segmental 
approach to fetal congenital heart disease. Cardiol Young 1999; 
9: 430–44. 
3. ISUOG Education Committee. Fetal Echo Task Force cardiac 
screening examination of the fetus: guidelines for performing the 
‘basic’ and ‘extended basic’ cardiac scan. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 107–13. 
4. Gonçalves LF, Lee W, Chaiworapongsa T, et al. Four-dimensional 
ultrasonography of the fetal heart with spatio-temporal 
image correlation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 189: 1792–802. 
5. Chaoui R, Hoffmann J, Heling KH. Three-dimensional (3D) and 
4D color Doppler fetal echocardiography using spatio-temporal 
image correlation (STIC). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 
535–45. 
6. Paladini D, Vassallo M, Sglavo G, Lapadula C, Martinelli P. The 
role of spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC) with tomographic 
ultrasound imaging (TUI) in the sequential analysis of 
fetal congenital heart disease. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006: 
27: 555–61. 
7. Volpe P, Campobasso G, Stanziano A, et al. A novel approach to 
enhance the assessment of sources of pulmonary blood flow and 
the identification of the anatomy of pulmonary arteries in fetuses 
with pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect: 4D-US 
with B-flow imaging and spatiotemporal image correlation. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; in press. 
8. Darling RC, Rothney WB, Craig JM. Total pulmonary venous 
drainage into the right side of the heart. Report of 17 autopsied 
cases not associated with other major cardiovascular anomalies. 
Lab Invest 1957; 7: 44–64. 
9. Valsangiacomo ER, Hornberger LK, Barrea C, et al. Partial and 
total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in the fetus: twodimensional 
and Doppler echocardiographic findings. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 257–63. 
10. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
11. Vassallo M, Pascotto M, Pisacane C, et al. Right superior vena 
cava draining into the left atrium: prenatal diagnosis and 
postnatal management. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 
445–8. 
12. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s. Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006. 
13. Ferencz C, Rubin DJ, Loffredo AC, Magee AC, eds. Epidemiology 
of Congenital Heart Disease. The Baltimore–Washington Infant 
Study 1981–1989. Perspectives in Pediatric Cardiology, Vol 4. 
New York: Mount Kisco Futura, 1993. 
14. Allan LD, Sharland GK, Milburn A, et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of 1006 consecutive cases of congenital heart disease in 
the fetus. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994; 23: 1452–8. 
15. Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
congenital heart disease in the Naples area during the years 
1994–1999 – the experience of a joint fetal–pediatric cardiology 
unit. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 545–52. 
16. Paladini D, Palmieri S, Lamberti A, et al. Characterization and 
natural history of ventricular septal defects in the fetus. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 118–22. 
17. Axt-Fliedner R, Schwarze A, Smrcek J, et al. Isolated ventricular 
septal defects detected by color Doppler imaging: evolution during 
fetal and first year of postnatal life. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 266–73. 
18. Paladini D, Russo MG, Vassallo M, Tartaglione A. The 
‘in-plane’ view of the interventricular septum. A new approach 
to the characterization of ventricular septal defects in the fetus. 
Prenat Diagn 2003; 23: 1052–5. 
19. Yagel S, Valsky DV, Messing B. Detailed assessment of fetal ventricular 
septal defect with 4D color Doppler ultrasound using 
spatio-temporal image correlation technology. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 97–8. 
20. Hoffman JIE, Rudolph AM. The natural history of ventricular 
septal defects in infancy. Am J Cardiol 1965; 16: 634–53. 
21. Kirklin JW, Barratt-Boyes BG. Cardiac Surgery, 2nd edn. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1993. 
22. Huggon IC, Cook AC, Smeeton NC, Magee AG, Sharland GK. 
Atrioventricular septal defects diagnosed in fetal life: associated 
cardiac and extra-cardiac abnormalities and outcome. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2000; 36: 593–601. 

23. Allan LD. Atrioventricular septal defect in the fetus. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999; 181: 1250–3. 
24. Berg C, Geipel A, Smrcek J, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of cardiosplenic 
syndromes: a 10-year experience. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 22: 451–9. 
25. Paladini D, Marasini M, Volpe P. Severe ductal constriction in 
the third-trimester fetus following maternal self-medication with 
nimesulide. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 357–61. 
26. Faiola S, Tsoi E, Huggon C, Allan LD, Nicolaides KH. Likelihood 
ratio for trisomy 21 in fetuses with tricuspid regurgitation at the 11 
to 13 + 6-week scan. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 22–7. 
27. Todros T, Paladini D, Chiappa E, et al. Pulmonary stenosis and 
atresia with intact ventricular septum during prenatal life. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 228–33. 
28. Daubeney PEF, Sharland GK, Cook AC, et al, for the UK and 
Eire Collaborative Study of Pulmonary Atresia with Intact 
Ventricular Septum. Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum. Impact of fetal echocardiography on incidence at birth 
and postnatal outcome. Circulation 1998; 98: 562–6. 
29. Simpson JM. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 15: 271–8. 
30. Allan LD, Sharland G, Tynan MJ. The natural history of the 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Int J Cardiol 1989; 25: 341–3. 
31. Simpson JM, Sharland GK. Natural history and outcome of 
aortic stenosis diagnosed prenatally. Heart 1997; 77: 205–10. 
32. McCaffrey FM, Sherman FS. Prenatal diagnosis of severe aortic 
stenosis. Pediatr Cardiol 1997; 18: 276–81. 
33. Brierley J, Redington AN. Aortic coarctation and interrupted 
aortic arch. In: Anderson RH, Macartney FJ, Shinebourne EA, 
Tynan M, eds. Paediatric Cardiology. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2001: 1523–58. 
34. Sharland GK, Chan KY, Allan LD. Coarctation of the aorta: 
difficulties in prenatal diagnosis. Br Heart J 1994; 7: 70–5. 
35. Paladini D, Volpe P, Russo MG, et al. Aortic coarctation: prognostic 
indicators of survival in the fetus. Heart 2004; 90: 
1348–9. 
36. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis 
of interruption of the aortic arch and its association with 
deletion of chromosome 22q11. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2002; 20: 327–31. 
37. Chaoui R, Schneider MBE, Kalache KD. Right aortic arch with 
vascular ring and aberrant left subclavian artery: prenatal diagnosis 
assisted by three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 661–3. 
38. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. 22q11 deletions in fetuses 
with malformations of the outflow tracts or interruption of the 
aortic arch: impact of additional ultrasound signs. Prenat Diagn 
2003; 23: 752–7. 
39. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in fetal 
cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 546–52. 
40. Achiron R, Rotstein Z, Heggesh J, et al. Anomalies of the fetal 
aortic arch: a novel sonographic approach to in-utero diagnosis. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 553–7. 
41. Yoo SJ, Min JY, Lee YH, et al. Fetal sonographic diagnosis of 
aortic arch anomalies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 
535–46. 
42. Volpe P, Paladini D, Marasini M, et al. Characteristics, associations 
and outcome of absent pulmonary valve syndrome in the 
fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 623–8. 
43. Hornberger LK, Sanders SP, Sahn DJ, et al. In utero pulmonary 
artery and aortic growth and potential for progression of pulmonary 
outflow tract obstruction in tetralogy of Fallot. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 1995; 25: 739–45. 
44. Paladini D, Rustico MA, Todros T, et al. Conotruncal anomalies 
in prenatal life. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 8: 241–6. 
45. Lev M, Eckner FA. The pathologic anatomy of tetralogy of 
Fallot and its variants. Disease Chest 1964; 45: 251–61. 
46. Razavi RS, Sharland GK, Simpson JM. Prenatal diagnosis by 
echocardiogram and outcome of absent pulmonary valve syndrome. 
Am J Cardiol 2003; 91: 429–32. 
47. Collet RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus: a classification 
according to anatomic types. Surg Clin North Am 1949; 
29: 1245–70. 
48. Volpe P, Paladini D, Marasini M, et al. Common arterial trunk 
in the fetus: characteristics, associations, and outcome in a multicentre 
series of 23 cases. Heart 2003; 89: 1437–41. 
49. Baker EJ. Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia. In: 
Anderson RH, Macartney FJ, Shinebourne EA, Tynan M, eds. 
Paediatric Cardiology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2001; 
1251–79. 
50. Jouannic JM, Gavard L, Fermont L, et al. Sensitivity and specificity 
of prenatal features of physiological shunts to predict 
neonatal clinical status in transposition of the great arteries. 
Circulation 2004; 110: 1743–6. 
51. Bonnet D, Coltri A, Butera G, et al. Detection of transposition of 
the great arteries reduces neonatal morbidity and mortality. 
Circulation 1999; 99: 916–18. 
52. Paladini D, Volpe P, Marasini M, et al. Diagnosis, characterization 
and outcome of congenitally-corrected transposition of the 
great arteries in the fetus. A multicenter series of 30 cases. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 281–5. 
53. Graham TP, Bernard YD, Mellen BG, et al. Long-term outcome 
in congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2000; 36: 255–61. 
54. Espinoza J, Goncalves LF, Lee W, Mazor M, Romero R. A novel 
method to improve prenatal diagnosis of abnormal systemic 
venous connections using three-and four-dimensional ultrasonography 
and ‘inversion mode’. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2005; 25: 428–34. 
55. Hashmi A, Abu-Sulaiman R, McCrindle BW, et al. Management 
and outcomes of right atrial isomerism: a 26-year experience. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 1998; 31: 1120–6. 
56. Groves AM, Fagg NL, Cook AC, Allan LD. Cardiac tumours in 
intrauterine life. Arch Dis Chil 1992; 67: 1189–92. 
57. Paladini D, Palmieri S, Russo GM, Pacileo G. Cardiac multiple 
rhabdomyomatosis: prenatal diagnosis and natural history. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 7: 84–5. 
58. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Vassallo M, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
ultrasonographic findings of a cardiac myxoma. Obstet Gynecol 
2003; 102: 1174–6. 
59. Paladini D, Russo MG, Tartaglione A, Loffredo A, Mastinelli P. 
Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Toriello-Carey syndrome. 
Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 1185–7. 
60. Dimitrow PP, Kizanowski M, Nizankowski R, Szczeklik A, 
Dubiel JS. Comparison of the effect of verapamil and propranolol 
on response of coronary vasomotion to cold pressor test in 
symptomatic patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Cardiovasc Drug Ther 2000; 14: 643–50. 
182 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

The thorax has a conotruncal shape. Its upper borders 
are represented by the clavicles and the neck; it is limited 
inferiorly by the diaphragm, laterally by the ribs, and 
anteriorly by the sternum. Posteriorly, the shoulder 
blades can be seen in strict relationship with the ribs and 
the clavicles. In the thorax, the following regions/organs 
can be identified: the lungs, which extend from the 
diaphragm to the upper border, just below the clavicles; 
the heart, which is located in the lower mediastinum and 
lies on the surface of the diaphragm; and the mediastinum, 
with the great vessels and the thymus, larger in 
the fetus than in the neonate. The bony outline, represented 
by the rib cage, and the overlying soft tissues 
complete the thoracic area. In this chapter, normal and 
abnormal anatomy of thoracic viscera are described. The 
heart and the great vessels are described in Chapter 5. 
Timing of examination. Ultrasound assessment of the 
thorax can be carried out easily until 25–26 weeks of gestation. 
After this period, the increased mineralization of 
the ribs leads to significant acoustic shadowing, which 
limits the display of intrathoracic organs, especially if 
coronal or sagittal views are sought (see below). Besides, 
it has to be underlined that a good number of thoracic 
anomalies evolve, i.e. they can appear only in the 3rd 
trimester, or, on the contrary, they can regress before 
birth. Therefore, if an initial assessment of the thorax and 
the heart can be performed as early as 12–14 weeks of 
gestation, it should be noted that, in order to follow up 
abnormal cases, late 3rd trimester scans may be needed. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). The 
regular shape of the thorax lends itself easily to a standardized 
ultrasound approach. However, it should be 
underlined that the key view for the assessment of 
intrathoracic anatomy is the classic 4-chamber view of the 
fetal heart. In fact, in this plane, most thoracic viscera can 
be displayed, including the ribs, the sternum, and the cutaneous 
outline. This is why numerous scientific societies 
refer to the 4-chamber view as the key view to assess 
intrathoracic anatomy. However, if the results from this 
view are abnormal, and a thoracic lesion is found, this 
should be explored further using coronal and sagittal 
views, as reported below. The midsagittal and parasagittal 
views allow display of the diaphragm as a hypoechoic 
layer below the basal aspects of the lungs and the heart, 
and above the liver and the stomach. The diaphragm 
shows a curved outline, convex towards the thorax. With 
regard to the other anatomic districts, since the anatomic 
scan is usually carried out (in most countries), at 18–22 
weeks of gestation, all normal planes shown in the figures 
in this chapter refer to 2nd trimester fetuses. 
Axial 4-chamber view (Figure 6.1). As already mentioned, 
this represents the fundamental plane where heart 
and lung anatomy is assessed. On this view, the following 
structures can and should be checked, in addition to the 
Chapter 6 
Thoracic anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE THORAX: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 6.1 Axial view of the thorax: 4-chamber view. In this view, 
the two lung fields (L), the heart, and the descending thoracic aorta 
(arrow) behind the left atrium are visible. Laterally, two complete ribs 
are evident (arrowheads); posteriorly, one thoracic vertebra can be 
seen. The cutaneous outline, outside the ribcage, is also evident. 
183 

cardiac anatomy described in Chapter 5: the thoracic 
outline, consisting of the two displayed ribs and the overlying 
soft tissues and skin; the two lungs, shown in crosssection; 
the thoracic aorta, lying in the prevertebral area 
just to the left of the midline and behind the left atrium (if 
the situs is solitus); and one thoracic vertebra, on the midline, 
posteriorly. The sternum begins to show mineralization 
in the late 2nd trimester. A useful hint to get a 
perfectly axial 4-chamber view is to look at the two displayed 
ribs, considering that in the fetus, unlike the adult, 
the ribs are perfectly horizontal: if the whole length of 
the ribs is visible, then the orientation of the transducer 
is correct. If, on the contrary, more than one rib 
is displayed, then the plane is malaligned either in the 
anteroposterior axis (a few segments of different ribs: 
Figure 6.2a) or in the laterolateral one (a few almost complete 
and parallel ribs: Figure 6.2b). On the correct axial 
plane, the two lungs appear as solid, homogeneous, 
weakly hyperechoic structures that almost completely 
surround the heart. Since the heart is mainly located in 
the left hemithorax, the right lung will appear larger than 
the left one (Figure 6.1). In the normal fetus, the pleural 
cavity is virtual, and does not show up; on the contrary, a 
film of fluid is often seen within the pericardium, especially 
if insonated with high-frequency transducers. 
Axial view of the mediastinum (3-vessel view) (Figure 6.3). 
This plane is parallel to the 4-chamber view, but more 
cranial. It is routinely sought in fetal echocardiography 
in order to demostrate the aortic and pulmonary arches 
and the corresponding flows on color Doppler, for the 
detection of ductus dependence (Chapter 5). A description 
of this view is included in this chapter since it allows one to 
visualize the thymus and study its relationship with the 
great vessels. The thymus, which is easier to recognize from 
the late 2nd trimester onwards when it starts to undergo 
significant hypertrophy, appears as a well-defined roundish 
solid structure interposed between the great vessels, in the 
prevertebral region, and the sternum. It is weakly hypoechoic 
in comparison with the surrounding lungs, although 
it should be underlined that the different echogenicity is 
not easy to pick up, especially if high-frequency (> 5 MHz) 
transducers are not employed. However, there is an additional 
feature that makes identification of the thymus easier: 
the thymus is located on top of the heart and, therefore, 
unlike the lungs, it shows movements synchronous with 
the cardiac cycle. Behind the thymus and in front of the 
vertebra, the great vessels, the trachea, and, with some 
difficulties, the esophagus can be seen (Figure 6.3b). 
Right parasagittal view (Figure 6.4). The midsagittal 
view does not give significant information regarding 
184 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.3 Axial view of the upper mediastinum. (a) The thymus 
(arrow), which is weakly hypoechoic in comparison with the lungs, can 
be seen in the middle of the thorax. (b) On a parallel plane, just caudal 
to the former one, the great vessels with the pulmonary artery (Pa) on 
the left, the aorta (Ao) in the middle, and the superior vena cava on the 
right can be seen, all behind the thymus (THY). 
Figure 6.4 Right parasagittal thoracic view. This view allows 
detection of the hypoechoic muscular layer represented by the 
diaphragm (arrowheads), just below the right lung (RL). 
Figure 6.2 4-chamber view: abnormal alignment. The ribs represent 
a good marker to assess the adequacy of the scanning plane. (a) If the 
axial alignment is unbalanced in the anteroposterior plane, then several 
indented rib segments will be visible (arrows 1, 2, 3). (b) If the axial 
alignment is unbalanced in the laterolateral plane, several whole ribs 
will appear (arrows). 
a b a b 

the lungs, since it is occupied mainly by the heart. On 
the contrary, on the right parasagittal view, the whole 
of the right lung comes into view. The heart is not visible, 
being in the left hemithorax. On this view, the 
diaphragmatic hypoechoic layer can be seen below the 
right lung. Care should be taken to consider the identification 
of the diaphragmatic plane in this view as a 
demonstration of an intact diaphragm: if the hernia is 
located on the other side, as in the Bochdalek type (see 
below), the contour of the right hemidiaphragm is normal. 
Also, it is important to note that this view can 
advantageously be employed to disclose the severe thoracic 
hypoplasia typical of lethal skeletal dysplasias 
(Chapter 9). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 185 
ULTRASOUND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF THORACIC ANOMALIES 
Following the practical approach typical of this book – 
from ultrasound finding to diagnosis – and noting that 
the reference view for the diagnosis of thoracic anomalies 
is the 4-chamber view – we believe that a classification of 
the various thoracic lesions according to their ultrasound 
appearance on this view may help in differential diagnosis. 
Hence, we have distinguished them according to their 
position and echogenicity: lateral versus central (median); 
hypo- or anechoic versus hyperechoic; bilateral versus 
unilateral. The final assessment regards those cases in 
which there is clear disproportion between the thorax 
and the heart; in such circumstances, the operator should 
always consider whether it is the heart that is enlarged 
(cardiomegaly and cardiomyopathies) or the rib cage that 
is too small (thoracic/pulmonary hypoplasia). 
• Unilateral, anechoic lesions 
– Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), leftsided 
(Figure 6.5c). Only in left posterolateral hernia, 
Bochdalek type, can the stomach migrate into 
the left hemithorax, especially if there are no ileal 
loops in the thorax at the same time. The heart will 
be displaced contralaterally, or in the center of the 
thorax. The stomach appears as a round or oval, 
anechoic, well-defined area. 
– Adenomatoid cystic malformation of the lung 
(ACML) type I, macrocystic variant (Figure 6.5b). 
In this case, the anechoic cystic structure can be single 
or multiple, but is located in one hemithorax 
only – ACML is almost always unilateral. The 
heart is displaced contralaterally. 
– Unilateral hydrothorax (pleural effusion) (Figure 
6.5d). A unilateral pleural effusion can appear as 
an anechoic moon-shaped area of variable size, 
according to the severity of the hydrothorax. 
Characteristically, in the middle of the anechoic 
area, the ipsilateral lung, showing movements synchronous 
with the heartbeats, can be identified. 
Rarely, the amount of fluid within the pleural space 
is so large as to severely increase the intrathoracic 
pressure; in such rare cases, all viscera, including 
the ipsilateral compressed lung, are pushed into the 
other hemithorax. After birth, most of these hypertensive 
unilateral pleural effusions turn out to be 
chylothoraces. 
• Unilateral hyperechoic lesions 
– ACML type III, solid (Figure 6.5g,h). The solid 
subtype of ACML appears as a homogeneously 
highly hyperechoic pulmonary mass. Although, by 
definition, ACML almost always involves one lobe 
only, the volume of the mass does not allow the 
remaining intact lobe(s) to be displayed on ultrasound. 
If the volume of the lesion is large enough, 
the mediastinum shifts towards the contralateral 
hemithorax. 
– Pulmonary sequestration (Figure 6.5g,h). This 
shares with ACML type III the same highly hyperechoic 
ultrasound aspect. Differential diagnosis 
relies on the identification, with power or color 
Doppler, of the feeding vessels originating from the 
descending aorta in the pulmonary sequestration. 
As with ACML, pulmonary sequestration is virtually 
always unilateral (prevalently on the left side). 
– CDH, right-sided (Figure 6.5i). In right-sided hernias, 
as well as in eventration, which is an upward 
displacement of the abdominal contents secondary to 
a congenitally thin hypoplastic diaphragm, the right 
lobe of the liver is displaced upwards, in the right 
hemithorax, and pushes the heart and the mediastinum 
into the left hemithorax. Identification of the 
gallbladder, and/or of the hepatic colonic flexure, in 
the right hemithorax leads to the diagnosis. Also, in a 
minority of cases of left posterolateral hernias in 
which the stomach does not migrate into the thorax, 
the appearance of the ileus and the spleen in the thorax 
may be that of an inhomogeneously hyperechoic 
mass in the left hemithorax. 
– Tumors. The same tumors that usually arise in the 
mediastinum can, very rarely, arise from the lateral 
walls of the thorax. 
• Bilateral hyperechoic lesions 
– CHAOS (laryngeal atresia) (Figure 6.5j). There is 
virtually only one entity that can appear as a bilateral 
hyperechoic lesion, namely laryngeal atresia. 
Obstruction of the high airways causes hyperplasia 
of the alveolar units, which are filled with fluid. 
Severely increased lung volume results from this 
hyperplasia together with the entrapment of a significant 
amount of fluid within the lungs. The severely 
enlarged lungs deform the thorax, which becomes 

bell-shaped as the diaphragmatic convexity is 
reversed and the lower more mobile ribs are displaced 
laterally; the heart is squeezed into the middle 
of the thorax and the cardiac angle is reduced (sometimes 
to zero) by high intrathoracic pressure. Ascites 
is constantly associated. 
• Bilateral anechoic lesions 
– Bilateral hydrothorax (pleural effusion) (Figure 
6.5e). If pleural effusion is bilateral, two moonshaped 
anechoic areas surrounding the mediastinum 
are evident. 
• Median anechoic lesions 
– Diaphragmatic hernia CDH (Figure 6.5c). In the 
left posterolateral subtype (Bochdalek type) of 
CDH, the stomach, appearing as a round welldefined 
anechoic structure, is frequently displaced 
into the center of the thorax; the heart is consequently 
pushed into the right hemithorax. 
– Absent pulmonary valve syndrome. In this rare 
anomaly, usually associated with tetralogy of Fallot, 
the anechoic mediastinal structure is represented 
by an extremely dilated pulmonary trunk and 
186 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Dx 
Dx Sn 
Sn Dx 
Sn 
Figure 6.5 Summary of the different 
types of thoracic abnormalities, classified 
according to their laterality (unilateral vs 
bilateral) and echogenicity (fluid vs solid): 
(a) normal thorax; (b) Adenomatoid 
cystic malformation of the lung (ACML), 
macrocystic type; (c) congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia (CDH), left-sided; 
(d) hydrothorax, unilateral; (e) hydrothorax, 
bilateral; (f) thoracic hypoplasia; 
(g, h) pulmonary sequestration/ACML 
microcystic type; (i) CDH, right-sided; 
(j) laryngeal atresia; (k) cardiomegaly. 
a
b
c
d
e
f 
k
j
i
h
g 

branches – results of the severe pulmonary valve 
insufficiency (Chapter 5). 
• Median hyperechoic lesions 
– Mediastinal tumors. A large mediastinal hyperechoic 
mass, located in the upper mediastinum, is 
often consistent with a mesenchymal tumor, such 
as a teratoma or a hemangioma. 
• Increased cardiothoracic ratio: enlarged heart 
– Isolated cardiomegaly (Figure 6.5k). If the cardiomegaly 
is not associated with congenital heart 
disease, it can be related to incipient heart failure 
from arterovenous fistulas (placental chorioangioma, 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, sacrococcygeal 
teratoma, etc.), or increased intraventricular pressure, 
as in ductus arteriosus constriction/closure. 
– Atrioventricular valve insufficiency. Cardiac 
enlargement can also be determined by congenital 
heart diseases associated with severe atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency: the consequent severe atriomegaly 
is responsible for the cardiomegaly 
(Chapter 5). Cardiomyopathies characterized by 
severe pump failure may also be associated with 
cardiomegaly, both because of the dilatation of the 
ventricular chambers and because of the severe 
myocardial hypertrophy. 
• Increased cardiothoracic ratio: hypoplastic thorax 
– Skeletal dysplasia featuring thoracic hypoplasia 
(Figure 6.5f). Severe hypoplasia of the rib cage 
(sternum, ribs, and spine) can be associated with 
some lethal skeletal dysplasias (thoracic asphyxiating 
dysplasia (Jeune syndrome), thanatophoric dysplasia, 
achondrogenesis, short-rib–polydactyly 
syndrome, and the FADS group: Chapters 9 and 
10). In the presence of severe thoracic hypoplasia, 
the midsagittal scan of the fetus at low magnification 
often shows a dip at the junction between the 
thorax and the abdomen. 
– Primary lung hypoplasia. This is a very rare anomaly 
of the thorax, due to a severe arrest of lung 
development; if it affects both lungs, it is lethal. In 
the case of bilateral lung hypoplasia, the thorax is 
virtually occupied by the heart only. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 187 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Definition. The term congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
(CDH) encompasses a range of closure defects of the 
diaphragm. Since the intra-abdominal pressure is higher 
than the intrathoracic pressure, in the presence of a 
diaphragmatic defect the abdominal viscera located near 
the defect migrate into the thorax. CDHs are classified 
according to the site of the defect: 75–85% of cases involve 
the left posterolateral area (Bochdalek type: Figure 6.6), 
10–15% of cases involve the right hemidiaphragm, and 
3–4% of cases are bilateral hernias. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Embryologically, CDHs 
originate if normal closure of primary pleuroperitoneal 
channels does not occur. At 12 weeks of gestation, 
when the physiologic umbilical hernia disappears, the 
intra-abdominal pressure increases and may force the 
abdominal viscera through the hernia, if this is present. 
From a prognostic standpoint, the main problem of a 
CDH is not the defect itself, but rather the occurrence 
and degree of pulmonary damage. This consists of severe 
alveolar hypoplasia induced by the long-term compression 
of the lungs exerted by the migrated abdominal 
viscera. After birth, the onset of pulmonary hypertension 
can further complicate the situation. The association of 
pulmonary hypoplasia with pulmonary hypertension 
represents the main determinant of death in neonates 
with non-syndromic CDH. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of CDH 
is, in most instances, indirect: what is detected is the 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Stomach in the thorax (left-sided hernias); right liver lobe in the thorax (right-sided hernias). 
Heart displaced in right hemithorax or hyper-rotated in the left hemithorax, respectively. Sometimes, ileal loops 
and/or the spleen in the thorax as well. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high (5–15%): trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (25–30%): Fryns, Pallister–Killian, Beckwith–Wiedemann. 
Outcome. Extremely poor in syndromic cases. Overall survival rate of 40–60% in non-syndromic cases. 
CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA 

abnormal intrathoracic position of the stomach and/or 
the other migrated viscera and the displacement of the 
heart and the mediastinum. These findings indirectly 
demonstrate the existence of the diaphragmatic hernia. 
The intrathoracic migration of the abdominal viscera is 
recognized on the 4-chamber view. 
Left posterolateral CDH (Figures 6.7–6.9). On the 
4-chamber view, the stomach is found either in the left 
hemithorax or in the mediastinal area (Figure 6.7). 
In most instances, a few ileal loops can be found near 
the stomach, while the heart and the mediastinum 
are displaced contralaterally. Much more rarely, the 
spleen and/or the left liver lobe may migrate as well 
(Figure 6.8a). In left-sided hernias, the stomach is found 
in the thorax in most cases (about 90%). In a minority 
of cases, only some ileal loops and/or the left hepatic 
lobe migrate into the thorax (Figure 6.8b and c). If 
this is the case, only the dextrocardia and the unusual 
dyshomogeneous appearance of the left hemithorax may 
lead to the diagnosis (Figure 6.8c). It should be underlined 
that even though the diaphragmatic defect occurs at 
12 weeks of gestation, the moment at which the viscera 
herniate is extremely variable and ranges from the early 
2nd trimester to the first hours of life; in the latter 
instance, it is the first breaths that determine the migration 
of the viscera. Hence, CDH can be considered as an 
‘evolving’ lesion and this has obvious medicolegal 
implications. This process is responsible for the fact 
that only 50–60% of CDHs are diagnosed prenatally.
1,2 The longitudinal views (ventral approach) 
allow one to detect additional signs that may confirm the 
existence of the hernia: a tortuous aspect of the inferior 
vena cava and the absence of the hypoechoic contour of 
the diaphragm (Figure 6.9). However, care should be 
taken not to diagnose a CDH only on the grounds of the 
longitudinal views; the evidence of intrathoracic viscera 
on the 4-chamber view is the basic requirement, in our 
opinion, for a correct diagnosis of CDH. 
Right-sided CDH (Figure 6.10). These represent about 
10% of all CDHs at birth. In the case of right-sided 
hernia, the ultrasound diagnosis is more challenging since 
the main finding leading to the final diagnosis of CDH in 
most instances, the intrathoracic stomach, is absent, 
being the defect on the other side of the diaphragm. 
Nonetheless, there are some features that allow one to 
recognize a right-sided hernia in utero. The first is represented 
by an extreme leftward rotation of the heart, with 
a consequent abnormal increase in the cardiac axis: the 
heart appears squeezed towards the lateral wall of the 
thorax; the second hint for diagnosis of a right CDH is 
188 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.6 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), Bochdalek type 
(left posterior). This specimen shows herniation into the left hemithorax 
of ileal loops (il), which hide the stomach. The heart (H) is displaced into 
the right hemithorax, where it compresses the right lung (rl). The liver is 
visible below. 
Figure 6.7 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. In this 
variant of CDH, the stomach (S) is visible in the middle of the thorax, 
or in the left hemithorax, while the mediastinum, with the heart, is 
shifted contralaterally. RA, right atrium; LV, left ventricle. 

the upward displacement of the right hepatic lobe: this is 
pushed upward by the absence of the counterpressure 
represented by the diaphragm and can be detected in the 
right hemithorax. However, the latter finding is sometimes 
difficult to identify, because the echogenicity of the 
lung and the liver are quite similar: high-frequency transducers 
and the use of power or color Doppler to identify 
the suprahepatic veins ‘in the thorax’, once a suspicion of 
right CDH has been raised, help identify the intrathoracic 
position of the right hepatic lobe. 
Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound. The assessment of 
the thorax and, in particular, of the lungs, may benefit 
from a 3D ultrasound approach. In particular, the 
diaphragmatic defect itself is effectively studied with 
tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This imaging 
modality allows one to display on a single panel a variable 
number of reconstructed 2D sections, as in a computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan: using this approach, the reconstructed 
coronal plane is used to display the extent and the site 
of the diaphragmatic defect (Figure 6.11). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 189 
Figure 6.9 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. The 
right parasagittal thoracic view can contribute to direct detection of 
the defect in the diaphragm (‘???’). However, this sign should not be 
considered as a primary finding; the most important clues to the diagnosis 
of CDH are the intrathoracic location of abdominal viscera and 
dextrocardia. Figure 6.10 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, right-sided (34 weeks 
of gestation). In 10% of cases, the diaphragmatic defect involves the 
right hemidiaphragm. In this case, the right hepatic lobe (and the gallbladder, 
as well) may migrate into the thorax. The detection, on 
grayscale or color Doppler ultrasound, of the suprahepatic veins 
(arrows) and, in the 3rd trimester, of the hepatic flexure of the colon 
(C) may contribute to the diagnosis. H, heart; Rt, right side. 
Figure 6.8 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. (a) In rarer cases, in addition to the stomach (St), the spleen, ileal loops (IL), and/or 
the left hepatic lobe (liver) can also migrate into the thorax. Lt, left; Rt, right. (b) In some cases, the first sign, in the 2nd trimester, of a CDH may 
be a dextrocardia, possibly associated with fluid collection, as in this case. (c) After 3 weeks, the hernia has become evident, although only some 
bowel loops (arrows) and not the stomach have herniated into the left hemithorax. 
a b c 

• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). For left-sided 
CDH, the differential diagnosis includes the macrocystic 
subtype of ACML, since the stomach might, at 
least theoretically, resemble the dominant cyst in 
a macrocystic ACML. Right-sided CDH should be 
differentiated from the solid, microcystic variant 
of ACML and pulmonary sequestration: the echogenicity 
of the intrathoracic liver/intestine should be 
differentiated from the highly hyperechoic ACML, 
although the difference in ‘brightness’ is usually 
significant. 
• Prognostic indicators. The most important prognostic 
factor for fetuses with CDH is the possible association 
with chromosomal anomalies and/or syndromes. 
In the case of isolated CDH, several ultrasound 
features have been assessed over the years for 
190 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.11 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. The use of three-dimensional ultrasound with the tomographic approach (TUI) 
may be of help in the evaluation of the diaphragmatic defect. In particular, by displaying the coronal plane of the thorax and abdomen, it is possible 
to assess the size and the site of the defect: the diaphragm (arrowheads) appears present in all the windows on the left and the middle rows, 
whereas its contour is lost in all of the right row images. b, bladder; H, heart; LL, left lung. 

their capacity to predict the neonatal occurrence of 
lethal pulmonary hypoplasia and of pulmonary 
hypertension: early gestational age at diagnosis, 
presence of a mediastinal shift, intrathoracic position 
of the liver, and lung-to-head ratio. Of these, only the 
latter two have proved acceptably reproducible and of 
sufficient, although not exceptional, prognostic value. 
The lung-to-head ratio (LHR), which can be applied 
to left-sided hernias only, is calculated by multiplying 
the two orthogonal diameters of the right lung, which 
is located between the rib cage and the heart in the 
right hemithorax (Figure 6.12), and dividing the result 
by the head circumference. The first report3 was a retrospective 
evaluation of 55 fetuses with left-sided 
CDH: the three identified cut-offs for the LHR, 
namely, <0.6, 0.6–1.35, and >1.35, apparently identified 
subgroups of fetuses with neonatal survival rates 
of 0%, 61%, and 100%, respectively. Other prospective 
reports followed this initial one with controversial 
results. Lipshultz et al,4 in a prospective study of 
15 fetuses, found similar results, although with different 
cut-offs: all fetuses with LHR <1.0 died, while 
those with LHR >1.4 survived; those with an intermediate 
LHR (1.1–1.39) showed a 38% survival rate. 
However, other authors have found the LHR to be of 
no prognostic significance.5 Recently, a multicenter 
investigation has reconfirmed the good prognostic 
value of this parameter.6 The other ultrasound prognostic 
indicator able to identify fetuses with very poor 
prognosis is the intrathoracic position of the liver, 
namely the liver-up sign. According to authors who 
have reported on this sign, in the case of liver-up, the 
survival rate halves, dropping from 93% to 43%; and 
the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO: see below) doubles.7 Other attempts at 
identifying in utero the occurrence of pulmonary 
hypoplasia have considered Doppler velocimetric 
assessment of pulmonary arteries8 and volumetric 
evaluation of lung volume by MRI and 3D ultrasound.
9,10 To date, none of the several above mentioned 
methods has proved a clear superiority in the 
identification of lung hypoplasia in utero: the most 
widely used remains, however, the LHR. 
• Association with other malformations. In addition 
to the cases associated with syndromes, CDH can 
be associated with congenital heart disease, and 
gastrointestinal and central nervous system (CNS) 
anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(5–15%). CDH is mainly associated with trisomies 21 
and 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high 
(25–30%). The syndromes detectable in utero that can 
be associated with CDH are as follows: 
 Fryns syndrome:11 look for . CDH + unilateral cleft 
lip/palate, CNS anomalies. 
 Pallister–Killian syndrome:12 look for . CDH + 
abnormal profile (‘small’ nose and thin upper lip) and 
mesomelic hypoplasia. 
 Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:11 look for . CDH 
+ macroglossia, somatic hemi-hypertrophy, polycystic 
kidneys and exomphalos (Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Should CDH be diagnosed in 
a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory becasue of the relatively 
high risk of aneuploidy. In addition, a thorough 
anatomic scan should be performed by an expert, in 
order to detect major and/or minor signs possibly leading 
to the diagnosis of one of the above-mentioned syndromes. 
As to the timing and mode of delivery, in the 
past, it had been apparently shown that delivery by 
cesarean section was associated with a better outcome. 
However, none of the more recent studies has confirmed 
this apparent advantage of the operative delivery. As a 
result, currently there is no recommendation to deliver 
fetuses with CDH by cesarean section.1 There are also 
some interesting data (which need be confirmed by 
larger trials) regarding the timing of delivery: in a recent 
study, survival was significantly higher for deliveries 
occurring later than 40 weeks of gestation than for those 
occurring at 38–40 weeks.13 
Postnatal therapy. Prior to addressing the postnatal treatment 
issue, it should be underlined that CDH is one of 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 191 
Figure 6.12 Calculation of the lung-to-head ratio (LHR) is performed 
by multiplying the two orthogonal diameters (D1 and D2) of 
the right lung, which is located behind the heart, in a left-sided hernia. 
This value is then divided by the head circumference (CC) (see text). 

the few anomalies for which fetal surgery has been 
attempted. In particular, the US West coast group of 
Harrison was the first to try to devise an intrauterine surgical 
approach to CDH with poor prognostic indicators 
(LHR < 1.0 and/or liver-up). The original technique consisted 
of direct closure of the diaphragmatic defect by 
suture or patch, after hysterotomy and exposure of the 
fetal chest; on completion of the hernia repair, the fetus 
was repositioned in utero, and the amniotic membranes 
and the hysterotomy were sutured. However, this 
approach showed mortality and prematurity rates that 
were not significantly different from those seen with 
conventional postnatal surgery, and the costs were 
extremely high. As a result, this approach was abandoned 
even by those who had first proposed it. More recently, 
another less invasive procedure for the treatment of CDH 
with poor prognostic signs was devised. The original idea 
came from the observation that fetuses with laryngeal 
atresia had significantly enlarged lungs with histologic 
signs of alveolar hyperplasia. The new approach consists 
of the creation of an iatrogenic obstruction of the high 
airways achieved with the insertion of a balloon catheter 
in the fetal trachea; the balloon is left in place for several 
weeks, during which it stimulates alveolar growth, and 
is eventually removed just prior to delivery. The procedure, 
which was originally performed with a surgical 
approach, is currently done under fetoscopic guidance, 
which reduces invasiveness, risks, and costs. The name of 
the procedure, Fetendo, underlines the limited invasiveness 
of the endoscopic approach. The initial results were 
considered promising, with a 60% survival rate, which 
compared favorably with the 0–30% rate expected for 
fetuses with CDH and a LHR< 1.0 or with liver-up.14 
However, a recent randomized clinical trial comparing 
this approach with conventional postnatal surgery did 
not find any statistical difference in survival at 90 days, 
which was the primary endpoint of the study. Interim 
analysis by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
resulted in early termination of trial enrollment, because 
the 90-day survival rate in the control group was better 
than in the tracheal occlusion group (77% vs 73%).15 It 
has also been demonstrated that the abnormal histologic 
features typical of lung hypoplasia (low radial alveolar 
counts and increased alveolar size) were not prevented by 
tracheal occlusion.16 The bottom line is that, so far, no 
type of prenatal approach has yet been proved to be superior 
to the conventional postnatal approach. 
In the conventional perinatal management of neonates 
with CDH, a very important role is played by in utero 
transport to referral centers and by resuscitation and stabilization 
protocols. After delivery, immediate resuscitation 
should proceed with respiratory support, including 
intubation, and circulatory support as needed. In this 
regard, although there is no single study demonstrating 
higher survival for severe cases if ECMO is employed, it 
is advised that ECMO be available in all neonatal intensive 
care units. Briefly, this technique employs a 
heart–lung machine to oxygenate the blood in those 
cases in which the alveolar units are severely damaged or 
hypoplastic. However, regardless of the technique used, 
currently the most crucial issue in the early neonatal 
management seems to be gentle ventilation, i.e, ventilation 
allowing mild hypercapnea; this has proven more 
advantageous than the aggressive ventilation used until 
1995.1 Once the neonate has been stabilized, surgery is 
performed. The timing of the surgical intervention 
depends on the severity of the desaturation (O2) and on 
the presence of pulmonary hypertension. The surgical 
approach usually involves the use of a synthetic patch 
when the diaphragmatic defect is too large to be closed 
by primary tissue approximation. Occasionally, rotational 
muscle flaps can be used to repair the defect. 
Unfortunately, since prosthetic patches do not grow 
with the neonate, re-herniation will occur in a significant 
number of survivors. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If CHD is associated 
with aneuploidy or non-chromosomal syndromes, 
survival is very poor, because of the high lethality of the 
above-described syndromic conditions. In the case of isolated 
non-syndromic CDH, the major determinant of 
death is the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and the 
occurrence of severe pulmonary hypertension, considering 
that moderate pulmonary hypertension is ubiquitous 
in neonates with CDH. For left-sided CDH, survival 
rates range between 30% and 80%, with a median of 
50–60%. Quality of life is generally good, especially 
when primary closure of the defect has been achieved. 
However, long-term sequelae have been reported in a 
significant number of cases. First of all, some authors 
have reported signs of cortical and basal ganglia damage 
on MRI scans in neonates with repaired CDH discharged 
from hospital in apparently good condition.17 
Even though it is still unclear whether these worrying 
signs of cerebral damage on MRI are indeed responsible 
for functional neurologic deficits, this finding should 
warrant further investigation and long-term followup: 
if the occurrence of long-term damage should be 
confirmed in other series, this possibility should be 
mentioned during prenatal counseling. Other fairly frequent 
but less important long-term sequelae include 
growth retardation (18%), gastro-esophageal reflux 
(27%), chronic lung disease (22%), and, rarely, oxygen 
requirement (2%).18 
192 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

Definition. CAML is a developmental anomaly of the 
lung characterized by a mass of disordered pulmonary 
parenchyma with proliferation of terminal respiratory 
bronchioles and a lack of normal alveoli, thought to represent 
a hamartomatous lesion. It is unilateral in 97% of 
cases. Histologically, the original Stocker classification19 
recognizes three subtypes differentiated according to the 
dimensions of the cysts: type I, with large cysts (2–10 
cm); type II, with small cysts (0.5–2 cm); and type III, 
solid or microcystic (< 0.5 cm). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of CAML is 
unknown. As already mentioned, this lesion represents a 
developmental anomaly. Histologically, it involves one 
lobe only, although on ultrasound it appears to extend 
to the whole lung, due to its usually large dimensions. It 
is interesting to note that, on histology slides following 
surgical removal of the mass, CAML is found to be associated 
with pulmonary sequestration or segmentary 
bronchial atresia in a not insignificant percentage of 
cases. On the basis of these findings, it has been hypothesized 
that a common pathogenetic mechanism may be 
responsible for the three different anomalies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is performed on the classic 
4-chamber view. Since the histologic Stocker classification 
cannot be applied to the ultrasound appearance, a simpler 
ultrasound-based classification was developed by Wilson 
et al,20 which recognizes a cystic and a solid variant. The 
ultrasound appearance is completely different for the two 
types of lesion: the cystic variant appears as a multilocular 
lesion with cysts of various size from a few millimeters to 
more than 10 mm, which show bright contours due to the 
posterior wall ultrasound enhancement (Figures 6.13 and 
6.14). On the contrary, the solid, microcystic variant 
appears as a well-defined homogeneously hyperechogenic 
mass (Figure 6.15). Both types are unilateral by definition 
(only 3% of CAML cases involve both lungs), and usually 
of large volume, which causes a contralateral shift of the 
mediastinum and the heart. In the case of right-sided 
CAML, there is an abnormally increased cardiac axis, due 
to the extreme levorotation (Figure 6.13a). 3D ultrasound 
may be used to better evaluate the volume of the mass 
and, possibly, to assess the net volume of the cystic component, 
as shown in Figure 6.16. 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). The differential 
diagnosis should consider, for the cystic variant, 
CDH, as already mentioned: the intrathoracic stomach 
may, to some extent, resemble a single cyst in an 
CAML. With regard to the solid variant, the most difficult 
diagnosis to differentiate CAML from is pulmonary 
sequestration. The only ultrasound feature 
that may allow discrimination between the two 
lesions, which share a highly hyperechoic and homogeneous 
appearance and mainly unilateral involvement, 
is the feeding artery, which is ubiquitous 
in pulmonary sequestration. This is detectable in 
most cases of pulmonary sequestration using power 
Doppler or color Doppler with a low pulse repetition 
frequency in order to visualize low-velocity vessels: 
the artery feeding the sequestration is commonly seen 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 193 
Incidence. Relatively rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Unilateral uni/multilocular cystic lung mass; unilateral, homogeneously hyperechoic lung 
mass. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Good/very good, with spontaneous complete regression or surgical removal after birth. 
CYSTIC ADENOMATOID MALFORMATION OF THE LUNG (CAML) 
Figure 6.13 Cystic adenomatoid malformation 
of the lung (CAML), macrocystic 
type (22 weeks of gestation). The macrocystic 
type is characterized by several communicating 
cysts of various sizes. In this case, the 
lesion was so large as to: (a) compress the 
heart (H) against the left thoracic wall and 
(b) distend the diaphragm (arrows). 
a b 

branching off the descending aorta. Theoretically, 
also, a right-sided hernia with liver-up should be differentiated 
from the solid, microcystic variant of 
CAML; however, in this case, the weak echogenicity 
of the liver is significantly different from the bright 
appearance of the CAML. 
• Prognostic indicators. CAML is not usually associated 
with syndromes, and therefore the risk of more 
severe underlying conditions of prognostic significance 
is not an issue. The only significant prognostic 
factor, which allows identification of cases at high 
risk of perinatal demise, is the occurrence of hydrops 
(ascites and/or hydrothorax) at the time of diagnosis 
or during follow-up. It has been hypothesized that the 
development of hydrops is a consequence of central 
venous compression, but direct caval obstruction is 
not found in all cases with hydrops. Fortunately, this 
poor prognostic sign is found in less than 10% of the 
cases at diagnosis,21 although it can develop in 
another 30% of cases during follow-up.22 If hydrops 
is present, the chances of survival are very low, with 
perinatal demise being by far the most frequent 
outcome.23 Recently, another promising prognostic 
index, derived from 3D assessment of CAML. has 
been investigated: the CAM volume ratio (CVR).22 
This parameter is calculated by dividing the volume 
of the CAML lesion by the circumference of the head, 
similarly to LHR in CDH. In a prospective study,22 
the incidence of hydrops was 75% for CVR > 1.6 and 
17% CVR < 1.7; the latter value dropped to 2.3% if 
cases with a dominant cyst were excluded. Hence, it 
seems that for the cystic subtype of CAML, regardless 
of the volume of the mass, hydrops is more likely to 
occur if there is a dominant cyst.22 
194 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.14 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
macrocystic type (22 weeks of gestation). In this case, the lesion corresponds 
to type II of the Stocker classification (in between the macrocystic 
and solid, microcystic types). It is homogeneously hyperechoic, 
but shows very small rare cysts, and involves only one lung field, determining 
only a minor mediastinal shift. H, heart. 
Figure 6.15 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
microcystic type (26 weeks of gestation). If the cysts are barely or not visible, 
the CAML, which has a homogeneously hyperechoic aspect, should 
be differentiated from pulmonary sequestration, which has similar sonographic 
features (see Figure 6.17). LT, left side; H, heart. 
Figure 6.16 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
macrocystic type (22 weeks of gestation). Three-dimensional ultrasound, 
with the VOCAL technique, has been used to calculate the volume of the 
CAML, which seems to be related to the risk of developing hydrops. A 
different approach may be to assess the volume of the cysts displayed 
with the inversion mode. This is the same case as in Figure 6.13. 

• Association with other malformations. There is a 
strict histologic and pathogenetic relationship with 
pulmonary sequestration, with the two lesions often 
being found at histology in the same gross pulmonary 
lesion. CAML may also be associated with other 
pulmonary or thoracic anomalies, such as CDH, duplication 
cysts, tracheo-esophageal fistulas, and 
pulmonary artery branching abnormalities. 
• Natural history. It is important to underscore that 
CAML represents an evolving lesion with peculiar features. 
First of all, the growth of the mass shows a predictable 
course, with rapid growth occurring between 
20 and 26 weeks of gestation. After that period, the 
volume of the mass plateaus and, in a significant percentage 
of cases, tends to regress or sonographically 
disappear during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
Therefore, since the volume of the mass is not 
expected to grow further after 26 weeks, if there is no 
hydrops by that gestational age, then it is highly 
unlikely that this will develop afterwards. In addition, 
it has to be underlined that, in a significant proportion 
of apparently disappeared lesions, the mass is still present 
and can be detected by MRI: it has only become 
invisible on ultrasound since it has become isoechogenic 
with adjacent normal lung parenchyma.22 
Overall, 10–20% of cases really do regress almost 
completely during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely 
low (anecdotal reports only). In all reports in which 
a slight increase in the risk of chromosomal anomalies 
was detected, extrapulmonary malformations were 
constantly associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Should an CAML be detected in a 
fetus, it is of the utmost importance to search also for very 
early signs of hydrops. As far as karyotyping is concerned, 
considering what has already been expressed, we deem 
this necessary only if other extrapulmonary anomalies are 
found. An important issue, in our opinion, is to correctly 
emphasize the relatively high rate of spontaneous regression 
and the consequently very good outcome that these 
lesions show, during prenatal counseling sessions.21 The 
above-mentioned prognostic tools (i.e., CVR and presence 
of hydrops) should be carefully evaluated at diagnosis and 
follow-up ultrasound examinations, since they may allow 
one to identify fetuses at high risk of perinatal mortality 
who can benefit from intrauterine treatment. This may 
consist of simple cyst aspiration or placement of a 
thoraco-amniotic shunt, and relies on the fact that all of 
the cysts communicate with one another. In very carefully 
selected cases, and in a few institutions only, open fetal 
surgery for CAML is considered as a final option for 
CAML with hydrops. Simple cyst aspiration and/or the 
placement of thoraco-amniotic shunts have been demonstrated 
to significantly improve the outcome of fetuses 
with CAML complicated by hydrops. 
Postnatal therapy. The first step is to confirm the volume 
of the lesion by MRI. Although there is no general agreement 
among pediatric surgeons about the need to resect 
the affected lobe, most of them believe that the CAML 
should be removed, even if asymptomatic, by 12 months 
of age. The need to resect the non-functioning lobe is 
based on the high incidence of infection and on the very 
low risk of neoplastic transformation, although, as for 
other types of lesions, if a genetic predisposition to 
neoplastic transformation is thought to be present in the 
alveolar epithelium, the resection of the CAML only 
would not prevent the neoplasia from originating in the 
adjacent lung parenchyma. The standard surgical procedure 
consists of thoracotomy and lobectomy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If hydrops is 
absent, survival is generally unaffected, with no functional 
limitations, regardless of the possible need for 
lobectomy. On the contrary, neonatal death is almost 
certain if hydrops is present and no intrauterine procedure 
has succeeded in reversing it. Overall survival rates 
for prenatally diagnosed CAML are greater than 80% in 
most series. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 195 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Homogeneously hyperechoic unilateral (left-sided in 90% of cases) lesion, sometimes 
extending below the diaphragm; presence of feeding artery on power/color Doppler. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very low. 
Outcome. Good/very good in most instances, with spontaneous regression, selective embolization of the feeding 
artery, or surgical resection. 
PULMONARY SEQUESTRATION (PS) 

Definition. PS consists of an island of lung parenchyma 
that does not communicate with the bronchial tree and is 
fed by the systemic rather than the pulmonary circulation. 
There are two types of PS: intralobar and extralobar. 
Prenatal diagnosis concerns the extralobar type only, 
since intralobar sequestration is not visible on ultrasound, 
despite accounting for three-quarters of the PS 
cases detected after birth. The extralobar variant is further 
subdivided into a supradiaphragmatic and a subdiaphragmatic 
subtype, the former accounting for 90% 
of extralobar PSs and the latter for the remaining 10%. 
The lesion is characteristically unilateral, and involves the 
left lower lobe in 90% of cases. In general, PS shows a 
roughly triangular shape, with the apex pointing towards 
the mediastinum. Typically, extralobar sequestrations 
present a feeding artery branching off the descending 
thoracic or abdominal aorta. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of PS is 
unknown, although it has been suggested that it might 
share the same pathogenesis with CAML, due to the fact 
that the two lesions are frequently associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the 4- 
chamber view, considering also that the lesion often 
involves the left lower lobe, which is at the same level as 
the heart. PS appears as a well-defined, homogeneously 
hyperechoic, roughly triangular mass, often involving the 
lower part of the left lung (Figure 6.17a,b). Only small PSs 
and the subdiaphragmatic variant may not be readily recognizable 
on the 4-chamber view, and require a lower 
axial view, at the level of the diaphragm (Figure 6.17c,d). 
To complete the ultrasound assessment, it is necessary to 
switch to sagittal views, since only these allow: (i) assessment 
of the caudal extension of the mass (Figure 6.17b); 
(ii) detection and characterization of subdiaphragmatic 
extralobar sequestrations (Figure 6.17d); and (iii) recognition, 
on power or color Doppler, of the feeding artery 
branching off the descending aorta (Figure 6.18). Finally, 
the possible association of ipsilateral hydrothorax (Figure 
6.19), frank hydrops, or other thoracic malformations 
(e.g., a CDH) should be excluded (Figure 6.20). 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). As already mentioned, 
the only difficult differential diagnosis is with 
the solid, microcystic variant of CAML, due to the 
very similar echogenicity of the mass. However, a 
more triangular shape, a location in the left lower 
lung area, and, above all, the recognition of the feeding 
vessel (Figure 6.18) all stand in favor of a PS. With 
the rare subdiaphragmatic subtype of PS, the differential 
diagnosis should include rare tumors (e.g., 
hemangiomas and neuroblastomas). It should be 
noted that in the very rare instance in which a feeding 
vessel is identified entering the solid component of a 
prevalently cystic CAML, the lesion is probably a rare 
case of mixed CAML + PS lesion. 
• Prognostic indicators. As for CAML, the occurrence 
of hydrops is the most ominous prognostic indicator. 
However, there have been cases (although rare) in 
which with the spontaneous regression of the PS, the 
196 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.17 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. This anomaly has 
a hyperechoic aspect and, often, a triangular shape. It can be located 
in the thorax or below the diaphragm. (a, b) Supradiaphragmatic 
pulmonary sequestration: (a) the axial view of the thorax demonstrates 
the homogeneously hyperechoic lesion of the left lung (S); (b) on the 
left parasagittal thoracic view, it is possible to assess its extent and the 
relationship with the abdominal organs. (c, d) Subdiaphragmatic pulmonary 
sequestration: (c) on the axial view of the abdomen, just below 
the diaphragm, it is possible to locate the small hyperechoic lesion 
(arrows), on the right side of the midline; (d) the right parasagittal thoracic 
view confirms the abdominal location of the sequestration 
(arrows). H, heart; li, liver; lt, left side; st, stomach; ra, right atrium. 
Figure 6.18 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. The vascular pedicle 
can be recognized in all cases. Color or power Doppler with a low 
pulse repetition frequency are used to locate the feeding artery, which, 
in most instances, branches off the thoracic or abdominal aorta. (a) 
Axial abdominal view: the feeding artery (arrowheads) is seen branching 
off the abdominal aorta. (b) On the longitudinal view, the inferior 
and superior venae cavae (IVC and SVC) are seen draining into the 
right atrium (RA); the descending aorta is partially hidden by the 
sequestration, and the feeding vessel (arrowhead) is clearly visible. Ao, 
aorta; Li, liver; SHV, suprahepatic veins. 
a b 
c d 
a b 

hydrops has also disappeared, with a good perinatal 
outcome. 
• Association with other malformations. The close histologic 
and pathogenetic relationship with CAML has 
already been underlined. PS, like CAML, may also be 
associated with other pulmonary or thoracic anomalies, 
such as CDH (Figure 6.20), duplication cysts, 
tracheo-esophageal fistulas, and pulmonary artery 
branching abnormalities. 
• Natural history. The tendency to regress and even disappear 
during the 3rd trimester has also been reported 
for PS, which further supports the close pathogenetic 
links with CAML. In some series, this tendency 
has been shown to be even more pronounced 
than that reported for CAML, occurring in 30% of 
cases.24,25 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Since the risk of chromosomal 
anomalies is low, karyotyping is not mandatory in the 
case of isolated PS. What should be monitored is the possible 
presence/onset of hydrothorax or hydrops. In most 
cases, the hydrops is a consequence of the hypertensive 
hydrothorax that can occasionally complicate PS. 
In fact, the hydrops often disappears after placement 
of a thoraco-amniotic shunt, which reduces the high 
intrathoracic pressure. The possibility of spontaneous 
regression and a good outcome also in cases complicated 
by hydrops should be communicated to the parents 
during prenatal counseling.25 
Postnatal therapy. This consists of surgical or endoscopic 
removal of mass or, alternatively, of selective embolization 
of the feeding artery under catheterization.26 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The survival rate 
of prenatally detected cases is very high.25 As already 
underlined, the possibility of active prenatal management 
(by drainage and thoraco-amniotic shunt placement) 
of cases associated with hydrops contributes 
significantly to the extremely good survival rates. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 197 
Figure 6.20 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar, associated with 
CDH. In rare cases, pulmonary sequestration may be associated with 
other pulmonary lesions. In this case (at 28 weeks of gestation), the 
sequestration (arrows) is associated with a left-sided diaphragmatic 
hernia. H, heart; li, liver; Rt, right side; St, stomach. 
Figure 6.19 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. In some cases, pulmonary sequestration is associated with hydrops. In these cases, a single tap 
or the placement of a thoraco-amniotic shunt may resolve the hydrops due to venous compression. (a) The supradiaphragmatic pulmonary sequestration 
(S) is associated with a severe hypertensive hydrothorax, severely compressing the left lung (arrows). (b) This image shows the tip of a 
needle (arrowhead) inserted to drain the pleural effusion. (c) After drainage of the fluid collection, the left lung re-expands (arrows). The different 
echogenicities of the sequestration (S) and the lung are also evident. Note also the heart displaced in the right hemithorax. 
a b c 

Definition. Laryngeal atresia is an exceedingly rare 
anomaly consisting of three different lesions: agenesis of 
the glottis, agenesis of the larynx, or agenesis of both. As 
a result of each of the three anomalies, the high airways 
are completely obstructed, and this leads to the inclusion 
of laryngeal atresia among the lesions causing CHAOS 
(congenital high airway obstruction syndrome). The 
other oropharyngeal and neck anomalies responsible for 
the CHAOS sequence are illustrated in Chapter 3. Here, 
we describe the laryngeal and tracheal atresias, since 
these two entities are not distinguishable on ultrasound 
and are detected on the basis of the unmistakable 
intrathoracic signs. Furthermore, both bear the same 
ominous prognosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The more accepted pathogenetic 
theory for this kind of lesion implicates the 
impaired blood supply during the embryogenetic period, 
which may have prevented the normal development of 
the trachea/larynx. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As already pointed out, differentiation 
between laryngeal and tracheal atresia is not feasible 
on ultrasound. The diagnosis is made on the 4-chamber 
view of the fetal heart. Typically, both lungs appear 
severely enlarged and highly hyperechoic (Figure 6.21). 
Owing to the exceedingly high intrathoracic pressure, the 
heart is squeezed in between the lungs, appears smaller 
than it really is due to the degree of pulmonary enlargement, 
and shows a reduced (sometimes to zero) cardiac 
axis (Figure 6.21). Relatively often, some fluid is trapped 
in the bronchial tree and is responsible for the bronchogram 
(dilatation of the trachea and bronchi by the 
entrapped fluid) that can sometimes be present: in this 
case, the swollen trachea appears as a small round 
sonolucent area behind the heart (Figure 6.21c). The 
bronchogram, if present, is better displayed with a coronal 
approach: on this view, the dilated trachea is seen 
bifurcating at the level of the carina in the two bronchi. 
On the coronal view of the fetal thorax and abdomen, at 
low magnification, the severe bell-shaped distortion of the 
thorax, the flattening or inversion of the diaphragmatic 
convexity, and the ubiquitous ascites can be appreciated 
(Figure 6.21b). 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). There is virtually 
no differential diagnosis to be made, since laryngeal 
atresia represents an absolutely unique lesion on 
ultrasound. Seen once, it will never be forgotten! The 
extremely rare cases (< 3%) of bilateral, solid, microcystic 
ACML would not show the severely increased 
lung volume typical of laryngeal atresia. 
• Prognostic indicators. The lethality of this condition 
makes the identification of poor prognostic signs 
irrelevant. If anything, the detection of severe 
oligoamnios due to concurrent renal agenesis together 
with other major anomalies characterizing Fraser syndrome 
makes the prognosis even worse than it 
already is, considering that the latter is transmitted as 
an autosomal recessive trait. 
• Association with other malformations. Developmental 
anomalies involving the bronchial tree and the esophagus 
may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. A 
significant proportion of cases of laryngeal atresia are 
associated with Fraser syndrome: 
• Fraser syndrome:27 look for . laryngeal atresia +cleft 
lip/palate, congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, 
external ear anomalies, and bilateral renal agenesis 
(Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Possible additional anomalies 
indicating the likely presence of Fraser syndrome should 
be looked for. In fact, isolated laryngeal atresia is a sporadic 
malformation, whereas Fraser syndrome shows 
autosomal recessive inheritance. Karyotyping is not indicated, 
because of the low risk of aneuploidy and the very 
high mortality rate. 
Postnatal therapy. The only available option to try 
salvaging the fetus with laryngeal atresia is the EXIT 
198 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severely enlarged and hyperechoic lungs. Broncogram (abnormal dilatation of the bronchial 
tree). Ascites constantly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: Fraser syndrome. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable. The very few survivors have been managed with the EXIT procedure. 
LARYNGEAL ATRESIA – CHAOS 

procedure (ex utero intrapartum treatment: Chapter 3). 
As of 2006, even with this technique, there are fewer 
than five surviving cases of laryngeal atresia reported in 
the literature. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Except for 
the above-mentioned cases, early neonatal death is 
constant, for cases not undergoing termination of 
pregnancy. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 199 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Anechoic moon-shaped area, unilateral or bilateral, with the lung in the middle. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Depends on etiology. Good in isolated chylothorax. 
HYDROTHORAX 
Figure 6.21 Laryngeal atresia (22 weeks of gestation). (a) On the axial 4-chamber view, the highly hyperechoic lungs appear severely enlarged. The 
(normal) heart is squeezed into the mediastinum. (b) The coronal view of the fetal trunk demonstrates eversion of the diaphragm (arrows), due to the 
massive enlargement of the lungs, and ascites, which is almost ubiquitous in laryngeal atresia. (c) Another case, associated with Fraser syndrome, in 
which the 4-chamber view demonstrates tracheal dilatation often found in these cases. A, ascites; li, liver; LL, left lung; H, heart; RL, right lung; Tr, 
trachea. 
Definition. This is a fluid pleural effusion. It can be 
unilateral or bilateral, isolated, or in the context of 
generalized hydrops. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is extremely variable, 
including at one end of the spectrum thoracic 
causes, such as in chylothorax, and, at the other, classic 
non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF) (Chapter 4). Thus, 
hydrothorax shares its pathogenesis with that of NIHF, 
if the pleural effusion represents one of the signs of 
hydrops. On the contrary, if the pleural effusion is 
isolated and no other chromosomal or non-chromosomal 
anomalies are associated, it may be due to a malformation 
(atresia or fistula) of the thoracic duct (chylothorax). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydrothorax can be diagnosed on 
the 4-chamber view, as a unilateral or bilateral anechoic 
area. It usually has a roughly moon-shaped appearance, 
due to the fact that it surrounds the lung, except for the 
hilum (Figure 6.22). The hydrothorax is defined as 
hypertensive if the intrathoracic pressure is high and all 
viscera are pushed into the contralateral hemithorax 
(Figure 6.23a). A significant proportion of isolated, 
hypertensive, unilateral hydrothoraces are actually chylothoraces.
28 If the pleural effusion is part of general 
NIHF, the severe edema of the subcutaneus thoracic tissue 
can be seen on the 4-chamber view (Figures 6.22 and 
6.23b). 
• Prognostic indicators. The most important prognostic 
factor in fetuses with hydrothorax is the association 
with NIHF, since in these cases the outcome is generally 
very poor, with a few exceptions described in 
Chapter 4. Another poor prognostic indicator is the 
association with anomalies at high risk of chromosomal 
anomalies, such as congenital heart disease or 
CNS malformations. The absence of any associated 
malformation and/or of any other fluid effusion possibly 
indicative of concurrent hydrops is the only good 
prognostic factor; in fact, in isolated hydrothorax, the 
a b c 

placement of a thoraco-amniotic shunt has been 
demonstrated to improve the outcome of hypertensive 
cases. 
• Association with other malformations. Congenital 
heart disease and ipsilateral pulmonary malformations 
may be associated. 
• Natural history. Chylothorax can regress in 10–25% 
of cases, spontaneously or after a single drainage.29 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. The risk 
applies also to isolated transient hydrothorax, be it of 
early or late 3rd trimester onset, and concerns mainly trisomy 
21 and Turner syndrome (monosomy X). Isolated 
chylothorax has also been shown to bear a not insignificant 
risk of aneuploidy (1–6%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, especially 
if NIHF is associated. There are several syndromes 
that may feature hydrothorax. These may be associated 
with other sonographically detectable anomalies, or, in a 
few instances, the hydrothorax may represent the only 
prenatally recognizable sign. 
Obstetric management. Should a pleural effusion be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, due to 
the high risk of associated chromosomal anomalies. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and/or 
minor signs possibly indicative of a syndromic context. If 
the hydrothorax is isolated, and karyotyping has ruled 
out any underlying chromosomal aberration, its evolution 
should be carefully monitored: the detection of signs 
possibly indicating elevated intrathoracic pressure, such 
as flattening of the ipsilateral lung and/or evident mediastinal 
and heart displacement into the contralateral 
hemithorax (Figure 6.23a), may represent an indication 
for a single drainage and/or the placement of a thoracoamniotic 
shunt. In fact, these procedures have been 
demonstrated to be able to prevent or reverse the occurrence 
of hydrops if this is due to the hydrothorax. In particular, 
it has been shown that if the hydrops is a direct 
consequence of the hypertensive hydrothorax, the placement 
of a thoraco-amniotic shunt increases the overall 
survival rate from 10% to 60%.28,29 
Postnatal management. This depends on the cause of the 
hydrothorax. Virtually no treatment is possible for 
NIHF, if idiopathic. On the contrary, in many cases of 
congenital chylothorax, resolution of the effusion occurs 
spontaneously with time, probably because collateral 
lymphatic channels develop. In cases with respiratory 
distress, placement of chest tube drainage and mechanical 
ventilation may be needed. If drainage remains persistent 
and copious, surgery, consisting of ligation of the 
thoracic duct, may be necessary. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall 
prognosis is guarded and survival exceptional in cases 
associated with NIHF. The only case in which hydrothorax 
may have a good outcome, as already underlined, is 
chylothorax. 
200 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.22 Hydrothorax, bilateral. Hydrothorax appears as a 
moon-shaped anechoic image encircling the ipsilateral lung. In this 
case, the pleural effusion was associated with general hydrops: note the 
severe edema of the subcutaneous tissues (arrowheads). LL, left lung; 
RL, right lung. 
Figure 6.23 Hydrothorax, unilateral, hypertensive. (a) The increased 
intrathoracic pressure is demonstrated by the fact that both the mediastinum 
and the lung ipsilateral to the effusion (arrowheads) are pushed 
into the right hemidiaphragm. (b) As a comparison, note the normal 
expansion of the lung (arrowheads) in a case of unilateral non-hypertensive 
hydrothorax associated with hydrops (subcutaneous edema). 
RV, right ventricle. 
a b 

Definition. Cardiomegaly consists of an increased cardiac 
volume (circumference or area). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In general, cardiomegaly is a 
sign of cardiac overload, which may or may not evolve 
into frank hydrops from heart failure. The cause of the 
cardiomegaly can be cardiac or extracardiac. All conditions 
associated with arterovenous fistulas, such as 
sacrococcygeal teratoma, aneurysm of the vein of Galen, 
placental chorioangioma, and twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome (TTTS) (Figure 6.24), can result in cardiomegaly 
as a sign of cardiac overload. The same is true 
for conditions leading to severe fetal anemia, such as 
parvovirus B19 infection. In such cases, the pathogenesis 
of the cardiomegaly is insufficient emptying of cardiac 
chambers due to the venous engorgement (preload 
increase) associated with elevated intraventricular pressure: 
this leads to systolic dysfunction and ultimately to 
cardiac failure. Alternatively, cardiomegaly can result 
from primary heart diseases: cardiomyopathies inducing 
myocardial dysfunction (pump failure) and/or congenital 
heart diseases associated with severe atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency may be responsible for the development 
of cardiomegaly (see Chapter 5). Premature 
constriction/closure of the ductus arteriosus, both spontaneous 
and induced by cyclooxygenase inhibitors such 
as indomethacin and nimesulide,30 is another rare but 
serious cause of cardiomegaly and heart failure. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the 4-chamber 
view. Except for very severe cases of cardiomegaly, such as 
those characterizing the worst cases of Ebstein’s anomaly 
(Chapter 5), it is necessary to quantify the degree of cardiac 
enlargement by measuring the cardiothoracic ratio: this 
is the ratio between the cardiac circumference (or area) 
and the thoracic circumference (or area) (Figure 6.25). 
The cardiothoracic ratio in these cases is increased 
because the numerator (cardiac circumference or area) is 
increased31 (Figure 6.25a). On the contrary, in thoracic 
and/or pulmonary hypoplasia, the cardiothoracic ratio is 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 201 
Figure 6.24 Abnormalities causing cardiomegaly due to high-output 
cardiac failure. (a) Aneurysm of the vein of Galen, demonstrated on 
power Doppler (G). (b) Sacrococcygeal teratoma: note the enlargement 
of the inferior vena cava (IVC), which drains the large tumor. 
(c) Placental chorioangioma (arrows). (d) Twin-to-twin-transfusion 
syndrome. Note the discrepant biometry between the donor (D) and 
recipient (R) twins. The latter had already developed ascites as a sign of 
high-output cardiac failure. 
Figure 6.25 Abnormal cardiothoracic ratio. The cardiothoracic ratio 
can be abnormal due to cardiomegaly or thoracic hypoplasia. (a) In 
this case, the cardiac enlargement was due to premature constriction 
of the ductus arteriosus, at 36 weeks of gestation. (b) Lethal skeletal 
dysplasias and the fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) can 
be associated with severe thoracic hypoplasia. This case was in the 
context of FADS. 
Incidence. Relatively common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Increased heart circumference or area (> 95th centile), with thoracic circumference or area 
within the normal range. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on etiology, but generally guarded. 
INCREASED CARDIOTHORACIC RATIO: CARDIOMEGALY 
a b 
c d 
a b 

similarly elevated, but due to a decrease in the denominator 
(Figure 6.25b). Therefore, to assess whether it is the 
heart that is enlarged or the thorax that is hypoplastic, the 
thoracic circumference or area should be plotted against 
the nomograms for gestational age (see the Appendix). 
• Prognostic indicators. These are related to the cause of 
the cardiomegaly and the presence or absence of concurrent 
hydrops. Clearly, if the cardiomegaly is due to 
treatable conditions, such as supraventricular tachycardia 
or parvovirus B19 infection, the prognosis is 
better, even in hydropic cases; in fact, with transplacental 
anti-arrhythmic therapy and intrauterine blood 
transfusions, respectively, the hydrops from cardiac 
failure can disappear completely. If, on the contrary, 
hydrops is associated with other non-treatable conditions, 
then the prognosis is generally very poor. 
• Association with other malformations. These include 
congenital heart disease, TTTS, conditions associated 
with arterovenous fistulas. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. It depends 
on the cause of the cardiomegaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
It depends on the cause of the cardiomegaly. 
Obstetric management. Should cardiomegaly be detected, 
fetal echocardiography should be carried out to confirm 
or rule out the existence of congenital heart disease or cardiomyopathy 
as the primary cause of the cardiomegaly. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to detect possible lesions 
associated with arterovenous fistulas. If potentially treatable 
conditions are found, then the intrauterine treatment 
of choice should be performed. This includes antiarrhythmic 
therapy for tachyarrhythmias and intrauterine 
blood transfusions for parvovirus B19 infections. 
With regard to the former, the first-line drug is digoxin, 
which can be administered by a transplacental route 
(oral maternal therapy) or, in highly hydropic fetuses, by 
direct intravenous fetal therapy (umbilical vein). The 
intrauterine therapy of conditions associated with 
arterovenous fistulas is another important issue. Laser 
coagulation of arterovenous anastomoses between the 
two placental sides of a monochorionic twin pregnancy 
complicated by TTTS is well established, and has reduced 
the risk of cerebral damage in surviving TTTS fetuses.32 In 
sacrococcygeal teratomas, there have been some attempts 
at reducing the hemodynamic impact of the mass by fetal 
debulking, drainage of the cystic component and/or direct 
ethanol treatment of the main feeding vessels of the 
tumor; the results are controversial.33 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends on the cause of the cardiomegaly. As already 
mentioned, good survival can be achieved in cases 
benefiting from intrauterine therapy (anti-arrhythmic 
transplacental or direct therapy for tachyarrhythmias; 
intrauterine blood transfusions for parvovirus B19 infections; 
and placental laser treatment of arterovenous 
fistulas in TTTS). 
202 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Very rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Normal heart circumference or area with thoracic circumference/area below the 5th centile. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high (mainly, skeletal dysplasia). 
Outcome. Invariably fatal for severe cases. 
INCREASED CARDIOTHORACIC RATIO: THORACIC HYPOPLASIA 
Definition. This is a reduced volume of the ribcage (ribs 
and sternum), due to primary bone diseases (skeletal 
dysplasias) or secondary to severe bilateral pulmonary 
hypoplasia. The minor forms of thoracic hypoplasia 
that are compatible with survival are rarely detected by 
ultrasound in the fetus. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In most instances, severe 
thoracic hypoplasia is an integral feature of a number of 
lethal skeletal dysplasias. Secondary thoracic hypoplasia 
may also be due to severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia. 
The latter occurs very rarely as a primary disease, while 
it is much more often the consequence of a long-lasting 
oligohydramnios from very premature rupture of membranes. 
The pathogenesis of thoracic hypoplasia, when 
this represents a sign of syndromes and/or skeletal 
dysplasias, involves underdevelopment of the ribs and 
the sternum. In those cases in which a neuromuscular 
disease is present, as in the fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence (FADS), the thoracic hypoplasia is the effect of 
the fixed contractures of the diaphragm and the intercostal 
muscles (Chapter 10). In all of these conditions, 

lethal pulmonary hypoplasia is invariably associated 
with thoracic hypoplasia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is made 
on the 4-chamber view. Similarly to what is seen in cardiomegaly, 
the heart will appear to fill the whole thorax, 
but the sonographer should be able to appreciate that in 
this case it is the thorax that is smaller while the heart is 
not affected (Figure 6.25b). As already mentioned, there 
are nomograms in the literature both for the cardiothoracic 
ratio31 and for the thoracic circumference versus gestational 
age (see the Appendix). On the low-magnification 
midsagittal view of the fetal trunk, a dip can be seen on the 
anterior contour of the fetal trunk at the passage between 
thorax and abdomen; this is due to the exceedingly different 
circumferences of a hypoplastic thorax and the normal 
abdomen (Chapter 9, Figure 9.7c). The same sign, but due 
to gross hepatomegaly, can sometimes be seen in severe 
intrauterine cytomegalovirus infection (Chapter 7). 
• Prognostic indicators. When severe, thoracic hypoplasia 
is invariably lethal, since it is associated with 
severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, especially 
if the frequently associated skeletal dysplasias are 
considered as syndromes. The syndromes detectable 
in utero that can be associated with severe thoracic 
hypoplasia are as follows: 
• Achondrogenesis: look for . thoracic hypoplasia + 
micromelia, micrognathia, and hypomineralization 
(Chapter 9). 
• FADS (fetal akinesia deformation sequence – including 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome): look for . thoracic 
hypoplasia + diffuse joint contractures, micrognathia, 
clubfeet, ulnar deviations of the hands, and extremely 
reduced fetal movements (Chapter 10). 
• Hypophosphatasia: look for . thoracic hypoplasia + 
micromelia and hypomineralization (clavicles excluded) 
(Chapter 9). 
• Short-rib-polydactyly syndrome(s): look for . 
thoracic hypoplasia + micromelia, polydactyly, and 
congenital heart disease (Chapter 9). 
• Thanatophoric dysplasia: look for . thoracic hypoplasia 
+ micromelia and cloverleaf skull (Chapter 9). 
• Thoracic asphyxiating dysplasia (Jeune syndrome): 
look for . thoracic hypoplasia + rhizomelia 
(moderate), polydactyly, and renal anomalies 
(Chapter 9). 
Obstetric management. Should severe thoracic hypoplasia 
be detected, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to assess the other 
abnormal features that in most instances allow one to 
reach a final diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia or neuromuscular 
syndrome. The importance of a correct diagnosis is 
not in the context of the current pregnancy, since this is 
unfortunately destined to end in termination or perinatal 
demise, but with regard to future pregnancies: some of 
the lethal conditions featuring thoracic hypoplasia may 
not occur sporadically but exhibit autosomal recessive 
inheritance. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
very poor in all cases associated with severe thoracic 
(and pulmonary) hypoplasia (see Chapter 9). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 203 
Incidence. Relatively uncommon. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 3-vessel view. Non-visualization of the thymus in the upper mediastinum, or thymus 
diameters < 5th centile. To be sought only in fetuses with congenial heart disease possibly at risk of microdeletion 
22q11 (mainly conotruncal anomalies). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very high (microdeletion 22q11). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on the severity of the associated cardiac defect and on the expression of the 22q11 
microdeletion, which is variable. 
THYMUS HYPOPLASIA/APLASIA 
Definition. This is complete absence or hypoplasia of 
the thymus. It is virtually always associated with congenital 
heart disease at risk of 22q11 microdeletion 
(Chapter 5). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The thymus defect is due to 
an abnormal development of the 3rd and 4th branchial 
arches which, in turn, depends on the absent migration of 
neural crest cells towards these embryological structures. 

The genetic derangement responsible for this lack of 
migration is a microdeletion in the so-called DiGeorge 
critical region (DGCR), which maps to chromosome 22, 
locus q11 (see Chapter 10). 
Ultrasound diagnosis (Figure 6.3). The diagnosis of 
thymus aplasia/hypoplasia has only been described fairly 
recently,34 and is made on the upper mediastinal 3-vessel 
view, which is an axial view of the mediastinum at the 
level of the ductal and aortic arches (Figure 6.3b), and/or 
just cranial to this, in which only the thymus is seen, 
between the lungs (Figure 6.3a). In the former view, the 
thymus appears as a well-defined weakly hypoechoic 
roundish solid structure interposed between the great 
vessels, in the prevertebral region, and the sternum. 
Thymus aplasia is diagnosed when the thymus cannot be 
visualized and the great vessels appear to be displaced 
just behind the sternum (Figure 6.26a). If the thymus is 
present but its diameters are below the 5th centile, then 
thymic hypoplasia is present (Figure 6.26b). The importance 
of this finding is related to its capacity to accurately 
predict the risk of 22q11 microdeletion in fetuses previously 
diagnosed with conotruncal anomalies.34 Therefore, 
it should be underlined that checking for the presence of 
the thymus is not a standard ultrasound procedure; it 
should be performed only in fetuses with conotruncal 
anomalies and/or, regardless of the occurrence of CHD, if 
one of the parents has the microdeletion, since in this case 
the transmission risk is 50% (autosomal dominant). 
• Prognostic indicators. The occurrence of thymus 
hypoplasia/aplasia is electively sought in fetuses at 
risk of 22q11 microdeletion. Hence, if the thymus is 
indeed absent or hypoplastic, the presence of the 
microdeletion is very likely (>90% probability), and 
this, of course, represents per se a poor prognostic 
sign. An additional poor prognostic sign, in this context 
may be a conotruncal anomaly with an unfavorable 
anatomy, such as tetralogy of Fallot with absent 
pulmonary valve or common arterial trunk with 
aortic arch interruption (Chapter 5). 
• Association with other malformations. In the context 
of 22q11 microdeletion, thymic anomalies are associated 
with cardiac defects, renal anomalies, fetal growth 
restriction (FGR), and polyhydramnios (Chapter 10). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high in 
view of the virtually ubiquitous presence of the 22q11 
microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should thymus hypoplasia/aplasia 
be detected in a fetus at risk for 22q11 microdeletion, a 
thorough anatomic scan should be performed by an 
expert, in order to assess the other abnormal features 
(renal anomalies, FGR, and polyhydramnios) that 
increase even more the likelihood of the microdeletion. As 
pointed out above, the associated cardiac defect should 
have already been diagnosed and characterized by fetal 
echocardiography. Fetal karyotyping with Fluorescence 
in situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis for the DGCR is 
mandatory, since only about 5–10% of the microdeletions 
are long enough to show up on conventional G-banding. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final prognosis 
and quality of life depend on the phenotypic expression of 
the microdeletion, which is extremely variable, and on the 
severity of the associated cardiac defect (see Chapter 10). 
204 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.26 Thymus hypoplasia/aplasia: 3-vessel view. (a) Thymus 
aplasia at 23 weeks of gestation: the upper mediastinal anatomy is hardly 
recognizable: the right lung (L) and the trachea (arrow) are evident, but 
there is no thymus at all (‘??’) in front of the abnormal great vessels (the 
fetus had tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve and 22q11 
microdeletion). (b) Thymus hypoplasia (arrows) at 36 weeks of gestation 
in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot and 22q11 microdeletion. P, 
pulmonary artery; Ao, aortic arch; C, superior vena cava; arrow, trachea. 
REFERENCES 
1. Downward CD, Wilson JM. Current therapy of infants with 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Neonatol 2003; 8: 
215–21. 
2. Grandjean H, Larroque D, Levi S. The performance of routine 
ultrasonography screening of pregnancies in the Eurofetus study. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999; 181: 446–54. 
3. Metkus AP, Filly RA, Stringer MD, Harrison MR, Adzick NS. 
Sonographic prediction of survival in fetal diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Pediatr Surg 1996; 31: 148–51. 
4. Lipshultz GS, Albanese CT, Feldstein VA, et al. Prospective 
analysis of lung-to-head ratio predicts survival for patients with 
prenatally diagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr 
Surg 1997; 32: 1634–6. 
5. Sbragia L, Paek BW, Filly RA, et al. Congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia without herniation of the liver: Does the lung-to-head 
ratio predict survival? J Ultrasound Med 2000; 19: 845–8. 
6. Heling KS, Wauer RR, Hammer H, Bollmann R, Chaoui R. 
Reliability of the lung-to-head ratio in predicting outcome and 
a b 

neonatal ventilation parameters in fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25(2): 112–8. 
7. Geary M. Management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
diagnosed prenatally: an update. Prenat Diagn 1998; 18: 1155–8. 
8. Fuke S, Kanzaki T, Mu J, et al. Antenatal prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia by acceleration time/ejection time ratio of 
fetal pulmonary arteries by Doppler blood flow velocimetry. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 188: 228–33. 
9. Levine D, Barnewolt CE, Mehta TS, et al. Fetal thoracic abnormalities: 
MR imaging. Radiology 2003; 228: 379–88. 
10. Ruano R, Joubin L, Sonigo P, et al. Fetal lung volume estimated 
by 3-dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging 
in cases with isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Ultrasound Med 2004; 23: 353–8. 
11. Lyons Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
12. Paladini D, Borghese A, Arienzo M, et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of Pallister–Killian syndrome in the second trimester of 
pregnancy: the importance of the fetal facial profile. Prenat Diagn 
2000; 20: 996–8. 
13. Stevens TP, Chess PR, McConnochie KM, et al. Survival in earlyand 
late-term infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Pediatrics 
2002; 110: 590–6. 
14. Harrison MR, Sydorak RM, Farrell JA, et al. Fetoscopic temporary 
tracheal occlusion for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: prelude to 
a randomized controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg 2003; 30: 1012–20. 
15. Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood SB, et al. A randomized trial 
of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion for severe fetal congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med 2003; 349: 1916–24. 
16. Heerema AE, Rabban JT, Sydorak RM, Harrison MR, Jones KD. 
Lung pathology in patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
treated with fetal surgical intervention, including tracheal occlusion. 
Pediatr Dev Pathol 2003; 6: 536–46. 
17. Hunt RW, Kean MJ, Stewart MJ, Inder TE. Patterns of cerebral 
injury in a series of infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia utilizing 
magnetic resonance imaging. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 39: 31–6. 
18. Jaillard SM, Pierrat V, Dubois A, et al. Outcome at 2 years of 
infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a population-based 
study. Ann Thorac Surg 2003; 75: 250–6. 
19. Stocker JT, Madewell JE, Drake RM. Congenital cystic adenomatoid 
malformation of the lung. Classification and morphologic 
spectrum. Hum Pathol 1977; 8: 155–71. 
20. Wilson RD, Hedrick HL, Liechty KW, et al. Cystic adenomatoid 
malformation of the lung: review of genetics, prenatal diagnosis, 
and in utero treatment. Am J Med Genet 2006; 140A: 151–5. 
21. Monni G, Paladini D, Ibba RM, et al. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis 
of congenital cystic malformation of the lung: a report of 26 
cases and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2000; 16: 159–62. 
22. Crombleholme TM, Coleman B, Hedrick H, et al. Cystic adenomatoid 
malformation volume ratio predicts outcome in prenatally 
diagnosed cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. 
J Pediatr Surg 2002; 37: 331–8. 
23. Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Crombleholme TM, Flake AW, 
Howell LJ. Fetal lung lesions: management and outcome. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1998; 179: 884–9. 
24. Lopoo JB, Goldstein RB, Lipshultz GS, et al. Fetal pulmonary 
sequestration: a favourable congenital lung lesion. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999; 94: 567–71. 
25. Pumbergera W, Hörmann M, Deutingerc J, et al. Longitudinal 
observation of antenatally detected congenital lung malformations 
(CLM): natural history, clinical outcome and long-term 
follow-up. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2003; 24: 703–11. 
26. de Lagausie P, Bonnard A, Berrebi D, et al. Video-assisted thoracoscopic 
surgery for pulmonary sequestration in children. Ann 
Thorac Surg 2005; 80: 1266–9. 
27. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a 
family with negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
28. Longaker MT, Laberge JM, Dansereau J, et al. Primary fetal 
hydrothorax: natural history and management. Pediatr Surg 
1989; 24: 573–6. 
29. Aubard Y, Derouineau I, Aubard V, Chalifor V, Preux PM. 
Primary fetal hydrothorax: a literature review and proposed antenatal 
clinical strategy. Fetal Diagn Ther 1998; 3: 325–33. 
30. Paladini D, Marasini M, Volpe P. Severe ductal constriction 
in the third-trimester fetus following maternal self-medication 
with nimesulide. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 
357–61. 
31. Paladini D, Chita SD, Allan LD. Prenatal measurement of cardiothoracic 
ratio in the evaluation of heart disease. Arch Dis Child 
1990; 65: 20–3. 
32. Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, et al. Endoscopic laser surgery 
versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 136–44. 
33. Hedrick HL, Flake AW, Crombleholme TM, et al. Sacrococcygeal 
teratoma: prenatal assessment, fetal intervention, and 
outcome. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 39: 430–8. 
34. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in fetal 
cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 546–52. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 205 

The main differential feature of the gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract in comparison with other organ systems is that its 
ultrasound appearance varies significantly during pregnancy 
and also, for some sites, in the course of the same 
ultrasound examination, due to the physiology of swallowing, 
stomach emptying, and intestinal peristalsis. It is 
therefore necessary to become acquainted with the 
whole range of anatomic correlates. It should also be 
underlined that the origin of a cystic or solid mass 
detected in the abdominal cavity can also be difficult to 
identify with certainty. For example, a cystic anechoic 
lesion can correspond to very different diagnoses according 
to its site and the relationships with the adjacent viscera: 
enteric duplication cyst, mesenteric cyst, choledochal 
cyst, double bubble in duodenal atresia, adrenal hemorrhage, 
renal cyst, or ovarian cyst. Finally, it should 
be underlined that, as far as obstructive GI lesions are 
concerned (duodenal atresia, esophageal atresia, ileal 
atresia, etc.), the dilatation of the tract proximal to the 
obstruction can become sonographically evident only in 
the 3rd trimester. 
Timing of examination. As already mentioned, the 
ultrasound appearance of the various GI tracts changes 
significantly with advancing gestational age. In the 3rd 
trimester, the density of the intestinal content at the level 
of the colon increases and becomes hypoechoic in comparison 
with the intestinal walls. This allows identification 
of the whole course of the colon, from the cecum to 
the rectum (Figure 7.1). It is also important to consider 
that the sonographic echogenicity of the intestinal walls 
changes significantly with the emission frequency of 
the transducer: higher frequencies (6–7 MHz) make 
the interfaces between the solid intestinal walls and the 
fluid content much brighter, with a consequent overall 
increase in intestinal echogenicity. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). A 
complete ultrasound assessment of the GI tract requires 
a series of views targeted to the various segments that 
have to be visualized, from the mouth to the rectum. 
Some of these views have already been described in 
Chapters 3 and 6. To these views, those necessary to 
explore the intra-abdominal intestinal tract, the liver, 
and the spleen should be added. 
Cranial views (mouth, pharynx, and esophagus). These 
views have already been described in Chapter 3, and the 
reader may refer to that chapter for full description. 
These views are summarized below: 
• lips: oblique view (Figure 7.2a) 
• tongue/pharynx: axial view (Figure 7.2b) 
Chapter 7 
Anomalies of the gastrointestinal 
tract and abdominal wall 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT 
AND ABDOMINAL WALL: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 7.1 Axial view of the upper abdomen in a 35-week-old fetus. 
Note the dilatation of the colon with the haustra. This finding may be 
indicative of an obstruction or may be completely normal, as it happened 
to be in this case. 
207 

Cranial views and related malformations. We describe 
again the cranial views in order to underline the normal 
ultrasound appearance of the esophagus. This may 
appear, in its proximal part, as a pouch full of amniotic 
fluid, especially if the fetus has just swallowed. The twodimensional 
(2D) sagittal view and the 3D volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C)-derived coronal view of the 
thorax may allow the thoracic esophageal tract to be recognized 
as a thin prevertebral anechoic structure, when 
filled with some amniotic fluid (Figure 7.3). In this situation, 
the thoracic tract of the esophagus may resemble a 
vessel. Power or color Doppler may be used to exclude 
its vascular origin. Also on the 4-chamber view, the 
cross-sectional appearance of the esophagus distended 
by some amniotic fluid may be mistaken for that of an 
abnormal vessel, as in abnormal pulmonary or systemic 
(axygos continuation) venous return. This artifact is 
shown in Figure 7.3d. Some authors have also described 
the sonographic aspect of the esophagus when empty 
as ‘two or more parallel echogenic lines’.1 Finally, it 
should be underlined that also the esophagus, like most 
thoracic anatomic structures, may benefit from a 3D 
approach. In particular, the coronal thoracic plane 
imaged with VCI-C is advantageous for assessment of 
thoracic esophagus (Figure 7.3b). 
Axial view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.4a). This represents the classic view for measurement 
of the abdominal circumference. On this view, 
the following structures of the GI tract can be recognized: 
on the left, the gastric bubble, appearing as a welldefined, 
anechoic, round or oval area (although, in some 
circumstances, particulate matter can be seen floating in 
it); on the right, most of the liver, which shows a weakly 
hyperechogenic echostructure, and the intrahepatic tract 
of the umbilical vein, anechoic with evident walls. 
Nomograms of the normal gastric biometry versus gestational 
age are available in the literature2 (see the 
Appendix). The GI anomalies that can be recognized on 
this view are as follows: 
• esophageal atresia: non-visualization of the gastric 
bubble 
• duodenal atresia/stenosis: double bubble 
• hepatomegaly: increased liver volume 
• splenomegaly: increased splenic volume 
Non-visualization of the gastric bubble (Figure 7.7). 
Following the spirit of this book – from ultrasound sign 
to diagnosis – we believe it useful to define a diagnostic 
algorithm to apply in the case of non-visualization of 
the gastric bubble. The importance of this algorithm 
lies in the fact that the stomach may be impossible to 
display on ultrasound not only in case of esophageal 
atresia but also in a heterogeneous group of other conditions. 
First, it has to be excluded that the stomach is 
not visible because it has just emptied in the duodenum 
following its physiologic emptying cycle. To confirm or 
exclude this frequent cause of non-visualization of the 
gastric bubble, it is sufficient to rescan the woman after 
60–80 minutes; in fact, the physiologic filling–emptying 
cycle of the stomach lasts about 50–60 minutes.3 In 
cases of severe oligohydramnios from premature rupture 
of membranes and, to a lesser extent, from severe 
fetal growth restriction (FGR), the stomach could be 
empty, since the amount of residual amniotic fluid may 
not be enough to ensure a sufficient filling to be recognizable 
on ultrasound. Other very severe conditions 
• neck (hypopharynx and esophagus): sagittal view 
(Figure 7.3a,b) 
• thorax (esophagus): sagittal view (Figure 7.3c) 
• thorax (esophagus): axial 4-chamber view 
(Figure 7.3d) 
Abdominal views (ileus, jejunum, colon, liver, 
spleen, and abdominal wall). The scanning views 
are: 
• axial view of the upper abdomen: stomach and right 
hepatic lobe (Figure 7.4a) 
• axial view of the lower abdomen: small bowel 
(Figure 7.4b) 
• midsagittal view of the abdomen: cord insertion and 
rectal pouch in the pelvis (Figure 7.5a, b) 
• left parasagittal view: spleen 
• right parasagittal view: right hepatic lobe (Figure 7.5c) 
• coronal view (VCI-C): general approach (Figure 7.6) 
208 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.2 Cranial views for the assessment of the upper gastrointestinal 
tract (mouth and pharynx). (a) Oblique view of the lips. (b) Axial 
view of the mouth with the tongue (T) and, behind, the oropharynx 
(arrows). 
GASTROINTENSTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 
ANOMALIES BY SCANNING VIEW 
a b 

that may result in non-visualization of the stomach 
bubble are the fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS) and the other neuroarthrogryposes (Chapter 
10): here the swallowing reflex is blocked due to contracture 
of the masseters and the pharyngeal muscles. 
This leads to polyhydramnios on the one hand and to 
non-visualization of the stomach on the other. In addition, 
it seems that the increased incidence of non-visualization 
of the gastric bubble reported in cases of 
complex facial clefts is due to the fact that the palatal 
anomaly renders deglutition ineffective. The stomach 
may also be impossible to visualize in its usual position 
due to migration, as in left-sided congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia (CDH). Finally, there is an extremely rare 
congenital anomaly, microgastria, which represents an 
arrest in the development of the stomach. A diagnostic 
flow-chart to be applied in the case of non-visualization 
of the stomach is shown in Figure 7.7. 
Axial view of the lower abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.4b). On this view, which is parallel and 
caudal to the axial view discussed above, the small 
bowel, the transverse colon, and, in some cases, the cord 
insertion can be recognized. With minor tilting of the 
transducer, the gallbladder can also be demonstrated. 
The ileal loops appear isoechoic or weakly hyperechoic 
in comparison with the relatively hypoechoic colon. The 
gallbladder has a variable shape, as in postnatal life, and 
usually has an anechoic content. It should be underlined 
that the rare recognition of apparent sludge in the fetal 
gallbladder in the 3rd trimester should not be considered 
to be synonymous with gallstones. The major anomalies 
that may be detected on this view are as follows: 
• Omphalocele: defect of the anterior abdominal wall, 
containing bowel and /or liver, which bulges from the 
cord insertion area 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 209 
Figure 7.3 Ultrasound views of the thoracic esophagus. (a) Sagittal 
view of the fetal neck, showing the course of the esophagus (arrowheads), 
which is temporarily dilated by the swallowing of some amniotic 
fluid. (b) The same region (arrowheads)is shown in the coronal 
view, using three-dimensional volume contrast imaging (VCI-C). (c) 
More caudally, the parasagittal view demonstrates the esophagus 
behind the left atrium (arrowheads). (d) The same region, on the 4- 
chamber view: on this view, it is necessary to differentiate the temporary 
dilatation of the esophagus (arrowhead) from an abnormal 
venous return (systemic or pulmonary). If the anechoic area is due to 
esophageal dilatation, it disappears after a few minutes; in addition, 
the use of color/power Doppler may easily confirm or rule out a cardiovascular 
anomaly. 
Figure 7.4 Axial abdominal views (stomach, bowel, liver, and 
spleen). (a) Axial view of the upper abdomen: the stomach is visible on 
the left, the right hepatic lobe on the right, and the intrahepatic tract of 
the umbilical vein on the midline. (b) Axial view of the lower abdomen 
(ventral approach): the bowel (ileus and jejunum) and a small segment 
of the umbilical vein (arrow) are visible. 
a b 
c d 
a
b 

• Gastroschisis: ileal loops floating freely in the amniotic 
fluid 
• Choledochal cyst: an anechoic cystic structure just 
below the liver 
• Small-bowel atresia: severe dilatation of ileal loops 
proximal to the atretic tract 
• Meconium ileus: diffuse hyperechogenicities and calcifications 
within the intestinal lumen, sometimes 
associated with small-bowel obstruction 
Midsagittal view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.5 a,b). This view allows one to 
assess the contour of the abdominal wall and the cord 
insertion site; in addition, in the pelvis, it is possible to 
identify the rectal pouch behind the bladder: it appears 
as a hypoechoic structure that becomes particularly 
evident in the 3rd trimester, when it is full with meconium. 
In this view abdominal wall defects, namely 
omphalocele, gastroschisis, and in some cases, bladder 
and cloacal extrophy, can be detected. 
Left parasagittal view and related malformations. This 
view is parallel and to the left of the midsagittal one. 
On this view, the stomach and the spleen can be seen, 
although the spleen is very difficult to visualize since it lies 
below the shadows of the lower ribs and has an echodensity 
that is rather similar to that of the liver and the lung. 
With color/power Doppler, using an axial approach, it is 
possible to locate the vascular hilum of the spleen. Nomograms 
reporting the two maximum splenic diameters versus 
gestational age have been published and are reported in 
the Appendix. However, it should be noted that, when 
conspicuous, such as in the case of severe cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infection, splenomegaly cannot be missed. 
Right parasagittal view and related malformations 
(Figure 7.5c). If the transducer is moved contralaterally, 
towards the right part of the abdomen, the right lobe of 
the liver comes into view, appearing as a solid, weakly 
210 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.5 Other abdominal views (liver, abdominal wall, and 
rectum). (a) Midsagittal view of the abdomen: the cord insertion, 
highlighted by power Doppler, and part of the small bowel (arrowhead) 
are visible. (b) With small movements of the transducer, it is 
possible to visualize, in the pelvis, the bladder and, behind it, the rectal 
pouch (arrow). (c) Right parasagittal view of the abdomen: the right 
hepatic lobe (Li), just below the hypoechoic layer of the diaphragm 
(arrowheads) and some ileal loops are visible. RL, right lung. 
Figure 7.6 Coronal view of thorax and abdomen: volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C): 3D ultrasound allows reconstruction of the coronal 
view of the fetal body, which is rather difficult to obtain with 2D ultrasound. 
On this view, the spatial relationships among the thoracic and 
the abdominal viscera can be studied in detail. The diaphragm appears 
as a hypoechoic layer (arrowheads). In the thorax, the right lung (RL, 
right lung) and the heart (H), in the left hemithorax, are clearly displayed 
(the left lung is hidden by the heart). Below the diaphragm, the 
liver is visible, with its left lobe (LL, left lobe) above the gastric bubble 
(St) and the right lobe (RL); the arrow indicates the gallbladder. 
a
b
c 

ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 211 
hyperechoic structure located between the hypoechoic 
diaphragmatic contour upwards and the ileal loops (and 
the hepatic flexure of the colon in the 3rd trimester) 
downwards. It is on this view that the degree of 
hepatomegaly, if present, is best appreciated. 
Coronal view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.6). This plane represents a lowmagnification 
view of the whole abdomen, and, as such, 
allows one to get a fair idea of the topographic location 
of cysts or bowel dilatation. With 2D ultrasound, 
obtaining this view may require significant manual skills; 
the use of 3D ultrasound makes the display of this plane 
much easier, since it can be reconstructed from a previously 
acquired volume using VCI-C. The major anomalies 
that may be detected on this view are as follows: 
• Esophageal atresia: non-visualization of the 
stomach 
• Duodenal atresia /stenosis: double-bubble sign 
• Hepatomegaly: increased volume of the liver 
• Choledochal cyst: round cystic structure under the 
liver 
• Enteric duplication cyst: round cystic structure 
adjacent to the stomach 
• Splenomegaly: increased volume of the spleen 
Non-visualization 
of the stomacha 
Normal 
amniotic fluid 
Associated 
anomalies? 
Stomach in 
thorax 
Contractures 
Facial cleftings 
No 
Yes 
Absent 
amniotic fluid 
PROM 
Severe FGR 
Bilateral renal 
agenesis 
Esophageal atresiab 
Left-sided CDH 
FADS 
Cleft lip/palatec 
a After ruling out physiologic emptying 
b Only if without transient-esophageal fistula (see text) 
c Complex forms are associated with impaired deglutition 
Figure 7.7 Diagnostic flowchart for the 
case of non-visualization of the stomach. 
PROM, premature rupture of membranes; 
FGR, fetal growth restriction; CDH, congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia; FADS, fetal 
akinesia deformation sequence. 

212 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Urachal 
Cysts 
Mesenteric 
cysts 
Umbilical 
vein varices 
Persistent right 
Umbilical vein 
Choledochal 
cysts 
Hepatic 
cysts 
Duodenal 
atresia 
Multicystic 
dysplastic 
kidney 
Dilatation of the 
renal pelvis 
Adrenal 
hemorrhage 
Duplex 
kidney 
Ovarian 
cysts 
Enteric 
duplication 
cysts 
Splenic 
cysts 
Ureterocele 
Figure 7.8 Differential diagnosis of 
abdominal cystic masses. 
• Small-bowel atresia: severe dilatation of ileal loops 
proximal to the atretic tract 
• Meconium ileus: diffuse hyperechogenicities and 
calcifications within the intestinal lumen, sometimes 
associated with small-bowel obstruction 
Cystic intra-abdominal masses. Again following 
the philosophy of this book – from ultrasound sign to 
diagnosis – in this subsection, a diagnostic algorithm of 
cystic intra-abdominal masses is described, taking into 
consideration their location and aspect. In fact, in 
clinical practice, the detection of a cystic intra-abdominal 
mass comes first, followed by determination of its origin – 
not, unfortunately, the other way round. The proposed 
algorithm for the differential diagnosis of intra-abdominal 
cystic masses is shown in Figure 7.8: this takes into consideration 
the location of the mass and its ultrasound 
appearance. As evident, there are several possible causes 
of cystic intra-abdominal structures. However, using this 
algorithm and/or clinical experience, a final determination 
of the actual origin of the mass is achieved in a good 
number of cases. 

Definition. In esophageal atresia, the communication 
between the proximal and the distal tract of the esophagus 
is absent, due to a lack of development of the intermediate 
esophageal portion, mainly because of an interruption of 
the blood supply during organogenesis. Esophageal atresia 
can occur as an isolated anomaly (10% of cases) or, 
much more frequently, be associated with a tracheoesophageal 
(TE) fistula (90% of cases), i.e., an abnormal 
communication between the trachea and the distal 
esophageal stump. The frequent association with TE fistula 
is responsible for the extremely low intrauterine 
detection rate: this is due to the fact that some amniotic 
fluid may actually reach the distal esophagus and eventually 
fill the stomach, just by transiting through the fistula. 
If this is the case, then ultrasound diagnosis becomes 
virtually impossible, being based on the detection of a constantly 
small gastric bubble. Anatomically, five types of 
esophageal atresia are recognized, according to the Gross 
classification,4 on the base of the anatomy and site of the 
TE fistula: 
• type A: no fistula (8% of cases) 
• type B: fistula with proximal stump (1%) 
• type C: fistula with distal stump (88%) 
• type D: double fistula with both stumps (1%) 
• type E: fistula without concomitant esophageal 
atresia (1%) 
As pointed out above, only type A is reliably detectable in 
the fetus by the non-visualization of the gastric bubble. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect is 
unknown. It originates when, at 8 weeks of gestation, 
the primitive foregut does not divide into the ventral 
tracheobronchial part and the dorsal digestive part. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. First, it should be underlined 
once more that more than 85% of cases of esophageal 
atresia are not detected in utero due to the existence of a 
concurrent TE fistula: this fistula does not prevent 
normal stomach filling in most instances, and only in a 
reduced number of cases is a constantly underfilled stomach 
found. In this regard, it is interesting to report that a 
sonographic sign possibly associated with esophageal 
atresia in the presence of a small stomach has been 
described in a few articles. This consists of a dilatation of 
the proximal esophageal tract, the so-called pouch sign.5 
This sign is observed transiently also in the normal fetus 
after swallowing; in fetuses with a small stomach and 
polyhydramnios, the detection of a persistent pouch sign 
would indicate the likely presence of a TE fistula. The 
overall detection rate, considering all possible signs of 
esophageal atresia, should be in the range of 24–42%.6,7 
The only sign that, if present, is highly indicative of 
esophageal atresia (but only in the 8–10% of cases that 
are not associated with a TE fistula) is non-visualization 
of the gastric bubble (Figure 7.9). As also shown in Figure 
7.7, a wide range of pathologic conditions may be associated 
with this sign, and all of these should be ruled out 
prior to reaching a definite diagnosis of esophageal atresia. 
The fact that these anomalies include very severe or 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 213 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Frequent: 1 /2500–1 /4000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Non-visualization of the gastric bubble, relatively late-onset polyhydramnios. In some of the cases 
associated with a TE fistula, a constantly small stomach. Inconstantly, an upper esophageal pouch (pouch sign). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20–44%): trisomies 21 and, to a lesser extent, 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: VA(C)TER(L). 
Outcome. Generally good, but depends mainly on the extent of the atretic tract. 
ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA – TRACHEO–ESOPHAGEAL (TE) FISTULA 
Figure 7.9 Esophageal atresia. (a) At 23 weeks of 
gestation, a suspicion of esophageal atreria (without 
TE fistula – see text) arises due to persistent 
non-visualization of the gastric bubble in the 
abdomen. The amount of amniotic fluid is normal. 
(b) At 30 weeks of gestation, polyhydramnios has 
developed and the stomach is still not visualized: 
the diagnosis of esophageal atresia is confirmed. 
a b 

lethal conditions, such as FADS, has led some authors to 
identify persistent non-visualization of the gastric bubble 
as a poor prognostic sign per se, being associated with a 
poor pregnancy outcome in roughly 50% of the cases, 
regardless of its cause. The other sign possibly indicative 
of esopheagal atresia is polyhydramnios, which becomes 
clearly evident only in the late 2nd trimester (Figure 7.9b). 
Additional inconstant signs are FGR and persistence of 
the upper esophageal pouch (pouch sign). It should be 
underlined that the association between FGR and polyhydramnios 
is uncommon, the latter usually being associated 
with fetal macrosomia. The development of FGR, 
which is present in 40% of fetuses with esophageal atresia, 
has been thought to be an effect of the reduced intestinal 
absorption of the proteins present in the amniotic fluid 
(due to lack of swallowing), which at term can be as high 
as 2 g of proteins per day. Another interesting feature is 
that 50% of the esophageal atresias associated with 
Down syndrome are type A (i.e, without a TE fistula): 
this is why in the fetus the recognition of an esophageal 
atresia, based on non-visualization of the gastric bubble, 
implies a very high risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all conditions possibly 
associated with non-visualization of the gastric 
bubble. These are shown in Figure 7.7: severe oligohydramnios 
(and consequent lack of amniotic fluid ingestion) 
in the case of premature rupture of membranes or 
bilateral renal agenesis; FADS and related syndromes; 
diaphragmatic hernia; and cleft lip/palate. 
• Prognostic indicators. Association with other major 
anomalies, which is fairly common, represents the 
most important poor prognostic sign, since the occurrence 
of concurrent anomalies makes surgical correction 
of the defect more difficult. In addition, the 
frequent occurrence of a low birthweight, as a result 
of FGR, may render the outcome even more guarded. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are associated in 40–70% of the cases, with prevalence, 
in decreasing order, of GI (28%), cardiovascular 
(24%), genitourinary (13%), and osteomuscular (11%) 
malformations. The VA(C)TER(L) association (see 
Chapter 10), the ‘TE’ of which stands for TE fistula, 
accounts for a significant number of these anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, reaching 
20–44% of cases in the fetus, with a prevalence of 
trisomies 21 and 18. This high risk is related to the fact 
that only type A esophageal atresia (atresia without 
concurrent TE fistula), which is the one most frequently 
associated with Down syndrome, is diagnosable in utero. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association: look for . esophageal 
atresia (+ TE fistula) + vertebral anomalies (scoliosis, 
hemivertebrae) + anorectal atresia + cardiac (ventricular 
septal defect) + renal anomalies (dysplasia, ectopia, 
etc.) + limb anomalies (aplasia radii) (Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Should esophageal atresia be 
suspected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should 
be performed by an expert, in order to detect major 
and/or minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis of 
one of the above-mentioned associated anomalies. 
Fetal karyotyping is also mandatory, because of the 
high risk of Down syndrome and, to a lesser extent, of 
trisomy 18. The delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center where a neonatal intensive care unit 
(NICU) and pediatric surgery are available. The need 
for in utero transport arises from various consideration: 
(i) the consistent risk of associated FGR (40% of 
cases) and prematurity (due to polyhydramnios), which 
may require NICU admission; (ii) the possibility that 
other major anomalies overlooked at prenatal ultrasound 
may be present; (iii) the need for adequate preoperative 
nutrition; (iv) the need for early corrective 
surgery. 
Postnatal therapy. This obviously consists of surgical 
reconstruction of the esophagus and may be carried out 
in a single intervention or require a two-stage procedure, 
according to the length of the atretic segment. The reconstruction 
includes, in addition to a concurrent temporary 
gastrostomy, an end-to-end single-layer anastomosis in 
cases with favorable anatomy and a limited atretic segment. 
Treatment of infants with ‘long-gap’ esophageal 
atresia usually requires interposition surgery: this is a 
staged procedure consisting of cervical esophagostomy 
and gastrostomy at birth, followed by a bowel (colon) or 
gastric tube interposition between the esophagus and 
stomach at 1 year of age. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses with esophageal atresia is quite different if fetal 
series are compared with neonatal ones, as for congenital 
heart disease. This is due to the fact that the cases with 
the poorer prognosis, due to association with syndromic 
and/or chromosomal anomalies, die prior to their enrolment 
in neonatal series. Postnatal series report a 9% 
postoperative mortality rate, with a 22% intrauterine 
mortality rate (termination of pregnancy or spontaneous 
demise). In contrast, fetal series describe an overall 
neonatal mortality rate as high as 75%.6,7 In the surviving 
cases, the most frequent long-term complication is gastroesophageal 
reflux, which, if severe, may also be lifethreatening 
because of the possibility of ab ingestis lung 
infection, followed by esophageal restenosis, which 
occurs in about 30% of cases. 
214 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

Definition. In duodenal atresia, the tract between the 
proximal and distal portions of the duodenum is atretic. 
In most cases (80%), the obstruction is due to complete 
atresia and is caudal to the ampulla of Vater. In the 
remaining 20% of cases, the obstruction can be due to a 
diaphragm or membrane located within the lumen of the 
duodenum, and can be complete or partial (stenosis). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect 
is unknown. The pathogenetic mechanism involves 
an interruption of blood supply during organogenetic 
period, as for most GI tract atresias. According to 
another theory, the defect may be due to a lack of duodenal 
recanalization – always during early embryogenesis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based upon recognition of 
the classic double bubble, associated with polyhydramnios, 
which often develops in the late 2nd, early 3rd 
trimester. Usually, when the midtrimester anomaly scan 
is carried out (at 18–21 weeks of gestation in most countries), 
polyhydramnios is absent and the double bubble 
has not yet completely developed: the only finding consists 
of an evidently dilated stomach, with initial dilatation 
only of the duodenum (Figure 7.10a,b). During 
follow-up scans, which should always be scheduled if the 
stomach presents the above-mentioned features (enlargement 
and evidence of pylorus), the classic double bubble 
becomes clearly visible (Figure 7.10c). Care should be 
taken in demonstrating a communication between the 
two anechoic bubbles, to obtain confirmation that the 
second bubble is actually the dilated proximal duodenum 
(Figure 7.10b): only by demonstrating this communication 
can the rare occurrence of enteric duplication 
cysts or other upper abdominal cysts (Figure 7.8) be 
ruled out. Furthermore, it should be noted that, in the 
less common cases of duodenal stenosis, most of which 
are not diagnosed prenatally, the double bubble may 
become visible only late in gestation or may even never 
occur, with a constantly dilated stomach with evidence 
of the pylorum being the only sign of the partial obstruction. 
Finally, it should be underlined that in the 
extremely rare cases in which duodenal atresia is associated 
with esophageal atresia, the overdistension of the 
stomach and proximal duodenum is massive. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should include all 
other conditions featuring a cystic structure in the 
middle or right upper abdomen (Figure 7.8): choledochal 
cysts, enteric duplication cysts, and hepatic 
cysts. The differential diagnosis is made by simply 
demonstrating the communication between the rightsided 
anechoic structure and the stomach: if this communication 
exists, then the diagnosis can only be 
duodenal atresia. 
• Prognostic indicators. The association with other 
anomalies, which is relatively frequent, represents the 
main poor prognostic sign. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are associated with duodenal atresia in 40–50% of 
cases, with a prevalence (in decreasing order) of other 
GI, vertebral (about 33%), and cardiac anomalies 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 215 
Figure 7.10 Duodenal atresia. (a) At 23 weeks of gestation, initial evidence 
of a double bubble is detected (arrow). (b) After a few 
minutes, intestinal peristalsis demonstrates the communication between 
the stomach (st) and the dilated proximal duodenum. (c) Later in gestation, 
a clear double bubble (arrow) has developed, confirming the suspicion 
of duodenal atresia. (d) Three-dimensional ultrasound with 
inversion mode rendering: the site of the obstruction is clearly visible. 
Incidence. Frequent 1 /2500–1 /10 000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Double bubble, with communication between the two parts; late polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20–50%): mainly trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Mainly good. 
DUODENAL ATRESIA 
a
c d
b 

(30%), related to the close association with Down 
syndrome. In particular, the rate of association with 
intestinal malrotation reaches 40%, but more severe 
anomalies of the biliary tract and of the pancreas (annular 
pancreas), which may have a negative impact 
on prognosis, are also not uncommon. These latter 
anomalies are virtually impossible to detect in utero: an 
ultrasound-detectable sign, namely non-visualization 
of the gallbladder, which would be indicative of lifethreatening 
biliary atresia, has a low diagnostic sensitivity, 
due to its frequent occurrence in the normal fetal 
population. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Overall, 
40% (range 20–50%) of cases of duodenal atresia are 
associated with Down syndrome. Conversely, 5–15% of 
neonates with trisomy 21 have duodenal atresia. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should duodenal atresia be diagnosed 
in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of trisomy 21. In addition, a thorough 
search for associated malformations (including fetal 
echocardiography) should be carried out. With the 
above-mentioned caveats, the gallbladder should be 
searched as well. There is also a consistent risk of 
preterm delivery because of the severe polyhydramnios, 
which constantly develops by the early 3rd trimester. In 
very carefully selected cases, this may benefit from 
amniodrainage. Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center where a NICU and pediatric surgery are 
available. In fact, it has been demonstrated that in utero 
transport to tertiary referral centers as a result of prenatal 
diagnosis of duodenal atresia has contributed significantly 
to improving the final outcome of such fetuses.8 
Postnatal therapy. The surgical approach to this anomaly 
is carried out just after birth. The operative management 
of duodenal atresia is determined by the anatomic 
findings and the associated anomalies noted at laparotomy. 
Bypass procedures for duodenal atresia or stenosis 
include duodenoduodenostomy or duodenojejunostomy. 
Additional surgical procedures may be needed in 
the case of associated intestinal, pancreatic (annular pancreas), 
and/or biliary malformations. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses diagnosed with duodenal atresia is generally 
good, except for the cases in which severe biliary 
tract anomalies are present. These are responsible for the 
20–40% neonatal mortality rate reported in most series. 
If only isolated cases are considered, then overall survival 
is extremely good, with an early postoperative 
mortality rate of 3–5% and a late mortality rate that 
does not exceeds 6%.9 Hence, about 90% of neonates 
with isolated duodenal atresia survive. Of these, 25% 
will require an additional surgical procedure, needed to 
remove a restenosis or postoperative complications 
such as gastro-esophageal reflux, by 6 years of age. Lateonset 
sequelae are represented by megaduodenum, 
duodenogastro-esophageal reflux, and peptic ulcers. The 
quality of life is normal in the overwhelming majority of 
cases. 
216 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Frequent: 1 /2500–1 /5000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Severe late-onset dilatation of the ileal loops proximal to the obstruction. Late-onset polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Generally good, but guarded in apple-peel variant and multiple-site atresia. 
SMALL-BOWEL ATRESIA 
Definition. Small-bowel atresia can be single or multiple. 
It can be due to an intraluminal diaphragm or membrane 
(type I: 20% of cases) or present as complete atresia of 
the affected segment. In the latter instance, this can show 
a fibrous string connecting the two blind-ending stumps 
(type II: 32% of cases) or a complete separation of the 
two stumps without any fibrous connection (type III: 
48% of cases). Type III includes the two variants that 
bear the worst prognosis, due to the severely reduced 
active intestinal surface: type IIIB (11% of cases), in 
which the bowel shows the so-called apple-peel aspect, 
and type IV (17% of cases), in which the atresia involves 
multiple sites. As far as the anatomic site of the atresia is 
concerned, the jejunum only is involved in 50% 
of cases, the ileus only in 43% of cases, and both intestinal 
tracts in the remaining 7% of cases. The anatomic 
site of the lesion is important, since there are some differences 
related to the site of the atresia. Ileal atresias are 

more often single, show a higher tendency to perforation 
in utero, and are associated with a higher neonatal mean 
weight and more advanced gestational age at delivery. In 
contrast, jejunal atresias are more often multiple, tend to 
dilate rather than to perforate, and show a significantly 
lower neonatal mean weight and less advanced gestational 
age at delivery in comparison with ileal atresias. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect 
is unknown. Investigations in animal models and in 
humans have demonstrated that intestinal atresia is due 
to a vascular insult, consisting of an atresia or torsion of 
the feeding artery during the rotation of the midgut. The 
apple-peel variant has been hypothesized to be the effect 
of vascular occlusion of a superior mesenteric artery 
branch. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is based 
mainly on the detection of the severe dilatation of the 
intestinal loops proximal to the obstruction, which is 
absent in most cases prior to 25 weeks of gestation. The 
polyhydramnios is also of late onset. Hence, the first 
sonographic evidence of a possible small-bowel atresia is 
the isolated dilatation of an ileal loop, showing a transverse 
diameter of greater than 7 mm (Figure 7.11a), 
according to the published nomograms,10 which are also 
given in the Appendix. Additional signs that contribute 
to confirming the diagnosis are a centroabdominal location 
of the affected loop, its hyperechoic walls (Figure 
7.11a), increased peristalsis, and the presence of endoabdominal 
calcifications possibly indicative of a meconium 
ileus. In the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester, the 
malformation is fully demonstrated by ultrasound, with 
severe dilatation of the ileal/jejunal loops proximal to the 
obstruction, showing particulate matter moving with the 
increased peristaltic waves (Figure 7.11b,c). It should be 
underlined that it is not possible to identify the real site of 
the obstruction (ileal or jejunal). The only features that 
may point towards one of the two sites are the evidence 
of intestinal perforation (ascites with particulate matter 
and/or calcifications) for the ileus or extreme dilatation 
without perforation for the jejunum (Figure 7.12). 
• Differential diagnosis. It should be pointed out that 
the ultrasound signs of small-bowel atresia are virtually 
the same as those characterizing Hirschprung’s disease 
(aganglionic megacolon) and volvulus. Therefore, a 
differential diagnosis among these three completely 
different causes of intestinal obstruction cannot be carried 
out in most instances. Only the timing and the 
rapidity of the appearance of the loop dilatation may 
be roughly indicative of the likely diagnosis: gradual 
for atresia, and sudden (in 3–4 days) for volvulus. 
In addition, the differentiation from meconium ileus, 
which is characterized by a mechanical intraluminal 
obstruction due to the increased consistency of the 
meconium, is similarly rather challenging, if not impossible. 
The evidence of diffuse intra-abdominal calcifications 
would suggest the occurrence of meconium 
peritonitis, which follows intestinal perforation. FGR 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 217 
Figure 7.11 Ileal atresia. (a) Before 24 weeks of gestation, there is hardly any evidence of intestinal dilatation. The only doubtful sign is 
represented by a moderate dilatation (> 7 mm) of a single ileal/jejunal loop, possibly associated with a hyperechoic aspect of the wall (arrowheads). 
(b) In the 3rd trimester, the obstruction becomes evident, with moderately severe dilatation of various loops. In the dilated bowel loops cranial 
to the obstruction, increased intestinal peristalsis is seen, with the intestinal content moving from one loop to the adjacent one. (c) At 36 weeks, by 
following the course of the dilated loops, it is possible to demonstrate the communication between the various dilated segments (the maximum 
transverse diameter of the loops was 23 mm). 
Figure 7.12 Jejunal atresia (37 weeks of gestation). Note the 
extremely severe dilatation without evidence of perforation (absence of 
meconium peritonitis). The arrowheads indicate the site of the peristaltic 
wave, opening and closing the communication between adjacent 
loops from (a) to (b). 
a b c 
a b 

can be associated, especially if the atresia is in the 
jejunum, due to the consequent consistent protein 
malabsorption. 
• Prognostic indicators. The detection of intra-abdominal 
calcifications, possibly suggesting the presence of 
a meconium ileus complicated by perforation and 
meconium peritonitis, represents one of the most 
important poor prognostic signs. The poorer prognosis 
is related to the worse outcome of the cases complicated 
by perforation and to the fact that, in the 
case of meconium ileus, the risk of underlying cystic 
fibrosis is very high (> 90%). According to a recent 
retrospective report, another prognostic factor seems 
to be polyhydramnios.11 Its presence would indicate a 
higher risk of delayed anastomosis and a longer 
hospital stay, due to an increased rate of surgical 
complications. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are very rarely associated with intestinal atresias. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. There is a 10% risk of cystic fibrosis; however, if 
meconium peritonitis is associated, the risk of cystic 
fibrosis reaches 90%. 
Obstetric management. Should ileo-jejunal atresia be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is not especially recommended, 
because of the low risk of chromosomal aberrations. 
With regard to perinatal management, it should be 
noted that the risk of preterm delivery is significant, due 
to the ubiquitous occurrence of late-onset but severe 
polyhydramnios. Amniodrainage may be an option in 
very carefully selected cases, in order to reduce the uterine 
overdistension and the associated risk of preterm 
delivery. The delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center. Although there is no indication for 
cesarean section, the rate of malpresentation is increased 
by the common occurrence of severe polyhydramnios. 
The need for in utero transport derives from the 
increased risk of preterm delivery and FGR. Furthermore, 
surgery has to be carried out immediately after 
birth in most cases. 
Postnatal therapy. The surgical procedure includes 
removal of the atretic tract(s) and end-to-end intestinal 
anastomosis. Only in selected, more complex cases does 
the procedure involve a two-step procedure with an 
initial ileostomy followed by the anastomosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses with ileo-jejunal atresias is generally 
good, except for the relatively rare cases of apple-peel 
atresia or multiple atresias (types IIIB and IV). In fact, in 
these cases, the total length of the intestine is significantly 
reduced, and this leads to malabsorption (shortbowel 
syndrome). Also, the association with volvulus, 
perforation, and meconium peritonitis, which complicates 
less than 10% of the cases, negatively affects the 
survival rate, being responsible for a 10% increase in 
postoperative mortality. 
218 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. No data available. 
Diagnosis. Mechanical ileal obstruction due to the increased consistency of meconium; significant risk of 
perforation and consequent meconium peritonitis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. If cystic fibrosis is considered here, the risk is extremely high (>90%). 
Outcome. Depends on the underlying cystic fibrosis and its phenotypic expression. 
MECONIUM ILEUS 
Definition. Meconium ileus is characterized by an ileal 
mechanical obstruction caused by inspissated meconium. 
The meconium is thicker than normal due to a 
high protein content, the primary cause of which is cystic 
fibrosis, associated with most cases of meconium ileus. 
This obstruction leads relatively often to ileal perforation 
and consequently meconium peritonitis. In some 
cases, the obstruction occurs more distally, in the colon, 
where the meconium causes a mucus plug that obstructs 
the rectum. Also in this case, the risk of underlying cystic 
fibrosis is high. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As already mentioned, cystic 
fibrosis is associated in more than 90% of cases. In the 
few cases not associated with this genetic condition, the 
etiology of the intestinal obstruction remains unclear. 
The pathogenetic mechanism leading to the obstruction is 
represented by the significant changes in the components 

of the meconium caused by the cystic fibrosis: this shows 
a very high protein content and, at the same time, less 
fluids, due to their impaired intraluminal secretion. This 
leads to a significant inspissation, which in turn delays 
and eventually blocks the intraluminal transit of the 
meconium along the relatively narrow ileal lumen. Once 
the obstruction occurs, the loops proximal to the obstruction 
dilate and, due to the weak elasticity of the ileal walls 
relatively often perforate, with the thick meconium 
spilling into the abdominal cavity, with a consequent 
severe adhesive peritonitis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based upon recognition of 
an ileal obstruction, with one or multiple dilated loops 
that characteristically show hyperechoic content and 
similarly hyperechoic walls (Figure 7.13). In meconium 
ileus, the obstruction is usually of late onset, becoming 
evident in the late 2nd trimester, after 24–25 weeks of 
gestation. The ultrasound appearance is pleomorphic. 
The dilated ileal loops may show hyperechoic content 
or, in other cases, meconium/fluid levels; the walls may 
appear normal or thickened and hyperechoic. The situation 
is further complicated by the frequent occurrence of 
meconium peritonitis, which is characterized by diffuse 
intra-abdominal calcifications. If the obstruction 
involves the ileus, the colon is typically empty, since 
meconium transit is blocked. As already mentioned, in a 
minority of cases, the obstruction involves the colon, 
with evidence of a distal mucus plug. The association 
with cystic fibrosis is also present for this variant, 
although at a lower rate (25%). It has to be underlined 
that, in a significant number of cases, the first evidence 
of meconium ileus at ultrasound consists of the so-called 
hyperechoic ileus. This finding, in the early–mid 2nd 
trimester, may have different underlying causes: trisomy 
21 (3%), severe FGR with ileal ischemia, or meconium 
ileus. 
• Differential diagnosis. As already pointed out, the 
differential diagnosis with simple small-bowel atresia 
may be impossible. The detection of a highly hyperechoic 
meconium within the ileal loops and/or of 
intra-abdominal calcifications due to the meconium 
peritonitis may point towards meconium ileus as the 
most likely diagnosis. 
• Prognostic indicators. If an intestinal obstruction is 
possibly identified as meconium ileus, this is itself a 
poor prognostic sign, especially if associated with 
meconium peritonitis. This is due to the extremely 
strong association with cystic fibrosis, which affects 
the mid- to long-term prognosis; and to the surgical 
difficulties encountered in dealing with the meconium 
peritonitis, which may require multiple bowel 
resections. 
• Association with other malformations. This is 
unknown. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. However, 
considering that the first evidence of a meconium ileus 
may be a hyperechoic ileus, it should be remembered 
that this soft marker carries a risk of trisomy 21 of 
roughly 3%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high, if the almost ubiquitous cystic fibrosis is considered 
as a syndrome. 
Obstetric management. If meconium ileus is detected in 
a fetus, the option of an amniocentesis performed to 
obtain fetal DNA for cystic fibrosis testing should be discussed 
with the parents. In fact, as already mentioned, 
the diagnosis of meconium peritonitis is usually made 
after 24–25 weeks of gestation, which is the limit for termination 
of pregnancy in those countries in which there 
is a time limit for this procedure. Therefore, in these 
countries, DNA testing will not alter the course of pregnancy 
if, as is highly probable, the results of the test will 
become available in the early 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
On the other hand, in countries in which termination for 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 219 
Figure 7.13 Meconium ileus. (a) At 29 weeks of gestation, some ileal 
loops are dilated and show hyperechoic walls (arrow). The presence of 
macrocalcifications (arrowheads) demonstrates the perforation and the 
consequent meconium peritonitis. (b) Specimen after surgery. (c) The 
same case as in (b): an oblique view of the abdomen also demonstrates 
the presence of a secluded sac of ascites containing meconium sludge 
(arrow). (d) Another case showing diffuse intra-abdominal calcifications 
(arrows), consistent with a diagnosis of meconium peritonitis. 
a b 
c d 

serious fetal conditions is permitted until delivery, this 
caveat does not apply, and DNA testing may be easily 
carried out. As already mentioned, if the ultrasound 
finding is a hyperechoic ileus but not yet meconium 
ileus, then karyotyping is justified by the 3% risk of 
Down syndrome associated with this finding. 
Regardless of the results of DNA testing, in the case 
of meconium ileus, the fetus should be delivered in a 
tertiary referral center, in order to optimize neonatal 
management, which includes surgery for the bowel 
obstruction and, if not already performed, DNA testing 
for cystic fibrosis. In this regard, the helpful role of prenatal 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been 
underlined: this technique can improve the low diagnostic 
yield of prenatal ultrasound for meconium 
peritonitis.12 
Postnatal therapy. The postnatal work-up should 
include a contrast computed tomography (CT) scan, 
in order to ascertain persistent intestinal perforation 
invisible on prenatal ultrasound. The timing of surgery 
depends on the clinical presentation. If bowel atresia is 
associated, bowel resection with end-to-end anastomosis 
should be carried out soon after birth. If the ileus is not 
associated with anatomic atresia, then simple saline, 
water-soluble contrast enema or N-acetylcysteine therapy 
may induce meconium passage. Clearly, the longterm 
prognosis depends on the clinical expression of the 
underlying cystic fibrosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The outcome of 
fetuses diagnosed with meconium ileus is extremely variable, 
depending on the abdominal situation (concurrence 
of ileal atresia or of meconium peritonitis) and on 
the association with cystic fibrosis. Survival and quality 
of life depend directly on the severity of the cystic fibrosis. 
The early surgical mortality rate has been reported to 
be as low as 2%,13 which underlines once more that survival 
is dependent almost only on the clinical severity of 
the underlying cystic fibrosis. 
220 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Diagnosis. Late-onset dilatation of sigmoid colon and rectum, often with hyperechoic meconium. Normal 
amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: predominantly associated with various expressions of the caudal 
regression sequence. 
Outcome. Good, if isolated. If syndromic, depends on the associated malformations (as in caudal regression). 
ANORECTAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. All of these are malformations causing distal 
obstruction of the GI tract. Anorectal malformations can 
be divided, on the basis of their embryologic origin, into 
the following: 
• external malformations, due to abnormalities of the 
development and fusion of the external perineal layers, 
such as an imperforate anus with/without fistula 
• internal malformations, in which the developmental 
anomaly involves the primary partition of the cloaca 
by the urogenital septum – this group includes pure 
rectal atresia and rectal atresia with fistula 
• mixed malformations, including all possible sites of 
ectopic anus 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Of the above-mentioned malformations, 
only anorectal atresia is detectable by ultrasound 
in a minority of cases, in the 3rd trimester of 
pregnancy. The main ultrasound finding possibly indicative 
of such a malformation is overdistension of the 
rectum and, to a lesser extent, of the sigmoid colon 
(Figure 7.14). Relatively often, the mecoium in the 
dilated rectal pouch becomes hyperechoic. The amount 
of amniotic fluid is unchanged. On the contrary, if the 
anorectal atresia is associated with a rectovesical fistula, 
the amniotic fluid is reduced. If polyhydramnios is noted 
in association with anorectal atresia, this is due to the 
associated anomalies. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes only the higher 
bowel obstructions; the site and the hyperechoic 
meconium in the rectal pouch may help in reaching 
the diagnosis. It should be underlined that under normal 
conditions, some meconium does fills the rectal 
pouch, especially in the 3rd trimester (Figure 7.1a). 
However, the maximum diameter of the rectum does 
not exceed that of the adjacent full bladder under 
normal conditions. If the rectal pouch is larger then 

the full bladder, and shows a bilobed appearance, 
then anorectal obstruction is likely. 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with other anomalies is a relatively common 
finding in cases of anorectal atresia (up to 70–90%): 
these are mainly urogenital malformations, because of 
common embryologic origin (cloaca and urogenital 
sinus). Other commonly associated malformations 
involve the GI tract, the skeleton, and the central nervous 
system (CNS). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (trisomies 
18 and 21). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with anorectal atresia are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L): look for . anorectal malformation + 
vertebral anomalies + cardiac defects + esophageal 
atresia (TE fistula) + renal agenesis + limb anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
• Caudal regression syndrome: look for . anorectal 
malformation + renal agenesis + sacral agenesis + 
lumbar vertebral anomalies + femoral hypoplasia + 
talipes (Chapter 10). 
• Sirenomelia: look for . anorectal malformation + 
fusion of inferior limbs + renal agenesis + severe 
vertebral anomalies + genital anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. If anorectal atresia is diagnosed 
in the 3rd trimester, a careful assessment of the fetal 
anatomy should be performed in order to exclude associated 
anomalies. The clinical situation is completely 
different if the possibility of an anorectal malformation 
arises following the diagnosis, in the early 2nd 
trimester, of caudal regression syndrome or, worse, 
sirenomelia. In such circumstances, the diagnosis of an 
anorectal malformation is of no prognostic significance, 
since the above-mentioned anomalies are 
already lethal due to the associated bilateral renal agenesis. 
In the case of isolated anorectal malformation, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, 
in order to ensure the best possible perinatal management 
of the lesion, which usually comprises a diagnostic 
work-up and a surgical approach to the distal bowel 
obstruction. 
Postnatal therapy. Improvements in the surgical 
approach to this anomaly (sagittal anorectoplasty, 
PSARP) have recently yielded very good functional 
results, with a significant number of patients experiencing 
normal fecal continence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the anorectal 
malformation is isolated, the prognosis and overall survival 
are good. However, not all neonates undergoing 
PSARP achieve fecal continence. Postoperatively, the 
patients can be categorized into three groups with different 
treatment options for the management of postoperative 
problems: group I includes patients with poor 
anatomy, flat bottom, poor-quality muscle, sacral defect, 
and urinary incontinence. In theses cases, muscle transfers 
and/or definitive colostomy are considered. Group 
II includes patients with good-quality muscle and 
sacrum but misplaced bowel. In these cases, the option 
to consider is repositioning of the bowel. Finally, group 
III includes patients suffering from constipation. These 
patients can be managed with enemas, suppositories, or 
anterior resection. In contrast, if other major anomalies 
are present, then the final prognosis depends mainly 
on the severity of these anomalies. The prognosis is 
poor in most cases presenting with multiple anomalies 
within the broad spectrum of the V(A)CTER(L)/caudal 
regression syndrome. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 221 
Figure 7.14 Anorectal atresia. (a) Normal filling of the rectal pouch (arrow), behind the bladder (BI). (b) Evident dilatation of the rectum, which 
also shows a hyperechoic content (arrows). (c) The fetus after termination of pregnancy. In addition to other anomalies, anorectal atresia was 
confirmed: the anal orifice is not visible. 
a b c 

Definition. Hepatomegaly is defined as an increased 
volume of the liver. Similarly, splenomegaly refers to an 
increased volume of the spleen. They may be associated 
or occur independently. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of hepatomegaly 
comprises a wide spectrum of causes. Intrauterine 
fetal infections are among the most common causes of 
hepatomegaly. CMV infection, when severe, is commonly 
associated with hepatosplenomegaly. The wellknown 
myeloproliferative disease associated with Down 
syndrome may be responsible, in some cases, for moderate 
to severe hepatomegaly. Also, rare benign and malignant 
hepatic tumors, such as hemangioma or hepatoblastoma, 
may induce hepatomegaly. It should also be noted that 
hepatomegaly due to venous congestion is often present 
in those cardiac and extracardiac conditions possibly 
causing heart failure. In fact, the first step of cardiac failure 
in the fetus is an increase in central venous pressure, 
which in turn causes venous congestion in the liver, due 
to the fact that because of the patency of the two shunts 
(foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus), all increases in 
cardiac pressure are reflected in the right heart. Finally, 
there are two very rare syndromic conditions, namely the 
Beckwith–Wiedemann and Zellweger syndromes, that 
can be associated with hepatomegaly. 
Fetal infections are also the primary cause of 
splenomegaly, with or without hepatomegaly. In particular, 
CMV infection, when severe, is typically associated 
with splenomegaly, as well as hepatomegaly and ascites, 
in addition to other signs of infection (CNS calcifications, 
etc.). Other rather unusual causes of late-onset 
splenomegaly are storage diseases, such as Gaucher 
and Niemann–Pick syndromes, which, in the late 3rd 
trimester, may lead to splenomegaly. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. If the enlargement of the spleen 
and/or liver is severe, the diagnosis of these conditions 
is straightforward, the two organs occupying most of 
the abdomen. The recognition of hepatomegaly and 
splenomegaly is made even simpler if ascites, which 
acts as an intra-abdominal contrast medium, is associated 
(Figures 7.15 and 7.16). If hepatomegaly is very 
pronounced, the prominence of the liver pushes the 
anterior abdominal wall, causing a dip at the thoracoabdominal 
junction, similarly to what happens in cases of 
severe thoracic hypoplasia, although in this case it is the 
abdomen that is enlarged rather than the thorax that is 
hypoplastic (Figure 7.16). Nomograms of the maximum 
diameters of the liver and the spleen have been published14 
and are shown in the Appendix. Nomograms giving 
liver and spleen volumes versus gestational age have 
been published, due to the widespread use of 3D ultrasound. 
However, we feel that the measurement of the 
two cross-sectional diameters of the viscera remains easier 
and faster (Figure 7.17). It should be underlined that, 
especially in the case of CMV infection, the involvement 
of the spleen is predominant (Figure 7.18). 
• Differential diagnosis. Virtually non-existent. Care 
needs only be taken not to mistake the left hepatic 
lobe, which is larger in utero than in postnatal life, for 
the spleen. 
• Prognostic indicators. Clearly, the final prognosis 
depends mainly on the cause of the hepatomegaly/ 
splenomegaly. If other signs of severe fetal infection, 
such as cerebral calcification or ascites, are present, 
then these are highly indicative of a poor prognosis. 
• Association with other malformations. The enlargement 
of the liver and/or the spleen does not itself represent 
a malformation; it is rather an acquired lesion 
due to enviromental factors (e.g., infections). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent, 
except for the already-mentioned myeloproliferative disease 
which, in a minority of Down syndrome fetuses, 
leads to evident hepatomegaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. Hepatomegaly can be associated with the following: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: look for .hepatomegaly 
+ omphalocele + body hemihypertrophy + 
macroglossia (Chapter 10). 
• Zellweger syndrome: look for . hepatomegaly + 
polycystic kidney + agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
222 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Rare. Often due to severe fetal infections. 
Diagnosis. Enlarged liver/spleen. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low, except for the myeloproliferative disease typical of trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. Hepatomegaly can be associated with the Beckwith– 
Wiedemann and Zellweger syndromes. 
Outcome. Depends on the underlying cause. 
HEPATOMEGALY/SPLENOMEGALY 

Obstetric management. Should hepatomegaly/ 
splenomegaly be diagnosed in a fetus, the first issue to 
consider is a possible infective cause. Therefore, a careful 
interview with the mother with the aim of disclosing any 
possible infectious episodes, which in most cases are also 
simple flu-like events, should be carried out. Maternal 
serologic evidence of recent CMV or other hepatotropic 
infections should be sought. In addition, a thorough 
ultrasound assessment searching for additional signs of 
fetal infection (cerebral calcification, hydrocephalus, 
ascites, and cardiomegaly (myocarditis)) should be performed 
by an expert. 
Postnatal therapy. This is directly related to the underlying 
cause of the hepatomegaly/splenomegaly. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis of 
the hepatomegaly/splenomegaly also depends on its 
cause. Storage diseases are usually lethal within a few 
months/years of life. In cases due to intrauterine infections, 
the neonatal outcome will depend upon the type of 
infection and on its severity. In the case of CMV infection, 
fetal involvement may range from a limited hepatitis 
of moderate severity to very important sequelae such 
as hearing loss or neurologic damage. Early perinatal 
demise may also occur in severe CMV infection. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 223 
Figure 7.15 Hepatomegaly. This patient had had serologically 
confirmed hepatitis A infection in the 1st trimester. At 19 weeks, 
ultrasound demonstrated the following: (a) Axial view: evident 
hepatomegaly, with capsular macrocalcification and moderate ascites. 
(b) Left parasagittal view: The ascites and moderate enlargement of the 
left hepatic lobe (LL, arrowheads) are shown; in such a situation, the 
left hepatic lobe should not be mistaken for the spleen, which was normal 
in this case (c) (SPL and arrowheads). 
Figure 7.16 Severe hepatomegaly due to CMV infection. (a) on the 
axial view of the upper abdomen, it is possible to recognize the 
enlarged, hyperechoic, and rather inhomogeneous liver (arrows). (b) 
On the right parasagittal view, the degree of hepatomegaly is easily 
evaluated and the prominence of the abdomen in comparison with the 
normal thorax is evident (arrowheads). 
a
b
c 
a
b 

224 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.17 Hepatomegaly. The simultaneous presence of ascites acts as a natural contrast medium, allowing 3D ultrasound (surface rendering) 
to visualize the enlarged liver (L), the spleen (on the left), and the bowel (arrow). However, in this case, the diagnostic role of 3D imaging is limited. 
Figure 7.18 Splenomegaly in two cases of severe fetal 
CMV infection. (a) On the coronal view, at 37 weeks of 
gestation, it is possible to recognize the severely enlarged 
spleen (Spl), the lower pole of which reaches the bladder 
(Bl) and a concurrent similarly severe hepatomegaly (Li). 
(b) A similar case, at 36 weeks of gestation, showing severe 
hepatosplenomegaly, ascites, and intra-abdominal calcifications. 
Both neonates died of widespread CMV infection. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent. 1/4000 live births, but higher in utero. 
Diagnosis. Round, solid mass that deforms the anterior abdominal wall, usually containing the right hepatic lobe 
and some bowel loops. The cord insertion is on the mass. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomies 18 and 13 and triploidy. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: Beckwith–Wiedemann, Cantrell. 
Outcome. Good if the lesion is isolated and the liver is not completely herniated. Very poor in the case of 
associated malformations and/or chromosomal aberrations. 
OMPHALOCELE 
a b 

Definition. Omphalocele is a defect in the closure of the 
abdominal wall that also involves the cord insertion. The 
herniated organs are wrapped in a two-layered sac, with 
the two layers being the peritoneum and the amnion. 
The incidence at birth is 1/4000 live births. 
Anatomy. The cord insertion is located on the top of the 
sac. Two variants of omphalocele exist, according to the 
presence or absence of the liver in the sac. The two variants 
have a different embryogenesis and may have a 
completely different prognosis, due to the differential 
risk of associated chromosomal anomalies. Rupture of 
the two-layered membranes occurs in about 10% of 
cases. In this rare circumstance, as reported below, the 
differential diagnosis with gastroschisis may be difficult. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. An omphalocele is sonographically 
represented by a bulging structure that (i) arises from the 
anterior abdominal wall; (ii) contains some abdominal 
viscera (liver and/or bowel); and (iii) presents the cord 
insertion on its convexity (Figures 7.19 and 7.20). The 
presence of the umbilical vein within the omphalocele is 
an indirect sign of the fact that this anomaly represents 
a primary closure defect of the abdominal wall (Figure 
7.21). In some cases, ascites may also be associated, 
and care should then be taken not to mistake the ascites 
for amniotic fluid (Figure 7.20b), as this would lead to 
an erroneous diagnosis of gastroschisis. In addition, it 
should be noted that polyhydramnios, possibly secondary 
to bowel obstruction at the level of the wall defect or 
within the omphalocele, may complicate one-third of 
cases. If the liver is detected within the omphalocele 
(Figure 7.22a), the diagnosis is certain also early in gestation; 
if, on the contrary, only some bowel loops are seen 
in it, care should be taken to differentiate a real omphalocele 
(Figure 7.22b) from the physiologic herniation of the 
intestine within the cord that is frequently seen until 
the 11th week of gestation (Figure 7.22c). Therefore, if 
an omphalocele containing only ileal loops is identified 
earlier than the 12th week of gestation, the fetus should 
be rescanned in a week’s time: if the herniation persists, 
then it is an omphalocele; if it has disappeared, then it 
was a physiologic transient herniation of the intestine in 
the cord. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 225 
Figure 7.19 Omphalocele in a fetus with multiple anomalies (anencephaly, omphalocele, and bilateral aplasia radii). (a) At 23 weeks of gestation, 
the axial view of the abdomen demonstrates a large omphalocele containing the liver (the arrows indicate the large wall defect). (b) 3D lowmagnification 
maximum-mode rendering showing the anencephaly and the omphalocele (arrowheads). (c) The stillborn fetus: the omphalocele 
(arrowhead), with the cord insertion, and the aplasia radii with ectrodactyly are shown. 
Figure 7.20 Omphalocele. (a) Midsagittal view of the abdomen: a case of omphalocele containing the liver at 29 weeks of gestation (normal 
karyotype). (b) Rarely, ascites can be associated with the omphalocele and can be detected in the sac (Asc); color Doppler shows the umbilical vein. 
(c) A small omphalocele, containing only some bowel loops (19 weeks of gestation) in a fetus with trisomy 18. Note the concurrent cord cyst 
(arrowhead), which is also often associated with trisomy 18. The inset shows the specimen with the small omphalocele and the bowel loops visible 
under the omphalocele membranes. 
a
a 
b 
b c 
c 

• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
should include other abdominal wall defects and the 
physiologic herniation in the cord that disappears completely 
after the 11th completed week of gestation. The 
differences with gastroschisis are evident: in an 
omphalocele, there is a sac containing the viscera, 
whereas in gastroschisis, the viscera float freely in the 
amniotic fluid. In addition, the cord insertion is normal 
226 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.22 Omphalocele. (a) At 11–12 weeks of gestation, an omphalocele can reliably be diagnosed only if it contains the liver (arrow). (b) In 
fact, if the omphalocele contains bowel loops only, as in this case (arrowheads), to confirm the diagnosis and rule out physiologic herniation of 
intestine in the cord, it is necessary to wait until the 12th completed week of gestation. In this case, it was associated with trisomy 13, enlarged 
nuchal translucency and subcutaneous edema, visible also in the image. (c) For comparison, in this image, an axial view of the abdomen showing a 
physiologic herniation of the bowel in the cord (arrows) at 11 weeks of gestation is shown. (d) Pentalogy of Cantrell (15 weeks of gestation): in 
addition to the omphalocele, the sternal cleft with ectopia cordis is demonstrated by power Doppler (arrowhead). 
Figure 7.21 Omphalocele: 3D ultrasound. (a) 
Multiplanar imaging, showing the omphalocele on the 
three orthogonal planes, which enables assessment of its 
content and extension (arrowheads indicate the abdominal 
wall defect; the arrow indicates cord insertion). (b) Surface 
rendering demonstrates the cord insertion on the top of the 
omphalocele (arrows), in between the two knees (g). 
a b 
a b 
c 
d 

in gastroschisis, the defect of which is paramedian, 
while in an omphalocele, it inserts on the top of the sac. 
If a large omphalocele contains the whole of the liver, 
this should be differentiated from the so-called 
limb–body–wall complex, which is characterized by 
major distortion of the body anatomy, with severe scoliosis 
and limb and skull abnormalities. Another entity 
that should be differentiated from pure omphalocele 
is cloacal exstrophy, in which omphalocele extends 
caudally and is associated with bladder extrophy and 
anomalies of the external genitalia. This anomaly is 
described in Chapter 8. In the case of omphalocele, the 
recognition of a normal bladder in the pelvis rules out 
this very rare possibility. 
• Association with other malformations. Congenital 
heart disease and urogenital and GI malformations 
are often associated with omphalocele. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (mainly trisomies 
18 and 13; in a few cases, triploidy, trisomy 21, 
and Turner syndrome). It should be underlined that the 
chromosomal risk is higher in the case of a small 
omphalocele containing only bowel loops. On the contrary, 
huge omphaloceles containing the liver are rarely 
associated with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with omphalocele are as follows: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: look for .omphalocele 
+ macroglossia + somatic hemihypertophy + polycystic 
kidney (Chapter 10). 
• Pentalogy of Cantrell (Figure 7.22d):15 look for . 
omphalocele + diaphragmatic hernia + sternal fusion 
defects + ectopia cordis + cleft lip/palate. 
Obstetric management. Should an omphalocele be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of chromosomal anomalies, which is 
greatest if the defect is small and contains bowel only. 
In addition, fetal echocardiography and a thorough 
anomaly scan should be performed to detect possibly 
associated defects. With regard to delivery, there is no 
consensus on the need for cesarean section, advocated by 
some authors to reduce the risk of traumatic rupture 
of the sac during passage through the birth canal. 
Empirically, it has been suggested that a cesarean section 
may be indicated in cases presenting with huge (>5cm) 
omphaloceles, with spontaneous delivery recommended 
for smaller lesions. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical correction of the defect may be 
performed in a single intervention or may require a twostep 
procedure, according to the size of the omphalocele. 
In fact, in those cases in which the whole liver has herniated, 
the limited intra-abdominal pressure is insufficient to 
allow normal growth of the abdomen. As a result, there is 
no space left in the abdomen to accommodate the large 
volume of the liver. In these cases, the defect is only partially 
closed, and the viscera remaining outside the 
abdomen are wrapped up in a sterile silastic bag (or 
spring-loaded silos). The final closure is delayed until the 
growth of the abdominal wall will allow complete closure 
without an abnormal increase in intra-abdominal pressure. 
Alternatively, rotational muscular flaps may be used 
to increase the surface of the anterior abdominal wall. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Early neonatal 
mortality is generally due to the associated anomalies, 
and may be as high as 80% in the case of multiple anomalies 
or even 95–100% in the case of severe aneuploidies 
or syndromes. On the contrary, if the omphalocele is isolated, 
and the liver is not in the sac, the prognosis is 
excellent, at least in pediatric series. Should the liver 
be in the sac, the prognosis is relatively poor and significant 
respiratory sequelae have been reported. As for 
other malformations, prenatal series yield very different 
results, with significantly lower survival rates and much 
poorer quality of life.16 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 227 
Incidence. Rare. 
Diagnosis. Bowel loops freely floating in the amniotic fluid. Para-umbilical wall defect. Normal cord insertion. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. Concurrent joint contractures of the legs with hypoplastic lower limb 
muscles indicate the presence of congenital amyoplasia. 
Outcome. Very good, unless rare complications including perforation, infarction or infection of the herniated loops 
occur. 
GASTROSCHISIS 

Definition. Gastroschisis is characterized by a paraumbilical 
defect of the abdominal wall through which 
bowel loops herniate to float freely in the amniotic fluid. 
Anatomy. The defect involves all the layers of the abdominal 
wall, and the herniated viscera consist, in the overwhelming 
majority of cases, of bowel loops only; in very 
rare circumstances, the stomach and, exceptionally, urogenital 
structures may herniate as well. As already pointed 
out, there is no membrane wrapping the herniated viscera, 
as in omphalocele, and these float freely in the amniotic 
fluid. This very fact increases the likelihood of chemically 
induced inflammation of the herniated bowel loops, 
which may lead to perforation. The pathogenetic mechanism 
leading to the para-umbilical defect involves an 
abnormal regression of the right umbilical vein or, alternatively, 
a vascular accident during embryogenesis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is 
straightforward and relies on the recognition of freely 
floating bowel outside the fetal abdomen (Figure 7.23). 
Once the suspicion of gastroschisis has been raised, a 
closer inspection may lead to identification of the right 
para-umbilical wall defect through which the bowel herniates. 
Usually, the defect is small (< 2 cm), and this is 
responsible for the occurrence of bowel infarction due to 
torsion and/or compression of the mesenteric pedicle on 
the rim of the defect. In some cases, during the 3rd 
trimester, thickening and edema of the intestinal walls, 
possibly associated with dilatation (Figure 7.24), may 
indicate the onset of obstruction and/or of even worse 
complications such as infarction. Some authors have 
described how, in extremely rare cases, after severe 
dilatation of an ileal loop due to obstruction, the dilatation 
may completely disappear due to complete necrosis 
of the affected loop (vanishing gut). 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis with 
omphalocele has already been addressed in detail in 
the previous section. The only other condition that 
may, to a limited extent, mimick gastroschisis is the 
limb–body–wall complex, especially if this is due to 
amniotic bands. In such a rare circumstance, the 
damage created by the amniotic band may extensively 
228 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.23 Gastroschisis at 16 weeks of gestation. (a) 3D multiplanar imaging, showing the bowel loops floating freely in the amniotic fluid. The 
insert at lower right shows the corresponding surface rendering. (b) Another case, at 12 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 7.24 Gastroschisis at 31 weeks of gestation. The appearance 
of bowel dilatation in the 3rd trimester represents a complication, indicating 
a likely obstruction. This situation may evolve with perforation 
and/or necrosis of one or more bowel loops. (a) Sagittal view of the 
fetal trunk showing some normally sized loops close to the fetal arm 
and one severely dilated tract (arrow). (b) Axial view demonstrating 
also some meconium blocked in the dilated loop (arrowhead). (c) 
Surface rendering demonstrating the dilated loop (the same as in (b)). 
(d) Below the dilated loop, most of the herniated bowel is of normal 
size. 
a 
a 
b 
b 
c d 

involve the abdominal wall, with consequent herniation 
of bowel and other viscera. However, in this 
lethal condition, there are other major anomalies of 
the spine, the limbs, and, possibly, the skull, which 
lead to the diagnosis. 
• Association with other malformations. Intestinal 
perforation and consequent peritonitis represent complications 
rather than associated malformations. 
Gastroschisis is rarely associated with non-GI anomalies. 
The only severe condition that would significantly 
worsen the prognosis, if present, is so-called 
congenital amyoplasia, which is characterized by 
absence of limb muscles, which are replaced by 
fibrous and fatty tissue. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low, except for the rare association with the above 
mentioned congenital amyoplasia. 
Obstetric management. Should gastroschisis be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping is not mandatory, because of the 
low risk of chromosomal anomalies. Similarly, the risk 
of associated non-chromosomal anomalies is low, and 
the only issue that needs to be addressed is the presence 
and function of the lower limb muscles. Serial follow-up 
scans should be scheduled in order to detect possible 
local complications, such as dilatation, wall edema, 
or perforation. With regard to the mode of delivery, no 
definite conclusion has been reached on the real need 
for cesarean section in order to avoid tearing on the 
mesenteric pedicle of the herniated bowel. In fact, 
almost the same risk applies for delivery of the fetal 
abdomen with gastroschisis in the course of cesarean 
section. The only aspect for which the operative modality 
of delivery would be preferable is the possible risk of 
infection of the bowel exposed to the bacteria of the 
birth canal. 
Postnatal therapy. As for omphalocele, surgical reduction 
of the defect may be carried out in a single operation 
or approached with a two-step procedure, according to 
the state and amount of herniated bowel. The same silastic 
bag (or spring-loaded silos) mentioned for omphalocele 
may be used for gastroschisis in those cases in which 
the single-step closure of the defect would dangerously 
increase the intra-abdominal pressure. Regardless of the 
procedure, the outcome is very good in the overwhelming 
majority of cases. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The postoperative 
mortality rate has been reported to be as low as 
15%. Causes of death are sepsis and the complications 
of mesenteric ischemia. However, in more recent series, 
the survival rate exceeds 90%. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 229 
REFERENCES 
1. Avni EF, Rypens F, Milaire J. Fetal esophagus: normal sonographic 
appearance. J Ultrasound Med 1994; 13: 175–80. 
2. Goldstein I, Reece EA, Yakoni S, et al. Growth of the fetal stomach 
in normal pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987; 70: 641–4. 
3. Sase M, Nakata M, Tashma R, Kato H. Development of gastric 
emptying in the human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 
16: 56–9. 
4. Gross RE. The Surgery of Infancy and Childhood. Philadelphia, 
PA WB Saunders, 1953. 
5. Satoh S, Takashima T, Takeuchi H, et al. Antenatal sonographic 
detection of the proximal esophageal segment: specific evidence 
for congenital esophageal atresia. J Clin Ultrasound 1995; 23: 
419–23. 
6. Stringer MD, Mc Kenna KM, Goldstein RB, et al. Prenatal 
diagnosis of esophageal atresia. J Pediatr Surg 1995; 30: 
1258–63. 
7. Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, Roth MP. Evaluation of prenatal 
diagnosis of congenital gastro-intestinal atresias. Eur J Epidemiol 
1996; 12: 611–16. 
8. Romero R, Jeanty P, Pilu GL, et al. The prenatal diagnosis of 
duodenal atresia. Does it make any difference? Obstet Gynecol 
1988; 71: 739–41. 
9. Escobar MA, Ladd AP, Grosveld JL, et al. Duodenal atresia and 
stenosis: long-term follow up over 30 years. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 
39: 867–71. 
10. Paralekar S. Sonography of normal fetal bowel. J Ultrasound 
Med 1991; 10: 211–13. 
11. Iacobelli BD, Zaccara A, Spirydakis I, et al. Prenatal counselling 
of small bowel atresia: watch the fluid! Prenat Diagn 2006; 26: 
214–17. 
12. Cham KL, Tang MHY, Tse HY, Tang RYK, Tam PKH. 
Meconium peritonitis: prenatal diagnosis, postnatal management 
and outcome. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 676–82. 
13. Mushtaq I, Wright VM, Drake DP, et al. Meconium ileus secondary 
to cystic fibrosis. The East London experience. Pediatr 
Surg Int 1998; 13: 365–9. 
14. Roberts AM, Mitchell JM, Pattison NS. Fetal liver length in 
normal and isoimmunized pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1989; 161: 42–6. 
15. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
16. Brantberg A, Blaas HGK, Haugen SE, Eiknes SH. Characteristics 
and outcome of 90 cases of fetal omphalocele. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2005; 26: 527–37. 

The urogenital system develops from the intermediate 
mesoderm. During folding of the embryo in the horizontal 
plane, this mesoderm is carried ventrally; then, a longitudinal 
ridge of mesoderm, the urogenital ridge, forms on 
each side of the dorsal aorta. This structure will eventually 
give rise to parts of the urinary and genital tract. The part 
of urogenital ridge giving rise to the urinary system is the 
nephrogenic cord; the part giving rise to the genital system 
is the genital ridge.1 
The urinary system begins to develop prior to the genital 
system. Three regions of excretory kidney develop in 
the human embryo: pronephros, mesonephros, and 
metanephros. These arise sequentially from the intermediate 
mesoderm beginning at days 19–21 of development. 
The pronephros and mesonephros degenerate, 
while the metanephros will develop into the adult kidney. 
The metanephros begins to develop during the 5th week 
of development and start to be functionally active 5 
weeks later. Initially, it consists of two cell types: the 
epithelium of the ureteric bud and the mesenchyme of the 
metanephric blastema. A series of reciprocal interactions 
between these two structures causes the ureteric bud to 
repeatedly branch to form the ureter, the renal pelvis, the 
calices, and the collecting tubules. Concurrently, the mesenchyme, 
induced by the adjacent ureteric bud branch 
tips, undergoes a transformation to form the nephrons. 
The first glomeruli develop by 8–9 weeks, and the 
nephrogenesis continues in the cortex of the fetal kidney 
until 34–36 weeks. 
The bladder develops from the urogenital sinus, and 
the first stage of bladder development involves division 
of the cloaca into the anorectal and urogenital regions. 
Initially, the bladder is in continuity with the allantois, 
but eventually this structure regresses, converting into a 
thick fibrous cord, the urachus, which connects the bladder 
with the umbilicus. 
The mature human kidneys contain about a million 
nephrons, each consisting of specialized segments, 
including glomeruli, proximal tubules, the loop of 
Henle, and the distal tubule, connected to the tree-like 
collecting duct system and intimately associated with the 
vascular supply. 
Timing of examination. Ultrasound screening of urinary 
tract anomalies is generally performed at 19–21 weeks 
of gestation, despite the fact that at this gestational age a 
significant number of late-onset renal diseases, such as 
most forms of hydronephrosis, cannot yet be identified. 
In fact, the incidence of prenatally detected urinary tract 
malformations depends also on the timing of the scan: 
the later the ultrasound examination is performed, 
the higher the percentage of urinary tract anomalies 
detected. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views) 
Kidneys. Anatomic assessment of the kidneys can be made 
on two scanning planes: axial and longitudinal. On axial 
views, the kidneys appear as two round paravertebral 
structures with the pelvis oriented towards the midline. 
On longitudinal views, they appear elliptic. The adrenal 
glands are located just cranial to the kidneys, and, in cases 
of renal agenesis, can be mistaken for the kidneys. On the 
axial view of the kidney, it is possible to measure its width 
and thickness. The length of the kidney, from the upper to 
the lower pole, can be measured on the longitudinal view. 
Nomograms for kidney size at different gestational ages 
are given in the Appendix. The ratio between renal circumference 
and abdominal circumference is approximately 
0.27–0.30 and remains constant throughout 
pregnancy. The fetal kidneys can be visualized on ultrasound 
in most cases by the end of the 1st trimester (12 
weeks), when they appear as two hyperechoic paravertebral 
structures (Figure 8.1); in the 2nd trimester, they 
lose their hyperechoic appearance, while by the 3rd 
trimester, it is possible to distinguish between the cortex 
Chapter 8 
Urinary tract anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE UROGENITAL TRACT: ULTRASOUND 
APPROACH, SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
231 

and the medulla; the renal pyramids appear hypoechoic, 
while the pelvis appears as a small medial sonolucent 
area (Figure 8.2). The cortex is peripheral to the medulla 
and is slightly more echogenic. The size of the pelvis in 
axial sections (Figure 8.3) should not exceed 4mm 
before the 32nd week and 7 mm from the 33rd week 
until term.2 
Bladder. The bladder can be visualized as soon as urine 
production begins, at about 10 weeks of gestation. On 
transvaginal ultrasound, the bladder can be always 
visualized by 12 weeks in the middle of the fetal pelvis 
as a circular anechoic structure with echoic walls. The 
ultrasound aspect of the bladder does not change during 
gestation, and, under physiologic conditions, the 
thickness of its walls should never exceed 2–3mm 
(Figure 8.4a). The perivesical arteries, which run laterally 
to the bladder (Figure 8.4b), are easily detected on 
color Doppler, and represent useful ultrasound landmarks 
that can help to differentiate the bladder from 
other cystic formations that might be present in the 
fetal pelvis. 
Ureters and urethra. Both of these structures are not 
visible prenatally, except in cases of disease. Figure 8.5 
shows the main embryologic events occurring during 
definitive formation of the kidneys. 
232 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.2 Ultrasound appearance of the fetal kidney at 28 weeks of 
gestation: the renal pyramids may be seen as hypoechoic structures 
within the renal parenchyma; the renal pelvis may be seen as an echofree 
area medially. 
Figure 8.1 (a) Normal fetal 
kidneys at 13 weeks of gestation. 
At this stage, the kidneys appear 
as bilateral hyperechoic structures 
in the paravertebral regions 
(arrows). (b) Normal fetal kidneys 
at 18 weeks. The kidney 
appears slightly hyperechoic 
(arrows) compared with surrounding 
tissues; the renal pelvis 
is seen centrally. 
Figure 8.3 Axial scan through 
the fetal abdomen, showing measurement 
of the normal (a) and 
enlarged (b) renal pelves. 
B 
a b 
A 

MB 
RP 
MC 
U 
UB 
b 
A systematic approach to the fetal urinary tract requires 
ultrasound assessment of both kidneys, the bladder, and 
the amount of amniotic fluid. 
Absent kidney. If one of the two kidneys is not found on 
ultrasound in its proper location, then it may be ectopic 
or completely absent (unilateral agenesis). In the former 
case, the most common ectopic site is represented by the 
pelvis, in the presacral area or in the iliac fossa; alternatively, 
and, much more rarely, the ectopic kidney can 
be fused with the contralateral one (simple or fused 
crossed renal ectopia). If the kidney cannot be found in 
ectopic sites, then a putative diagnosis of unilateral renal 
agenesis can be formulated after excluding the possibility 
of severe renal hypoplasia. If both kidneys are absent 
(bilateral agenesis), the bladder cannot be visualized and 
only after 16 weeks of gestation will severe oligohydramnios 
be associated. 
Abnormal renal echogenicity and size (Figure 8.6) 
• If both kidneys appear hyperechoic in comparison 
with the liver or spleen, and larger than normal, this 
will point towards a diagnosis of polycystic kidneys. 
If additional extrarenal abnormalities are associated 
(especially of the skeleton and central nervous system 
(CNS), then the kidney anomaly is likely to be part of 
a well-defined syndrome. 
• If the kidneys are small and hyperechoic, then this 
may indicate the presence of Potter type IV cystic 
renal dysplasia. 
• If the kidneys are hyperechoic and normal in size and 
no associated extrarenal anomalies are found, the picture 
may simply represent a variant form of normal 
kidney development, although some authors have 
included this feature (i.e., normally sized hyperechoic 
kidney), among the soft markers of aneuploidy. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 233 
Figure 8.5 Development of the kidney. (a) Sketch of a lateral view of a 5 week embryo, showing the primordium of the metanephros. (b,c) Sketches 
showing successive stages in the development of the metanephric diverticulum or ureteric bud (fifth to sixth week). Observe the development of the 
ureter, renal pelvis and major calices. (UB, ureteric bud; P, Remnant of pronephros; M, mesonephros; MB, metanephric blastema; RP, renal pelvis; 
U, ureter; MC, major calix.) 
a 
Figure 8.4 (a) Axial scan 
through the fetal pelvis showing 
the bladder wall (arrows). (b) 
Color flow Doppler image showing 
both perivesical arteries separating 
around the bladder 
(arrow). 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 
a b 

234 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Hyperechoic 
kidney 
Polycystic 
kidneys 
Normal 
variant or 
soft marker? 
Cystic dysplasia 
Potter type 4 
Volume 
+ Other anomalies 
Bardet–Biedl 
syndrome 
Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome 
Perlman syndrome 
Zellweger syndrome 
Figure 8.6 Algorithm to be applied in the case of hyperechoic kidneys. 
Calicopyelic 
dilatation 
Ureteropelvic 
junction 
obstruction 
Vesico-ureteral 
junction obstructionb 
Unilateral 
vesico-ureteral 
reflux 
Post-urethral valvesa 
Bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Moderate 
Severe 
No 
Ureteronephrosis? 
Bladder 
dilatation? 
aComplete valves, with absent amniotic fluid 
bOften associated with duplex kidney, 
as in this case 
Figure 8.7 Algorithm to be applied in the case of calicopelvic dilatation. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 235 
Bladder 
not visualizeda 
Kidneys 
present? 
Normal 
echogenicity? 
Hyperechoic 
kidneys 
Yes 
Yes 
No Absent amniotic fluid 
Bilatral 
renal 
agenesis 
No 
ARPKD 
ADPKD 
Potter IVd 
Reduced 
amniotic fluid + 
abnormal 
Dopplerc 
Normal 
amniotic fluid 
lower 
abdominal 
mass 
Severe 
FGRc 
Bladder 
exstrophy 
Volume - 
reduced 
amniotic fluid 
aAfter ruling out physiologic transient 
emptying 
bSometimes reduced amniotic fluid 
cOften with hyperechoic ileus from 
mesenteric ischemia 
dObstructive cystic renal dysplasia 
Volume + 
normal 
amniotic fluid b 
Volume + 
absent 
amniotic fluid 
Figure 8.8 Algorithm to be applied in the case 
of non-visualization of the bladder. ARPKD, 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; 
ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney 
disease; FGR, fetal growth restriction. 
• If parenchymal cysts of various sizes are detected, and 
the overall renal volume is increased, a diagnosis of 
multicystic kidney can be made, if the cysts do not 
communicate with one another; otherwise, it could be 
a case of severe hydronephrosis. In both cases, it is of 
the utmost importance, for prognostic purposes, to 
make a careful assessment of the contralateral kidney, 
as described below. 
• If unilateral calicopyelic dilatation is present 
(Figure 8.7), then the hydronephrosis may be due to 
obstruction or vesico-ureteral reflux. The operator 
should check for signs of dilatation of the ureter to 
exclude the possibility of pyelo-ureteral junction 
obstruction, thereby hypothesizing that an obstruction 
of the vesico-ureteral junction or a reflux might 
be present. 
• If bilateral hydro-ureteronephrosis is present together 
with mild distension of the bladder, but normal thickness 
of the bladder walls and a normal quantity of 
amniotic fluid, then the most likely diagnosis is that of 
bilateral vesico-ureteral reflux. 
• Conversely, if the bladder is clearly dilated and with 
thickened and hyperechoic walls, and significant oligohydramnios 
is associated, then this points towards a 
diagnosis of lower urinary tract obstruction. In this 
case, hydro-ureteronephrosis may be associated with 
increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma (Potter 
type IV cystic dysplasia). 
• If the fetal bladder cannot be seen, then the diagnostic 
algorithm shown in Figure 8.8 should be applied, and 
a firm diagnosis made only after weighing up all of 
the parameters listed above. 

236 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
RENAL AGENESIS 
Incidence. Unilateral form: 1/1000. Bilateral form: 1–2/5000. 
Diagnosis. Bilateral form: lack of visualization of the kidneys and bladder associated with severe oligohydramnios 
(after the 16th week). Unilateral form: lack of visualization of one kidney, with normal bladder and amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low risk in isolated unilateral forms (< 1%); slightly higher in isolated bilateral 
renal agenesis. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: 20–25%. 
Outcome. Bilateral form: uniformly fatal. Unilateral form: good, if isolated. 
Definition. Renal agenesis is defined as complete 
absence of one or both kidneys (unilateral or bilateral 
renal agenesis). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This anomaly is due to failure 
of the development of the ureteric bud with absence 
of any interaction with the metanephric blastema.3 The 
incidence is 1/1000 newborns for the unilateral form and 
1–2/5000 for the bilateral form. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographic diagnosis of bilateral 
renal agenesis is based on the impossibility of visualizing 
the kidneys and the bladder, associated with severe 
oligohydramnios after the 16th week of gestation. In 
these cases, it is important not to mistake the adrenal 
glands for the kidneys (Figure 8.9). The lack of an 
acoustic window, due to the severe oligohydramnios, can 
make the diagnosis challenging in some cases. In addition, 
the adrenal glands may be mistakenly interpreted as 
kidneys: in fact, due to the absence of the kidneys, these 
glands sometimes appear hypertrophic or merely rounder 
than normal. Although amnioinfusion has been proposed 
as a diagnostic aid, it is generally sufficient to employ 
color/power Doppler to confirm the absence of the renal 
Figure 8.9 Bilateral renal agenesis. (a) The absence of both kidneys is evident despite the associated oligohydramnios; the arrows indicate both 
adrenal glands in the paraspinal regions. (b) The ultrasound image shows the absence of both kidneys; the right adrenal gland appears enlarged 
(arrowheads); the typical ‘ice cream sandwich’ appearance of the adrenal gland is characterized by the hypoechoic cortex and hyperechoic medulla; 
this is quite different from the normal kidney. 
In most renal abnormalities, the prognosis is worse if 
the lesion is bilateral and/or if it is associated with 
extrarenal anomalies. In fact, bilateral renal malformations 
often cause renal insufficiency, which in 
turn is responsible for severe oligohydramnios. This 
may induce Potter sequence anomalies, including the 
Potter facies, clubfeet, and other skeletal deformities; 
the association of extrarenal anomalies increases 
the risk of chromosomal and non-chromosomal 
syndromic conditions. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
a b 

arteries, feature consistent with the diagnosis of bilateral 
renal agenesis (Figure 8.10). The course of the superior 
vesical arteries can also help to confirm the absence of the 
bladder. Fetal biometry and Doppler evaluation of the 
umbilical artery velocity waveform rules out another 
cause of non-visualization of the fetal bladder and oligohydramnios, 
namely fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
Most cases of unilateral renal agenesis escape prenatal 
diagnosis because the bladder and amount of amniotic 
fluid are normal and so there are no indirect signs raising 
the suspicion of renal disease. Moreover, in the same way 
as in bilateral agenesis, the presence of the adrenal gland 
in the ipsilateral renal loggia may resemble the kidney. 
Color Doppler can be used in doubtful cases to confirm 
the absence of the ipsilateral renal arteries (Figure 8.11). 
However, prior to a definite diagnosis of unilateral 
kidney agenesis, care should be taken to rule out the 
more frequent presence of an ectopic kidney (or of renal 
hypoplasia). In the third trimester, the findings of an 
enlarged kidney contralateral to the empty renal fossa 
can assist in diagnosing in utero absence of the other kidney. 
In fact, unilateral renal agenesis can cause compensatory 
hypertrophy of the contralateral kidney. 
Artefacts. As stated above, there is a risk of mistaking the 
adrenal glands for the missing kidney(s), considering also 
the impaired acoustic window. The features that may 
help in differentiating the adrenals from the kidneys are 
as follows: the adrenal glands are smaller and oblong, 
and (in contrast to the renal medulla), the adrenal 
medulla is hyperechoic rather than hypoechoic. Finally, 
the renal pelvis cannot be visualized (Figure 8.9). 
• Differential diagnosis. In cases of bilateral renal agenesis, 
the differential diagnosis should include other conditions 
possibly responsible for severe oligohydramnios: 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 237 
Figure 8.10 (a) Color flow Doppler shows both renal arteries in a case of autosomal recessive polycystic renal disease (ARPKD) (b) Absence of the 
renal arteries is noted in a case of bilateral renal agenesis, while the aorta is clearly shown; the arrows indicate the adrenal glands. 
Figure 8.11 Unilateral renal agenesis. (a) Color Doppler image demonstrating a single renal artery; the arrow indicates the pelvis of the single kidney, 
? indicating the empty contralateral renal area (b) 3D power Doppler of the same case, showing a single renal artery (RA) branching off the 
abdominal aorta; the arrow indicates the absence of a contralateral renal artery. IA, common iliac arteries 
a b 
a b 

severe FGR and rupture of the membranes. In the 
presence of severe FGR, umbilical artery velocimetry is 
usually abnormal, while the presence of a normal bladder 
can identify rupture of the membranes. 
• Association with other malformations. The anomalies 
most frequently associated with unilateral renal agenesis3 
affect the contralateral kidney and the internal 
genital organs (which cannot be visualized in the prenatal 
period). Extrarenal anomalies often associated 
with bilateral renal agenesis include cardiac, cerebral 
and skeletal malformations. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low in 
isolated bilateral forms (1–5%), and low in unilateral 
forms (< 1%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high 
(20–25%). Renal agenesis can be the main sign of 
more than 40 different syndromes.3 The most common 
syndromes and associations are as follows: 
• Fraser syndrome:3 look for . renal agenesis + laryngeal 
atresia, cryptophthalmos, and syndactyly 
(Chapter 10). 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . renal agenesis 
+ vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, CHD, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, and limb anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Caudal regression syndrome:3 look for . renal agenesis 
+ sacral agenesis, lumbar vertebral anomalies, 
and femoral hypoplasia (Chapter 10). 
• Sirenomelia:3 look for . renal agenesis + fusion of the 
lower limbs, anal atresia, vertebral anomalies, and 
genital anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Cerebro-oculofacial–skeletal syndrome:3 look for . 
renal agenesis + microcephaly, micrognathia, and 
joint contractures. 
• Otocephaly:3 look for . renal agenesis + agnathia, 
microstomia, holoprosencephaly, and cleft lip/palate. 
If renal agenesis is isolated, the empiric risk of recurrence 
is 3.5%, whereas if it is one sign of a syndrome, the risk 
of recurrence is obviously the risk associated with the 
underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not mandatory 
for the unilateral form. Although the association with 
chromosomal anomalies is not considered to be high in 
the bilateral form, some authors advise karyotyping,4 
especially in cases associated with other malformations, 
to help estimate the recurrence risk. Ultrasound investigation 
of the parents’ kidneys is necessary in case of unilateral 
agenesis, in view of the autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern of the condition. After delivery, 
scintigraphy should be performed to gain postnatal confirmation 
of the renal agenesis and to assess the residual 
renal function. 
Postnatal therapy. No treatment is available for bilateral 
renal agenesis: one-third of fetuses die in utero and the 
remaining two-thirds die immediately after birth due to 
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Bilateral renal 
agenesis is always lethal, due to the associated severe 
pulmonary hypoplasia. In fact, apart from provoking the 
typical Potter sequence (Potter facies, deformation of 
hands and feet, etc.), severe oligohydramnios induces 
lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. The compression of the 
fetal chest by the uterine walls and the absence of amniotic 
fluid arrest pulmonary development. In cases of unilateral 
agenesis, if the controlateral kidney is unaffected, 
the prognosis is good and the survival and quality of life 
are normal. 
238 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
PELVIC KIDNEY 
Incidence. 1/700 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Visualization of the kidney in the pelvis, beside the bladder. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Good in isolated forms. 
This features an abnormal position of the kidney, which 
in most cases is located in the pelvis (Figure 8.12 a,b). 
The ectopic kidney can be positioned either ipsilaterally 
or contralaterally (crossed renal ectopia) (Figure 8.12c). 
RENAL ECTOPIA 

Definition. The kidney is positioned in the fetal pelvis, 
either in the iliac fossa or on the midline in the pre-sacral 
area. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The kidney fails to migrate 
up into the lumbar region between the 6th and 10th 
weeks of gestation.1 The incidence of this anomaly is 
approximately 1/700 liveborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The kidney is not visible in its usual 
location. Only the adrenal gland is visible, and can sometimes 
be mistaken for the kidney; instead, the kidney is 
positioned in the pelvis beside the bladder (Figure 8.12a), 
which shows normal filling. The amount of amniotic fluid 
is normal. In some cases, the vascularization of the pelvic 
kidney is as a tributary of the iliac arteries, rather than of 
the descending abdominal aorta (Figure 8.12b). 
• Differential diagnosis. A pelvic kidney must be differentiated 
from unilateral agenesis and from crossed 
renal ectopia (Figure 8.12c), in which both kidneys are 
present, often partly fused, in the same half of the 
abdomen. It should be underlined that the visualization 
of a pelvic kidney is often hampered by interposition of 
bowel loops and shadowing from the iliac wing. Color 
Doppler may be useful to locate the hilum of the 
ectopic kidney. 
• Association with other malformations. Apart from 
anomalies of the genital tract, which in any case 
cannot be identified in the prenatal period, the pelvic 
kidney can be associated with gastrointestinal and 
cardiac anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. An accurate anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert in order to exclude the 
presence of associated anomalies. Ultrasound examination 
of the parents’ kidneys is recommended. Serial ultrasound 
follow up is warranted in order to detect possible 
late onset vesicoureteral reflux, which is not uncommon. 
Postnatal therapy. There is no treatment. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In isolated 
forms, the prognosis is good. Vesico-ureteral reflux is 
frequently present.
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 239 
Figure 8.12 Pelvic kidney. (a) Oblique scan through the fetal pelvis. The kidney (arrows) is seen within the pelvis, lying superior to the bladder 
(BL). (b) Color flow Doppler shows the pelvic kidney artery (arrow), which originates from the aorta at a more caudal level than the contralateral 
renal artery (RA). K, pelvic kidney. (c) Crossed fused renal ectopia. Note the two fused kidneys (arrows); the lower pole of the upper one is fused 
with the upper pole of the lower one. In these cases, the kidneys are also abnornally rotated, as in horseshoe kidney. 
HORSESHOE KIDNEY 
FUSION ANOMALIES 
Incidence. 1/400 newborns. 
Diagnosis. In axial scans, the isthmus linking the two inferior poles of the kidneys can be seen in front 
of the descending aorta. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. 5–8%: Turner syndrome and trisomy 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. moderately high: 12–16%. 
Outcome. In isolated forms, horseshoe kidney is asymptomatic in about half of cases. Increased incidence of 
infections and vesico-ureteral reflux. 
a b c 

Definition. The kidneys are fused, with an equal amount 
of renal tissue on each side of the midline. The inferior 
poles of the kidneys are linked by an isthmus of fibrous 
tissue or parenchyma. The ureters do not cross the 
midline before entering the renal sinuses. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Horseshoe kidney is the 
most common type of fusion anomaly. The anomaly 
originates after the interaction of the ureteral buds with 
the metanephric blastema, but before the migration and 
rotation processes.3 The horseshoe kidney is usually 
positioned lower than normal because its ascent in the 
normal position is impeded by the emergence of the 
inferior mesenteric artery. The incidence is 1/400 newborns 
and is higher in males. This anomaly has a heterogeneous 
etiology. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On transverse or oblique views 
of the fetal abdomen, the isthmus connecting the inferior 
poles of the two kidneys can be seen in front of the 
descending aorta; the kidneys appear medially and 
anteriorly rotated. In this scanning plane, it is also possible 
to see the two renal pelvises (Figure 8.13), which 
have a more anterior location and are often slightly 
dilated. 
• Association with other malformations. The anomalies 
most frequently associated include hydronephrosis 
(possibly due to vesico-ureteral reflux or ureteral 
obstruction) and genital anomalies (unrecognizable in 
the fetus). In one-third of the cases, extrarenal anomalies 
(CNS, cardiac, and skeletal malformations) are 
associated.3 Association with Wilms’ tumor in the 
prenatal period has also been described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is not insignificant 
(5–8%). Horseshoe kidney is present in 30% of cases of 
Turner syndrome and about 20% of trisomy 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high (12–16%). The best known syndromes possibly 
associated with horseshoe kidney are: 
• Caudal regression syndrome:3 look for . horseshoe 
kidney + sacral agenesis, lumbar vertebral anomalies, 
and femoral hypoplasia (Chapter 10). 
• Otocephaly:3 look for . horseshoe kidney + 
agnathia, CHD, and cleft lip/palate. 
• Oro-cranio-digital syndrome:3 look for . horseshoe 
kidney + cleft lip/palate, microcephaly, hypoplastic 
thumbs, and elbow deformities. 
In isolated forms, the recurrence risk is not significantly 
increased. 
Obstetric management. An accurate anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert in order to exclude the 
presence of associated anomalies. Karyotyping is indicated, 
especially if other anomalies are associated. Serial 
ultrasound monitoring should be warranted to detect the 
possible late onset of vesicoureteral reflux, which is not 
uncommon. 
Postnatal therapy. Postnatal treatment may be indicated 
in the presence of hydronephrosis and/or associated 
reflux. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In about half of 
the isolated forms, the anomaly is asymptomatic. 
Postnatal follow-up is advised because of the significant 
association with infections, hematuria, and vesicoureteral 
reflux. Prognosis, survival, and quality of life are 
poorer if the disease is associated with other anomalies, 
especially in the context of a syndrome. In isolated 
forms, the prognosis is good. 
240 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
BL 
Figure 8.13 Horseshoe kidney. Ultrasound images showing (a) both renal pelvises (arrows), which have a more anterior location than normal, 
and (b) the slightly lower than normal location of the horseshoe kidney. The arrows indicates the renal pelvises; BL, bladder. 
a b 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 241 
POLYCYSTIC AND DYSPLASTIC KIDNEYS 
One of the prenatal ultrasound renal findings that can 
represent a difficult diagnosis is the bright or hyperecoic 
kidney. A large bright or hyperechoic kidney 
(Figure 8.14) represents a dilemma, especially in the 
presence of a normal amniotic fluid volume, since different 
underlying etiologies can be present, including 
also genetic syndromes (Table 8.1). Recently, the study 
of fetal renal disease in animal models, along with molecular 
biologic studies, has allowed investigation of the 
relationship between specific renal histologic lesions 
and the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease;5 
this may help achieve a better comprehension of kidney 
diseases and their sonographic features. 
The increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma 
can result from the presence of dysplasia and/or multiple 
microscopic cyst. The term dysplastic kidney is used to 
encompass a heterogeneous group of disorders due to 
abnormal development and differentiation of the 
metanephric mesenchyme, and to abnormal interaction 
with the ureteric bud. In a relevant proportion of cases, 
dysplastic kidneys are associated with ectopic placement 
of ureteric orifices, and/or with abnormalities of the urinary 
tract, leading to unilateral, bilateral, or focal 
obstruction of urine flow. Dysplastic organs often contain 
cysts, usually deriving from dilated terminal ampullae 
of the ureteric bud. As a general rule, severely 
dysplastic kidneys have no excretory function, are usually 
attached to atretic or absent ureters, and remain 
asymptomatic only if unilateral. On ultrasound, as 
Figure 8.14 Coronal view of two hyperechoic kidneys in a 21 week 
fetus. 
Table 8.1 Conditions associated with bright kidneys
Renal Associated Kidney 
Condition Amniotic fluid macrocysts anomalies Inheritance volume 
ARPKD Decreased +/-* - AR Increased 
ADPKD Normal +/-* - AD Increased 
Beckwith– 
Wiedeman syndrome Normal/increased - + AD or Increased 
sporadic 
Perlman syndrome Increase/decreased - + AR Increased 
Trisomy 13 Normal/decreased +/- + Sporadic Increased/normal 
Bardet–Biedl syndrome Normal +/-* + AR Increased 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome Decreased + + AR Increased 
Zellweger syndrome Normal +/- + AR Normal/increased 
Elejaide syndrome Decreased - + AR Increased 
Cystic dysplastic Decreased +/- - 10% AD Normal/decreased 
kidney (Potter IV) 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; 
AR, autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant. *Renal macrocysts are present in a minority of cases. 

242 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
reported above, the increased echogenicity of the renal 
parenchyma can be related to the dysplasia and/or multiple 
microscopic cyst, although it does not represent a 
specific sign, since at times it is also present in the 
absence of dysplasia. Sometimes, even if the parenchyma 
is not hyperechoic, the dysplasia may still be present. 
Organs with focal dysplastic lesions may exhibit an 
almost normal function and may be diagnosed later in 
life owing to the late onset of signs and/or symptoms 
related to their larger size, or to the occurrence of frequently 
relapsing infections. 
In the case of hyperechoic kideny +/- renal macrocysts, 
ultrasound examination of the parents and grandparents 
is useful. Kidney morphology must be evaluated and their 
size compared with the reference table. An accurate 
anatomic scan should be performed in order to exclude/ 
detect other malformations and karyotyping should be 
discussed, especially if other anomalies are present. 
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (ARPKD) – POTTER TYPE I 
Incidence. 1/20 000–40 000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Both kidneys are increased in volume and are hyperechogenic. The bladder cannot be visualized, and 
severe oligohydramnios is present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The pathology is monogenic (single gene disorder with multiple mutant alleles). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High, if the polycystic aspect and not the genetic cause is considered. 
Outcome. Unfavorable, due to associated severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Definition. This is a bilateral anomaly mainly characterized 
by fusiform cystic dilatations of the collecting ducts. 
The kidneys appear spongy and there is no clear separation 
between cortex and medulla. The cut surface 
demonstrates cortical extension of fusiform or cylindrical 
spaces arranged radially throughout the renal 
parenchyma from the medulla to the cortex.6,7 It is a 
hereditary disorder, with an autosomal recessive inheritance 
pattern.6 The disease is associated with portal and 
interstitial fibrosis of the liver. According to the time of 
onset, which is a function of the proportion of dilated 
renal ducts, ARPKD is subdivided into perinatal, neonatal, 
infantile, and juvenile forms. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The disease is caused by 
mutations in the PKHD1 gene on chromosome 6p21.6 
The protein encoded by the PKHD1 gene is known 
as polyductin or fibrocystin, and is characterized by a 
single transmembrane segment and a short cytoplasmic 
C- terminal portion. However, significant genetic heterogeneity 
is present. Primary anomalies of the tubular cilia 
are clearly involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. 
The incidence is 1/20 000–1/40 000 newborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On ultrasound, ARPKD is characterized 
by increased volume and evident hyperechogenicity 
of both kidneys. These two signs result 
from the insonation of interfaces provided by the walls 
of the microcysts (Figure 8.15). The bladder cannot be 
seen, and severe oligohydramnios is generally present, 
starting from 16 weeks onwards. Despite the fact that 
in some cases the disease becomes sonographically recognizable 
in the 3rd trimester only, in more than 50% 
of cases the diagnosis can be made in the 2nd trimester. 
Repeated sonographic measurements of kidney length 
appear to be the most useful parameter. In addition, 
unlike in the normal kidney, in the 3rd trimester it will 
not be possible to differentiate the cortex from the 
medulla because corticomedullary differentiation is less 
defined or completely lacking6,7 (Figure 8.15a). In some 
cases macrocysts are present. In milder forms, which 
have been demonstrated to involve only part of the 
nephrons, prenatal ultrasound diagnosis may be very 
challenging. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the 
autosomal dominant form of polycystic kidney disease 
(ADPKD – Potter type III). The latter is generally associated 
with a normal quantity of amniotic fluid and a 
normal bladder (Table 8.1). Moreover, the differentiation 
between the cortex and the medulla is more pronounced 
in comparison with ARPKD, because the 
cortex tends to be hyperechoic whereas the medulla is 
normally hypoechoic, probably due to confinement of 
the microcysts to the cortical region7 (Figure 8.16b). 
However, the family history and a rapid ultrasound 
assessment of the parents’ kidneys often solve any 
diagnostic doubt, because of the different inheritance 
pattern of the two diseases (autosomal recessive for 
ARPKD, autosomal dominant for the adult form). 

• Association with other malformations. These include 
cystic fibrosis of the liver (Figure 8.15b), pulmonary 
hypoplasia, and the Potter phenotype (both linked to 
severe oligohydramnios sequence). It should be noted 
that in ARPKD, the disease spectrum ranges from 
mild kidney alterations with severe liver involvement 
to the reverse picture. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The condition is a 
single-gene disorder, not associated with karyotypic 
alterations. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. An enlarged 
and hyperechoic kidney can be found in a relatively 
high number of syndromic conditions7 (Table 8.1). In 
Bardet–Biedl syndrome, as in ARPKD, there is little or 
no corticomedullary differentiation; however, polydactyly 
is present and the quantity of amniotic fluid 
and bladder filling are normal. In Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome, the markedly increased kidney volume is 
generally apparent even earlier, and CNS anomalies 
and polydactyly are associated in most cases, although 
they are difficult to recognize because of the common 
occurrence of severe oligohydramnios. The presence 
of the extrarenal findings is sufficient to make a 
differential diagnosis in the two aforementioned 
syndromes and in other rarer conditions characterized 
by an enlarged and hyperechoic kidney 
(Table 8.1): 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + cephalocele, microcephaly, polydactyly 
(Chapter 10). 
• Bardet–Biedl syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + polydactyly and genital anomalies. 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + macroglossia, omphalocele, and hemihypertrophy 
(Chapter 10). 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 243 
Figure 8.15 Autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease 
(ARPKD) – Potter type I. 
(a) Axial scan through the fetal 
abdomen showing the enlarged 
hyperechoic kidneys (arrows). (b) 
Sagittal scan of the fetal abdomen 
showing the increased echogenicity 
of the liver due to cystic 
fibrosis (arrowheads); the arrow 
indicates the polycystic kidney. 
a b 
Figure 8.16 Polycystic kidney disease. (a) In ARPKD, there is no clear separation between cortex and medulla; thus the kidney appears 
homogeneously hyperechoic. (b,c) In ADPKD, on the other hand, there is a more evident differentiation between the cortex and medulla. (b, c: 3D 
US with SRI)
a b c 

• Perlman syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
diaphragmatic hernia, macrosomia, cleft palate, and 
dextrocardia. 
• Elejalde syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
omphalocele, corpus callosum agenesis, macrosomia, 
craniosynostosis, and skeletal dysplasia. 
Obstetric management. After the 24th week of gestation, 
management is conservative. Molecular typing of polycystic 
kidneys has yielded a better understanding of the disease, 
but the possibility of making an early genetic 
diagnosis of the disease during the prenatal period is still 
very limited. In the case of ARPKD, mutations of the 
PKHD1 gene are responsible for the disease, but there is a 
high rate of allelic heterogeneity and a high frequency of 
missense mutations, whose identification usually requires 
gene sequencing. For this reason, in sporadic cases identified 
in the prenatal period, it is unlikely that the 
specific mutation will be identified within a reasonable 
time-frame. However, when other cases have occurred in 
the family, there are much more technical possibilities, 
because linkage analysis (individualizing the haplotype 
associated with the disease) can be performed under suitable 
conditions (informed consent of the family and available 
DNA from a previously affected family member). In 
doubtful cases in which other anomalies are associated, 
karyotyping may be advisable. 
Postnatal therapy. No treatment is possible. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Up to 30% of 
affected individuals die in the early neonatal period due 
to respiratory insufficiency, and the majority of surviving 
infants develop hypertension. Progression to endstage 
renal disease occurs in 20–45% of cases within 
15 years, but a proportion maintain renal function 
into adulthood, where complications of liver disease 
predominate. 
244 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
MULTICYSTIC DYSPLASTIC KIDNEY (MCDK) – POTTER TYPE II 
Incidence. At birth, 1/1000–5000 live births; unilateral in approximately 75–80% of cases. 
Diagnosis. Unilateral: the kidney is increased in volume, with multiple non-communicating cysts of variable size; 
the parenchyma is hyperechoic; normal amount of amniotic fluid and bladder visualized. Bilateral: same as above 
+ severe oligohydramnios and inability to visualize bladder. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low in isolated unilateral forms (2–4%), reaches 15–18% in bilateral 
forms and 25–28% when associated with other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. 5–10%. 
Outcome. Unilateral form: involution of the kidney, resulting in disappearance in a significant percentage of cases 
within the first 2 years of life. Bilateral form: unfavorable prognosis. 
Definition. There is an enlarged kidney with parenchyma 
replaced by multiple, non-communicating cysts, of variable 
size and number. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is due to an abnormal 
development, associated in a significant percentage of 
cases with early obstruction (atretic ureters).3 It is unilateral 
in approximately 75–80% of cases, but may also be 
bilateral or segmented, in which case small areas of 
normal renal parenchyma are also present. The incidence 
is 1/1000–5000 live births. It is usually sporadic, 
but recurrence has been described in 1–2% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the majority of cases, the ultrasound 
diagnosis can be made in the 2nd trimester, and 
relates to a single kidney with multiple cysts of variable 
size mixed with hyperechogenicity of the parenchyma 
(Figure 8.17a). The dimensions of the kidney are 
often significantly increased and depend on the number 
and dimensions of the non-communicating cysts 
(Figure 8.17b). The bladder and quantity of amniotic 
fluid are usually normal. The volume of multicystic 
kidneys is often increased, and for this reason MCKD 
represents one of the most common causes of abdominal 
mass in the neonate. A variety with reduced volume 
is also described, as is the possibility of evolution 
into renal hypoplasia. In rare cases, the cystic element 
may only involve part of the kidney, particularly 
when associated with the presence of a duplex kidney. 
The ipsilateral renal artery may be absent or small, 
with the presence of Doppler velocity waveform 
anomalies. When, less frequently, both of the kidneys 
are multicystic (Figure 8.17c), severe oligohydramnios 
is present and the bladder cannot be visualized. 

In sporadic cases, the multicystic kidney may also 
have an ectopic site. 
• Differential diagnosis. This mainly involves hydronephrosis. 
When the position of the cysts resembles 
that of a calicopyelic dilatation, the presence of anomalous 
renal tissue between the cysts and the lack of 
communication between the cysts indicates a diagnosis 
of multicystic kidney. If the differential diagnosis is 
particularly difficult, some authors have suggested 
aspiration of the cystic fluid, which, in the case of 
multicystic kidney, shows high phosphate levels.8 
• Association with other malformations. Children 
with unilateral MCKD have an increased risk 
of abnormalities of the contralateral kidney 
and the lower urogenital tract; heart, CNS, and 
gastrointestinal problems have frequently been 
reported in association. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low 
(2–4%); but reaches 15–18% in bilateral forms and 
25–28% when associated with other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is 5–10%. 
The most common syndromes possibly associated with 
MCKD are as follows: 
• Brachio-otorenal syndrome:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + pre-auricular tags and branchial cleft 
fistulas. 
• Cerebrorenodigital syndrome:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + digital and limb anomalies, and CNS 
malformations. 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, CHD, 
tracheo-esophageal fistula, and limb anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 245 
Figure 8.17 Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease 
(MCKD) – Potter type II. (a)Axial scan through the 
fetal abdomen showing an enlarged right kidney 
(arrow) with multiple cysts within the hyperechoic 
parenchyma; the contralateral kidney is normal. 
(b) Coronal scan through the fetal abdomen showing 
an enlarged kidney with increased echogenicity and 
numerous non-communicating cysts. (c) Axial scan 
through the fetal abdomen showing 2 hyperechoic 
enlarged kidneys and multiple macrocysts. 
a b 
c 

246 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (ADPKD) – POTTER TYPE III 
Incidence. Affects approximately 1/1000 people. 
Diagnosis. Kidneys moderately increased in volume, hyperechogenic (often the cortex only), with a bladder that 
can be visualized and normal or slightly reduced amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The anomaly is monogenic. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high, if the polycystic aspect and not its cause is considered. 
Outcome. Although the symptoms usually occur in the 3rd–5th decades of life, the prognosis is apparently worse 
in the prenatally detected forms. 
In isolated forms, the risk of recurrence is 3%; in 
syndromic forms, it is that of the underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. In the case of unilateral involvement, 
serial ultrasound scans should be arranged in order 
to follow up the lesion during gestation, as it may sometimes 
reduce in volume; at the same time, the onset of 
hydronephrosis (up to 40% of cases) on the contralateral 
kidney should be verified. In the case of unilateral 
MCKD, meticulous long-term (pre- and postnatal) 
screening of the entire urinary tract is warranted. In bilateral 
forms, the prognosis is unfavorable due to the presence 
of the oligohydramnios, due to the complete renal 
insufficiency, which may result in the Potter sequence and 
death from lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Postnatal therapy. After birth, scintigraphy is recommended 
to confirm the type of lesion in doubtful cases 
and to evaluate residual renal function. During the early 
years of life, serial ultrasound follow-up must be carried 
out. Evaluation of the contralateral kidney is important, 
to ascertain the possible presence of associated anomalies 
and/or an infection. Nephrectomy is recommended if the 
multicystic kidney is symptomatic, being responsible for 
hypertension, hematuria, or infection. In this regard, 
it must be remembered that during the first 2 years of 
life, there is a high chance of involution of the multicystic 
kidney. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Although occasional 
cases of infection or hypertension associated with 
multicystic kidneys have been reported, prognosis, 
survival, and quality of life are good in the majority of 
cases of isolated forms. When the multicystic disease is 
bilateral, a conservative approach is recommended, after 
the 24th week, due to the unfavorable prognosis. 
Definition. This is a bilateral anomaly mainly characterized 
by cysts that arise from all areas of the nephron 
or collecting duct. The disease is inherited with an 
autosomal dominant pattern. It is typically of adult 
onset, becoming symptomatic usually in the 3rd–5th 
decades of life,3 but it can be identified in the fetus in 
families at risk. In prenatal life, ADPKD is characterized 
by the presence of enlarged kidneys that also 
show increased parenchymal echogenicity (often 
involving the outer layer only) due to the presence of 
microcysts. In ADPKD, initial nephron and collecting 
duct formation is unremarkable, but cystic dilatation 
of these structures then ensues, causing secondary loss 
of adjacent normal parenchyma. According to some 
authors, the cases identified in the fetus have a worse 
prognosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is the most common 
hereditary kidney disorder, with an incidence of 1/1000 
in the general population. Mutations of two genes on 
chromosome 16 have been found to be responsible for 
the disease. Mutations of the PKD1 gene, encoding polycystine 
1, are responsible for approximately 85% of 
cases, whereas mutations of the PKD2 gene, encoding 
polycystine 2, are responsible for approximately 
10–12% of cases; the latter mutations are responsible 
for the less severe cases occurring later in life. It is probable 
that there is also a third gene responsible for the 
remaining cases, but it has not yet been identified. Both 
polycystines are located in the primary cilia of the renal 
tubules, and are involved in regulation of the cell cycle 
and in the intracellular transport of calcium (voltageactivated 
calcium channels). The prevailing pathogenetic 
hypothesis is that of the so-called second-hit theory: the 
genetic defect causes the focal formation of cysts, which 
initially involve less than 5% of the nephrons; a subsequent 
somatic mutation in the normal allele causes full 
expression of the disease later in life. The considerable 
variation in the phenotypic expression of the disease 
within individual families, and the variability of 

extrarenal events, suggests interaction between environmental 
factors and other modifying genes in modulation 
of the clinical expression. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The kidneys are hyperechoic 
(often in the cortical region only) and moderately 
increased in volume. Fetal cases with the presence 
of macrocysts have also been described. The bladder 
and quantity of amniotic fluid are usually normal. 
Furthermore, corticomedullar differentiation is 
increased in a great number of cases because the cortical 
is hyperechoic whereas the medulla is regularly 
hypoechoic, probably due to the selective presence of 
microcysts in the cortical region6,7 (Figure 8.18a). Less 
frequently, as in the autosomal recessive variety, the 
kidneys are considerably increased in size and corticomedullar 
differentiation is absent or decreased or 
macrocysts may be present (Figure 8.18b,c). The ultrasound 
picture described above frequently follows a 
normal result during the 2nd-trimester scan; furthermore, 
a normal ultrasound result during the prenatal 
period does not exclude the presence of this disease. On 
the contrary, in some families, the sonographic signs of 
renal disease are evident as early as the 15th week. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of 
the two polycystic kidney variants is based on a 
positive family history and on the recognition, in 
the autosomal dominant variant, of moderately 
enlarged kidneys with normal bladder and amniotic 
fluid7 (Table 8.1). Furthermore, corticomedullar 
differentiation is frequently increased in ADPKD 
while it is lost in ARPKD (Figure 8.18). In a minority 
of cases of ADPKD, the kidneys are severely 
enlarged and show loss of corticomedullary 
differentiation. In a few cases, ADPKD may also 
feature late-onset oligohydramnios. A hyperechoic 
polycystic kidney (cystic dysplasia) can also be present 
in a number of syndromic conditions described 
below. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The disease is monogenic. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. The following 
syndromic conditions may have a polycystic kidney 
among their typical features (Table 8.1): 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + encephalocele, microcephaly, and 
polydactyly. 
• Bardet–Biedl syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + polydactyly and genital anomalies. 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . 
polycystic kidney + macroglossia, omphalocele, and 
hemihypertrophy. 
• Perlman syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
diaphragmatic hernia, macrosomia, cleft palate, and 
dextrocardia. 
• Elejalde syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
omphalocele, agenesis of the corpus callosum, macrosomia, 
craniosynostosis, and skeletal dysplasia. 
Obstetric management. Once ADPKD has been diagnosed 
in a fetus, serial ultrasound monitoring is necessary 
in order to assess changes in the amount of amniotic 
fluid, which reflects renal function. If the prenatal diagnosis 
is prospective (in the absence of a known family history), 
ultrasound examination of the parents’ kidneys is 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 247 
Figure 8.18 Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) – Potter type III. (a) Ultrasound image showing an enlarged kidney with 
increased differentiation between the cortex and the medulla. (b) The presence of some macroscopic cysts within the enlarged kidney may represent 
another ultrasound variety of ADPKD. (c) 3D surface rendering of the same case as in (b). 
a b c 

Definition. Potter type IV cystic dysplasia is due to 
early and severe obstruction of the collecting system. 
This causes the formation of cysts, which are variously 
distributed in the renal parenchyma, with prevalence 
in the cortical part; the kidney volume is normal or 
decreased. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Potter type IV cystic dysplasia 
is commonly secondary to an early obstruction of the 
urinary tract (mainly lower urinary tract) that results in 
an abnormal environment during nephrogenesis, lasting 
for the rest of the gestational period.3 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of renal 
cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) secondary to early and 
severe obstruction of the urinary tract is based on the 
recognition of increased echogenicity of the renal 
parenchyma associated with cysts, which are more often 
pericortical (Figure 8.19). The increased echogenicity of 
the renal parenchyma is related to the dysplasia, 
although it does not represent a specific sign: in fact, the 
kidneys can be hyperechoic but not dysplastic or, conversely, 
show normal echogenicity and impaired function. 
In its bilateral form, Potter type IV cystic dysplasia 
is associated with early and severe obstruction of the 
urethra that is responsible for severe oligohydramnios 
and thickening of the bladder walls (Figure 8.20). 
• Differential diagnosis. The main conditions to be distinguished 
from Potter type IV cystic dysplasia are 
shown in Table 8.1. 
• Association with other malformations. A significant 
association with cardiac and cerebral malformations 
has been reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is 5–10% in isolated 
forms, but is higher (15–25%) if associated with 
other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is 5–10%. 
The most common syndromes possibly associated with 
cystic renal dysplasia are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . renal cystic dysplasia 
+ vertebral anomalies, anorectal atresia, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, CHD, and limb anomalies. 
• Cerebrorenodigital syndrome:3 look for . renal 
cystic dysplasia + digital and limb anomalies and 
CNS malformations. 
• Tuberous sclerosis:3 look for . renal cystic dysplasia 
+ cardiac rhabdomyomas and intracranial 
calcifications. 
Obstetric management. In the unilateral variety, which is 
less frequent, it is of the utmost importance to monitor 
the sonographic aspect and function of the contralateral 
248 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
indicated, given the autosomal dominant pattern of 
inheritance. The genetic diagnosis in ADPKD appears 
complex, due to the genetic heterogeneity (with two 
genes identified: PKD1 and PKD2), and to the sizes of 
the genes themselves, which make a direct search for the 
mutations both long and expensive; hence, in these cases, 
pedigree-based linkage analysis usually represents the 
only possible choice. However, it should be noted that 
the very late onset of the kidney failure in this disorder 
and the possible treatment (dialysis and transplant) 
reduce the yield of genetic prenatal diagnosis. In families 
at risk, serial fetal ultrasound monitoring allows disclosure 
during the 2nd trimester of the fetuses affected with 
ADPKD, with the earliest evidence being at 15 weeks in 
selected cases. 
Postnatal therapy. Dialysis and transplant are the treatment 
options to be applied when the pathology becomes 
manifest (usually the 3rd–5th decades of life). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Generally, 
the disease becomes clinically evident during the 3rd–5th 
decades of life. However, it has recently been reported 
that prenatal recognition of the disease is a bad prognostic 
sign, since these neonates are apparently likely to 
develop hypertension during the first year of life. 
OBSTRUCTIVE CYSTIC DYSPLASIA – POTTER TYPE IV 
Incidence. The bilateral form is more frequent. 
Diagnosis. Kidney(s) of normal or reduced dimensions with increased echogenicity of the parenchyma and 
presence of cysts in variable positions (frequently pericortical). If bilateral, oligohydramnios and a dilated bladder 
with thick walls are present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. 5–10% in isolated forms; higher if associated with other anomalies (15–25%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. 3–6% in isolated forms. 
Outcome. In isolated forms, this depends on the severity of the obstruction and the extent of the dysplasia. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 249 
Figure 8.19 Obstructive renal 
cystic dysplasia – Potter type IV. 
(a) Coronal scan through 
the fetal abdomen showing 
a hydronephrotic kidney with 
echogenic parenchyma. (b) Ultrasound 
image showing several 
subcortical small cysts (arrowheads). 
k, kidney. 
HYDRONEPHROSIS 
Incidence. 1–5/500 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Dilatation of the collecting system of the kidney. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low in isolated cases: 1–3%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low: 6–8%. 
Outcome. In the first 2 years of life: spontaneous regression in approximately 30–40% of cases and need for 
surgery in 20–50% of cases, according to the grade of hydronephrosis present during the prenatal period. In 
bilateral forms associated with oligohydramnios, unfavorable prognosis with the possibility, in selected cases, of 
in utero therapy. 
a b 
kidney, in order to exclude the occurrence of concurrent 
diseases that might worsen the prognosis. In the bilateral 
form, termination of pregnancy or conservative treatment 
after 24 weeks of gestation may be advised. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical removal of the obstruction is 
relevant only in those cases in which residual renal function 
has been confirmed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In bilateral forms, 
the prognosis is unfavorable; in the majority of cases, 
neonatal death is due to pulmonary hypoplasia, as a consequence 
of the severe oligohydramnios. In the unilateral 
form, the outcome depends on the presence of contralateral 
kidney anomalies and on possible associated anomalies. Figure 8.20 Obstructive renal cystic dysplasia – Potter type IV. 
Coronal scan of the fetal abdomen showing a distended urinary bladder 
(BL) and hydronephrotic kidneys with echogenic cortex (arrows). 
HYDRONEPHROSIS, HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS, AND 
BLADDER DILATATION 
Hydronephrosis, hydro-ureteronephrosis, and bladder 
dilatation can be associated or not with obstructions 
of the urinary tract. In this section, these three 
ultrasound findings will be examined and related 
to their most common causes. Hydronephrosis and 
hydro-ureteronephrosis will be dealt with together 
because of their relatively similar characteristics. 
The prognosis and treatment of these three abnormal 
renal findings will be discussed at the end of the 
section. 

Definition. Hydronephrosis is characterized by dilatation 
of the collecting system of the kidney. Fetal hydronephrosis 
is usually the expression of a mild-to-moderate 
obstruction of the urinary tract (Table 8.2), and less frequently 
of a non-obstructive pathology. In addition, in 
some cases, it may represent a transient finding related 
to the normal development of the urogenital system. 
Paradoxically, an obstructive lesion of the urinary tract 
may not show any sign of hydronephrosis and be 
recognized only for the presence of renal dysplastic 
modifications frequently associated with oligohydramnios. 
Generally speaking, the severity of the ultrasound 
findings and the clinical situation are dependent upon 
the severity of the obstruction, its time of onset, and its 
duration. As a result, the ultrasound evaluation of a 
fetus with abnormal dilatation of the urinary tract must 
take into consideration various parameters: the volume 
of amniotic fluid, the level and degree of dilatation, the 
time of onset, the unilateral or bilateral nature of 
the damage, and finally the association with other 
malformations. 
An important and controversial issue is the cut-off used 
to differentiate the diameter of a normal renal pelvis from 
an abnormally dilated one. The confusion arises from the 
fact that a slight dilatation of the renal pelvis can also be 
encountered in normal fetuses. In fact, even if mild dilatation 
of the renal pelvis may represent the first evidence of 
more severe obstructions, in most instances, mild 2ndtrimester 
renal pyelectasias will resolve either in utero or 
within the first year of postnatal life.9,10 Of the various 
cut-off values proposed by different authors, one of the 
more widely accepted is the following: the anteroposterior 
diameter of the pelvis on a transverse view of the 
abdomen should not, under normal conditions, exceed 
4 mm up to 32 weeks of gestation and 7 mm from the 
33rd week onwards.2 The confusion has increased after 
the discovery that in more than 50% of the cases examined 
in one study, the pelvic diameter showed significant 
variations below and above the 4 mm cut-off over an 
observation period of approximately 2 hours.11 Factors 
influencing the diameter of the fetal pelvis include the 
state of hydration of the mother, the grade of distension 
of the fetal bladder, and recent emptying of the bladder 
itself. On the contrary, what is highly indicative of an 
obstructive lesion is dilatation of the renal calices. 
Hydronephrosis with or without dilatation of the 
ureters accounts for approximately 50% of all prenatally 
detected renal abnormalities.12 Its incidence is 1–5 
per 500 newborns. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The response of the kidney 
to obstruction of urinary flow during the prenatal period 
will depend on the time of onset and the severity of the 
obstruction. Very early obstructions may lead to renal 
dysplasia (poor branching of the collecting ducts and 
deficient formation of glomeruli and tubules), associated 
with abnormal differentiation (transformation of tubular 
epithelial cells into myocytes and chondrocytes). 
Late or partial obstruction delays maturation of the 
nephrons, and may result in a reduced number of 
nephrons at birth (variously associated with atrophy 
and fibrosis). The functional damage caused by the 
obstruction usually leads to a progressive dilatation of 
the pelvis, the calices, and the ureters which act as 
a ‘compensation chamber’ to reduce the intrarenal 
pressure. In severe and early obstruction, the consistently 
increased intraluminal pressure upstream of the obstruction, 
results in an irreversible loss of nephrons due to 
ischemic damage. In contrast, in the case of incomplete 
but long-lasting obstruction, vasoactive amines released 
by the tubules cause a decrease in urine production and 
an increase in ureteral peristalsis. 
Recent evidence, both from animal models and from 
newborns, has demonstrated the involvement of the 
renin–angiotensin system, with angiotensin-dependent 
renal vasoconstruction proportional to the severity of 
the obstruction. At least in animals, inhibition of the 
renin–angiotensin system with angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors is capable of reducing the 
renal damage and preserving renal function at birth. 
Furthermore, it seems that renal damage occurring in 
obstructive uropathies is not limited to the tubules but 
extends to the glomeruli, with consequent activation 
of apoptosis. On the other hand, these experimental 
findings cannot be translated, at least for the time being, 
into clinical practice, as the marked inhibition of the 
renin–angiotensin system during nephrogenesis is 
accompanied by widespread tubular and vascular abnormalities 
and a decrease in the expression of growth 
factors critical for development of the fetus. 
• Unilateral hydronephrosis: can be due to an obstruction 
of the uretero-pelvic junction, in which the ureter 
is unaffected; vesico-ureteral reflux; obstruction of the 
250 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 8.2 Urinary causes of hydronephrosis 
• Pelvic ureteric junction dostruction (PUJO) 
(unilateral or bilateral) 
• Vesico-ureteric junction obstruction 
• Megaureter (with or without reflux) (unilateral or 
bilateral) 
• Cloacal dysgenesis 
• Complicated duplex kidney (unilateral or bilateral) 
• Bladder pathology (posterior urethral valves, PUVs) 
• Vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR) (unilateral or 
bilateral) 
• Megacystics microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome 

vesico-ureteral junction, in which both hydronephrosis 
and ureteronephrosis are present. 
• Bilateral hydronephrosis: can be due to bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux and urethral obstruction, which 
is usually associated with evident ureteral dilatation. 
Bladder overdistension may be present in both conditions, 
although it is more often found in cases of urethral 
obstruction. Less frequently it can be due to 
bilateral ureteropelvic junction obstruction. 
• Association with other malformations. These relate 
mainly to the contralateral kidney and are represented 
by multicystic kidney, ectopia, and renal agenesis. 
Associations with extrarenal anomalies include 
CHD, skeletal dysplasias, and spine anomalies, usually 
within a syndromic context. 
The most frequent cause of hydronephrosis is obstruction 
of the uretero-pelvic junction, which is unilateral in 
approximately 70% of cases. Table 8.2 shows the most 
frequent causes of hydronephrosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydronephrosis is diagnosed if the 
dilatation involves the renal collecting system only, with 
normal ureters and bladder. With time, some cases of 
mild pyelectasis evolve into moderate or severe 
hydronephrosis. The grade of dilatation may increase 
with advancing gestation, resulting in a reduction of 
the cortical thickness (Figure 8.21), or it may remain 
unchanged. In rare cases, the extremely dilated collecting 
system may perforate, with formation of a paranephric 
pseudocyst, a urinoma, which is associated with poor or 
absent renal function. It is important to underline that 
hydronephrosis is considered moderate or severe only 
when the calices are dilated, or when the renal pelvis is 
so dilated as to cause cortical atrophy, respectively. 
In the case of unilateral hydronephrosis, it is important 
to evaluate the contralateral kidney to exclude 
associated anomalies. The amount of amniotic fluid 
may be normal or even increased due to a reduction in 
the ability of the obstructed kidney to concentrate 
urine; in the case of bilateral obstruction, the amniotic 
volume may be normal only if the onset of the obstruction 
is recent or incomplete, otherwise, there is severe 
oligohydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in isolated 
forms. Some studies have shown an increased incidence 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 251 
Figure 8.21 Ultrasound images showing several different degrees of hydronephrosis. (a) The kidneys show moderate pyelectasia. (b) Sagittal scan 
of a hydronephrotic fetal kidney showing dilatation of the pelvis and calices; the calices are confluent and dilated. (c) Coronal scan of the kidney in 
a case of ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction; the renal pelvis (RP) and caliceal distension (arrows) end abruptly at the ureteral junction. 
(d) Severe UPJ obstruction presenting as an abdominal cyst; the renal parenchyma is thinned to a few millimeters. 
a b 
c d 

of aneuploidy among fetuses with pyelectasia. However, 
due to the high prevalence of this sign in the fetus, we 
believe that fetal karyotyping should be considered only 
if another major anomaly or other risk factors are 
present at the same time. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low: 6–8%. The syndromes most frequently associated 
with hydronephrosis are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ vertebral anomalies, anorectal atresia, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, cardiac defects, and limb 
anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Schinzel-Giedion syndrome:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ midface retraction, skull anomalies, 
talipes, and cardiac anomalies. 
• Camptomelic dysplasia:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ bowed tibiae/femurs, scapular hypoplasia, micrognathia, 
and sex reversal in males. 
252 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.22 Vesico-ureteric 
junction obstruction. (a) Hydronephrosis 
and dilatation of the 
ureter (arrow) are present. K, 
kidney; BL, bladder. (b) Hydroureteronephrosis 
and ureterocele: 
ultrasound image showing a 
tubular anechoic formation, with 
a tortuous path, corresponding 
to a dilated ureter, which extends 
from the renal pelvis to the retrovesical 
region. Hydronephrosis is 
associated. Note the ureterocele 
within the bladder. 
a b 
HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS 
Definition. This is dilatation of the renal pelvis associated 
with dilatation of the ureter. The main causes are 
obstruction of the vesico-ureteral junction, vesicoureteral 
reflux, obstruction secondary to ureterocele, 
and ectopic ureter. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In obstruction of the vesicoureteral 
junction, the distal part of the ureter is usually 
reduced in size. Vesico-ureteral reflux involves a continuous 
or intermittent retrograde flow of urine from the 
bladder into the upper urinary tract. Interestingly, in 
contrast with postnatal life, where the male-to-female 
ratio is 1 : 5, most neonates with prenatally diagnosed 
reflux are males. A possible explanation may be the 
increased voiding pressure required in males, which 
in utero would compress the vesico-ureteral junction, 
leading to the reflux.12 The third, less common, cause of 
hydro-ureteronephrosis in the fetus is duplex kidney 
with ectopic ureterocele. In this case, the ureter draining 
the lower pole is usually refluent, while that draining the 
upper pole, which has an ectopic vesical orifice, has an 
intravesical ureterocele. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound aspect of ureteral 
dilatation is that of a tubular, tortuous anechoic structure 
(Figure 8.22) with a diameter ranging from a few millimeters 
up to 2–3 cm and extending from the renal pelvis 
to the retrovesical region. Hydronephrosis is associated. 
In unilateral forms, the bladder and the amount of amniotic 
fluid are normal. Sometimes, in severe bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux, the association of severe hydroureteronephrosis 
with moderate to severe bladder distension 
may mimic the presence of lower urinary tract 
obstruction. In the case of bilateral severe obstruction, 
the amount of amniotic fluid may be decreased. When 
the cause of the obstruction is a duplex kidney with 
ectopic ureterocele, the ultrasound picture is based on the 
presence of hydronephrosis in the upper-pole moiety only 
(Figure 8.23); when the hydronephrosis is marked, cystic 
dilatation of the upper pole may dislocate and hide the 
normal morphology of the lower pole, complicating the 
ultrasound diagnosis. In these cases, the only hint leading 
to the diagnosis of a duplex kidney is the intravesical 
ureterocele associated with the hydro-ureteronephrosis. 
However, in addition, the ureterocele may be difficult to 
detect: with an empty bladder, the ureterocele itself may 
be mistaken for the bladder or, vice versa, with a full bladder, 
the ureterocele may flatten along the bladder wall 
due to the high intraluminal pressure, becoming sonographically 
unrecognizable. Finally, it should be note that 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 253 
not all duplex kidneys and not all vesico-ureteral junction 
obstructions are associated with ureteronephrosis. 
• Differential diagnosis. In the bilateral form, upper 
causes of hydro-ureteronephrosis should be differentiated 
from lower urinary tract obstruction 
(Table 8.3). In the unilateral form, the differential 
diagnosis includes unilateral obstruction of the 
pyelo-ureteral junction, in which there is no 
ureteral dilatation. In the case of a duplex kidney 
with ectopic ureterocele, the presence of the ureterocele 
protruding into the vesical lumen identifies 
this type of lesion. 
• Association with other malformations. In the unilateral 
form, contralateral kidney anomalies are frequently 
associated. 
Figure 8.23 Duplex kidney with two collecting systems and ectopic ureterocele. (a) The arrowhead indicates the ureterocele within the bladder. 
(b) Color Doppler flow demonstrating two renal artery branches. (c) Ultrasound image showing hydronephrosis of the upper pole only (arrow). (d) 
Surface rendering of the same case, demonstrating the duplex kidney with a dilated ureter. 
a b 
c d 
Table 8.3 Differential diagnosis of distended bladder. Breakdown of ultrasound signs by type of lesion. 
Diagnosis Liquor volume Kidneys Ureters Bladder 
Megacystis microcolon Normal/increased Hydronephrosis Normal/dilated Distended, 
intestinal hypoperistalsis normal walled 
syndromes (MMIHS) 
Posterior urethral valves Normal/decreased Hydronephrosis, Dilated Distended, thick- 
(PUV) or cystic dysplasia walled, (dilated 
(Potter IV) urethra) 
Urethral atresia Usually absent Small, hyperechoic Usually not visible Distended, thinwalled 
Vesico-ureteric reflux Normal Hydronephrosis Usually dilated Distended, 
normal-walled 

Definition. In this section, we will illustrate all anomalies 
associated with a dilated bladder and, usually, hydroureteronephrosis 
or hydronephrosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A dilated bladder may be due 
to obstructive or non-obstructive anomalies. The first 
group comprises posterior urethral valves (typical of male 
fetuses), urethral steno-atresia, and cloacal dysgenesis 
(mainly female). In the second group, the bladder dilatation 
is not due to obstruction but rather to abnormalities of 
the vesical tone (atonia), frequently related to neurologic, 
genetic (e.g., megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome), or chromosomal disorders. Early and 
complete obstruction (urethral atresia, and complete posterior 
urethral valves) may result in conspicuous dilatation of 
the bladder, with elevation of the diaphragm and distension 
and thinning of the abdominal wall. The consequent 
deficit of abdominal wall muscles, together with megaureter 
and cryptorchidism, completes the clinical condition 
known as prune belly syndrome, which can occur as a primary 
lesion or be secondary to various causes, with urethral 
obstruction being the most common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. An enlarged bladder detected 
at ultrasound may simply be a transient phase in the 
normal voiding cycle, or, if persistent and/or severe, it 
may be secondary to reflux or obstructive, neurogenic, 
or myopathic causes. Ultrasound diagnosis of lower 
urinary tract obstruction is based on visualization of a 
dilated bladder with thick and hyperechoic walls, sometimes 
associated with bladder neck and proximal urethral 
distension; hydro-ureteronephrosis, when present, 
is usually bilateral (Figure 8.24). In the case of urethral 
atresia, the early onset of the obstruction, which dates 
back to organogenesis, is responsible for a severe dilatation 
of the bladder, which frequently occupies the 
whole abdomen as early as the 13th week of gestation 
(Figure 8.25 and Table 8.3). If mild to moderate vesical 
dilatation is present as early as the 10th–14th week 
(Figure 8.26), with a longitudinal bladder diameter of 
7–15 mm, 23% of the fetuses have a chromosomal 
anomaly. However, if the karyotype is normal, spontaneous 
resolution of the megacystis occurs in about 90% 
of cases. If the longitudinal diameter of the bladder is 
greater than 15 mm, the risk of aneuploidy is about 
10%, and in the chromosomally normal group, the condition 
is invariably associated with progressive obstructive 
uropathy.13 
The associated hydro-ureteronephrosis is due to the 
increased intravesical pressure. Reflux and urinary 
sequestration increase the intrarenal pressure, leading to 
a dilatation of the collecting system and impairing, by 
254 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.24 Posterior urethral 
valve. (a) Ultrasound image 
showing the distended bladder 
with hydronephrosis and 
dilatation of both ureters RD, 
right kidney; RS, left kidney; U, 
ureters; V, bladder. (b) The 
bladder is distended and there 
is dilatation of the proximal 
part of the urethra (arrow). 
a b
DILATED BLADDER 
Incidence. 1/2000–4000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Dilatation of the bladder associated with hydro-ureteronephrosis (or hydronephrosis). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. If the lesion is isolated and the amount of amniotic fluid is within the normal range, the prognosis may 
be favorable; if, on the other hand, oligohydramnios is already present before the 24th week of gestation and the 
kidneys are hyperechoic (with or without cysts), the prognosis is unfavorable. 

compression, the blood flow to the proximal renal 
tubules. The consequent parenchymal damage results in 
a loss of proteins, which are no longer reabsorbed, in the 
fetal urine. Sometimes, the vesicoureteral reflux resulting 
from the obstruction may cause massive unilateral 
hydronephrosis that can totally destroy the kidney, 
decompressing the contralateral kidney, which may only 
show moderate hydronephrosis. The extremely high 
intraluminal pressures may also lead to rupture of the 
bladder; in this case, urinous ascites and decompression 
of the collecting system will occur (Figure 8.27). Spontaneous 
decompression takes place in approximately 10% 
of the cases. The ultrasound picture will depend on the 
duration and degree of the obstruction. In the case of 
incomplete obstruction, as in some cases of posterior 
urethral valves, the amniotic fluid will be normal or 
slightly decreased. It should be noted that in some cases 
of complete posterior urethral valves, the early and longlasting 
obstruction can lead to severe cystic dysplasia 
with complete loss of renal function. As a result, the production 
of urine will be extremely reduced. In this case, 
the sonographic findings will consist of hyperechoic kidneys, 
possibly with small pericortical cysts, and severe 
oligohydramnios; the dilatation of the collecting system 
(i.e., pelves, ureters, and bladder), may be moderate or 
non-existent. It is also necessary to underline that the 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 255 
Figure 8.25 Urethral atresia. 
(a) Ultrasound image showing 
massive dilatation of the bladder 
and hyperechoic kidneys. 
(b) Gross pathology shows a 
very distended abdomen and 
small chest. The lack of musculature 
gives the abdominal wall 
a flaccid, wrinkled appearance – 
hence the name ‘prune belly 
syndrome’. 
Figure 8.26 Sagittal scan through the abdomen of a 13-week fetus 
showing mild distension of the bladder and a dilated posterior urethra. 
Figure 8.27 Rupture of an obstructed bladder (arrow) may occur, 
producing urinous ascites, as shown in this ultrasound image. 
a b 

compressive action of the increased intraluminal pressure 
on the tubules may precede sonographic evidence of 
hydronephrosis by days or weeks. In contrast, the 
absence or disappearance of pelvic dilatation, in the 
presence of a hyperechoic, structurally disorganized, or 
frankly dysplastic kidney, may represent the final result 
of a protracted period of endoluminal hypertension. The 
conclusion about the ultrasound diagnosis of obstructive 
urinary lesions is that a correct diagnosis requires 
longitudinal observation. 
• Differential diagnosis. Posterior urethral valves must 
be differentiated from severe vesico-ureteral reflux: 
bladder dilatation and severe hydro-ureteronephrosis 
may be present in both; however, posterior urethral 
valves are associated with thickened bladder walls 
and dilatation of the proximal urethra, which are 
absent in vesico-ureteral reflux. In addition, the volume 
of amniotic fluid is more frequently reduced in 
urethral obstruction. In the case of complete posterior 
urethral valves, the sonographic evidence is 
remarkable from the end of the 1st trimester, featuring 
a severely dilated bladder occupying the whole 
abdomen and moderate oligohydramnios. In this 
regard, it must be underlined that the amniotic fluid 
will disappear completely by the 14th–16th weeks of 
gestation, when its production will be accounted for 
by the fetal kidney only. Hydronephrosis is more frequently 
associated with incomplete rather than complete 
urethral obstruction. In lower urinary tract 
obstruction presenting in the 1st and 2nd trimesters, 
hyperechoic kidneys are predictive of severe renal 
dysplasia in 95% of cases. Finally, it should be noted 
that bladder dilatation (megacystis) can also be associated 
with non-obstructive disorders, usually in the 
context of genetic syndromes, as in case of the megacystis 
microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis (MMIH) 
syndrome, in which the amount of amniotic fluid is 
usually increased and dilatation of the stomach is frequently 
present (Figure 8.28). 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with cardiac anomalies and anal atresia has been 
described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high: 
8–20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 7–12%. 
256 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
OBSTETRIC MANAGEMENT, POSTNATAL THERAPY, AND PROGNOSIS OF 
HYDRONEPHROSIS, HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS, AND BLADDER DILATATION 
Ultrasound monitoring of fetuses with urinary obstruction, 
together with the study of animal models, has 
expanded the understanding of the natural history of 
this disease, and has allowed the definition of some general 
diagnostic criteria and algorithms for pre- and postnatal 
management of such patients. However, several 
aspects of the physiopathology of fetal obstructive 
uropathies remain unresolved, which in turn limits both 
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. 
The first crucial point is the inability of the sonographic 
examination to fully define the extent and 
severity of parenchymal damage and to forecast its outcome 
at the time of initial diagnosis, with the possible 
exception of the most severe forms of cystic dysplasia, 
associated with severe oligohydramnios. The technical 
feasibility of in utero vesico-amniotic shunting, to be 
performed in selected cases to relieve prenatal urinary 
tract obstruction, has led to research into sensitive biochemical 
markers that might accurately reflect the 
(residual) fetal renal function. Unfortunately, this 
approach has been unsuccessful so far, for a number of 
reasons. First, the biochemical function of the fetal kidney 
is only partially known, and depends largely on gestational 
age. Then, the fetal blood or urine 
concentration of any putative biochemical marker of 
renal function is strongly influenced by its transplacental 
passage. Lastly, with the limitations cited above, it 
appears infeasible to define cut-off values that can reliably 
forecast the progression of renal damage, thereby 
justifying intrauterine interventions. To a certain extent, 
the same applies to the adult patient, as demonstrated 
by the unresolved debate around the no-return value of 
Figure 8.28 Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome. Ultrasound image showing megacyst, hydronephrotic 
kidneys, and polyhydramnios (arrow). 

serum creatinine predicting the progression towards 
end-stage renal disease. 
Based on the available evidence, it is reasonable to 
adopt the following schedule for the management of 
fetal hydronephrosis. Following identification of urinary 
tract dilatation, a detailed anatomic scan should be performed 
to exclude the presence of associated extrarenal 
anomalies. In the case of unilateral obstruction, a reduction 
of the ipsilateral glomerular filtration rate and a 
compensatory increase in the function of contralateral 
kidney are the expected responses, with a presumably 
near-normal global excretory function. Management 
should therefore be limited to serial ultrasound followup, 
prolonged at least until the first year of age, associated 
with postnatal biochemical evaluation of renal 
function. This approach is based on the apparent sonographic 
normality of the contralateral kidney and the 
urinary tract, on the lack of oligohydramnios, and on 
the presence of urine in the fetal bladder; as such, it is 
limited by the fact that the assessment of renal function 
relies exclusively on the sonographic appearance. A 
detailed analysis of subjects with unilateral dysplastic 
kidneys diagnosed in utero showed that the usually 
hypertrophic contralateral kidney was also prone to 
hydronephrosis, urolithiasis, and infection during postnatal 
life in about 30% of cases. Furthermore, uncomplicated 
fetal unilateral hydronephrosis has been 
reported in a few cases to progress to irreversible uremia 
early in postnatal life. This may simply be the 
effect of a significant reduction in the number of 
nephrons, despite the compensatory hypertrophy of the 
contralateral kidney during fetal life: accordingly, renal 
insufficiency would develop when the already reduced 
renal functional reserve has to cope with an increased 
functional demand over the years in postnatal life. 
However, recent research has revealed that the picture 
is far more complex: it has been demonstrated that unilateral 
obstruction can lead to activation of a number 
of hemodynamic mechanisms, such as the renin– 
angiotensin system, which account for functional and 
eventually structural modifications of the contralateral 
kidney. Then, unilateral obstruction may trigger an 
array of metabolic and immunologic mechanisms that 
may involve the contralateral kidney and eventually 
lead to uremia. Despite all of the above reported 
concerns, the lack of conclusive evidence and a favorable 
cost/benefit judgement supports a conservative 
approach to the fetus with unilateral obstruction. 
In the case of bilateral obstruction, the first step is 
always to rule out the simultaneous existence of other 
major lethal anomalies. Termination of pregnancy may 
be an option, where legally allowed, in these unfortunate 
cases. If the association with other significant 
anomalies (including chromosomal abnormalities) has 
been excluded, and the amniotic fluid is normal, then a 
conservative ultrasound follow-up is required, with 
surgical correction usually being postponed until birth. 
All the concerns and limitations reported for unilateral 
obstruction are even more compelling in this case. 
After the 24th week of gestation, the detection of oligohydramnios, 
at the time of diagnosis or thereafter, 
requires a more accurate evaluation of renal function. 
The sonographic recognition of bilateral renal 
dysplasia is an indication of an unfavorable outcome. 
Nevertheless, renal function should be explored with 
more invasive procedures. Fetuses with renal damage 
have hypertonic urine with a higher concentration of 
proteins as compared with normal fetuses or fetuses 
with low urinary tract obstruction and a good outcome. 
It should be recalled that up to the 20th week of 
gestation, fetal urine is isotonic with plasma, owing to 
the immaturity of tubular function. At this early stage, 
the fetal blood concentration of ß2--microglobulin may 
be a valuable marker of renal function. Urinalysis 
should be performed on the urine collected after prolonged 
bladder drainage of 48–72 hours, and the 
results should be confirmed at least thrice. The severity 
of urine hypertonicity (Nau> 100 mmol/L and 
Cau> 95th centile) correlates with the severity and 
extent of renal damage. In the case of severe renal damage, 
the degree of hypertonicity remains stable or tends 
to increase. At the opposite end of the spectrum, in 
fetuses who may benefit from intrauterine surgery, the 
degree of urine hypertonicity tends to decrease towards 
the normal range over time. In conclusion, fetuses with 
bilateral hydronephrosis, oligohydramnios, and bladder 
enlargement, associated with a normal karyotype 
and without coexisting malformations, in whom urine 
hypertonicity tends to decrease over time, are candidates 
for in utero surgery (placement of a vesico-amniotic 
shunt, cystoscopy with ablation of the posterior 
urethral valve, etc.). Conversely, if sonographic and 
biochemical findings indicate an unfavorable outcome, 
then termination of pregnancy or no intervention are 
the only possible options. In very carefully selected 
cases, in the presence of lung maturity and an acceptable 
renal function, preterm delivery with early 
ex utero surgery may be considered. It should also be 
noted that some reports have described how, in a 
few circumstances, a single tap of a dilated bladder 
has unblocked the obstruction, resolving the 
hydronephrosis. The suggested mechanism behind 
these events is that the reduction in intraluminal pressure 
may allow the opening of a functional valve or 
resolve a sphincteral spasm, in this way removing an 
apparent obstruction. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 257 

Definition. Bladder exstrophy is a very rare congenital 
malformation in which the anterior wall of the bladder is 
absent and the posterior wall is exposed to the amniotic 
fluid.3,14 It is caused by incomplete closure of the lower 
abdominal wall. The defect is associated with separation 
of the pubic bones, a low-set umbilicus, and abnormal 
genitalia. Bladder exstrophy may occur as an isolated 
anomaly or be part of a still more complex situation 
represented by exstrophy of the cloaca, in which 
omphalocele, bowel anomalies, spina bifida, and phallus 
bifidus may be associated. The term OEIS complex 
(Omphalocele, Extrophy of the bladder, Imperforate 
anus, and spinal defects) is used to describe the spectrum 
of malformations in cloacal exstrophy. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Embryologically, exstrophy 
of the bladder occurs during the 4th week of gestation 
and is the consequence of a failure in the migration of 
mesenchymal cells between the ectoderm of the 
abdomen and cloaca; abnormally shaped and weakened 
abdominal muscles are also present. The incidence of 
bladder exstrophy is about 1/30 000 births, with a 3 : 1 
male-to-female ratio. Cloacal exstrophy is the result of 
an embryologic maldevelopment of the cloacal membrane 
that prevents the migration of mesenchymal tissue 
and impedes normal lower abdominal development. 
Its incidence is about 1/200 000–1/400 00 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound signs (Figure 
8.29) of bladder exstrophy are: non-visualization of the 
bladder in the pelvis and recognition of a small moderately 
echoic solid mass bulging from the lower abdominal 
wall. The amniotic fluid volume is normal14 (Figure 
8.8). Minor findings, often difficult to identify, include 
a low insertion of the umbilical cord, widening of the 
iliac crests, and a small penis. In cloacal exstrophy, nonvisualization 
of the fetal bladder is associated with the 
recognition of a large infraumbilical anterior abdominal 
wall defect or a cystic abdominal wall structure, the 
latter representing a persistent cloacal membrane. 
Omphalocele is present in most cases (Figure 8.30). 
Spinal anomalies including meningomyelocele, renal 
anomalies, and abnormalities of the lower limbs are often 
found. A hint that may lead to a diagnosis of bladder 
258 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.29 Bladder exstrophy (a, b) Ultrasound images showing an 
exteriorized bladder (arrows). (c) 3D surface rendering of the exteriorized 
bladder (arrows). Associated hypospadias is evident. 
a
b
c 
BLADDER/CLOACAL EXSTROPHY 
Incidence. Bladder exstrophy: 1/30 000 newborns. Cloacal exstrophy: 1/200 000–1/400 000newborns. 
Diagnosis. Failure to visualize the bladder in the pelvis. Presence of a small mass on the lower abdominal wall 
(bladder exstrophy). Ample abdominal wall defect with presence of omphalocele or cystic anterior abdominal wall 
structure in contact with the amniotic fluid (cloacal exstrophy). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. The survival rate is about 90% in the case of bladder exstrophy, but decreases to 75% for cloacal 
exstrophy. The quality of life depends on the success of surgical correction. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 259 
Figure 8.30 Cloacal exstrophy. (a) Axial view of a large omphalocele (arrowheads). (b) Sagittal view of the lower body, showing the omphalocele 
(arrowheads) and the bladder exstrophy (arrows). (c) The fetus after termination of pregnancy. Frontal view of the large omphalocele. Note the 
cord insertion on the top of the sac. (d) Lifting the sac of the omphalocele, the concurrent bladder exstrophy (arrows) is shown. 
a
b 
c
d 
exstrophy is a parallel course of the intra-abdominal 
umbilical arteries: in the case of bladder exstrophy, the 
two umbilical arteries are adjacent to one another and 
have a parallel and not converging course. 
• Differential diagnosis. For cloacal exstrophy the 
main differential diagnosis is with omphalocele. 
However, in the latter, the bladder can always be 
visualized in the fetal pelvis. With regard to the differential 
diagnosis between the two forms of exstrophy, 
the omphalocele is absent in isolated bladder 
exstrophy, and associated spinal dyraphisms are 
uncommon. 
• Association with other malformations. Generally, 
only genital abnormalities are associated with bladder 
exstrophy; on the contrary, as already mentioned, 
cloacal exstrophy is frequently associated with genital, 
neural tube, gastrointestinal (including anal atresia), 
and cardiac anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in both 
defects. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low in both defects. 
Obstetric management. If bladder/cloacal exstrophy is 
detected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performxed by an expert in order to recognize possible 
associated anomalies, especially in the case of cloacal 
exstrophy. Their diagnosis is of key importance in order 
to accurately assess the surgical procedures needed to correct 
the defect. Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center in order to provide adequate perinatal management 
of the different anomalies present. As far as the 
mode of delivery is concerned, fetuses with bladder 
exstrophy may be delivered spontaneously. The same considerations 
as for omphalocele apply to cloacal exstrophy: 
it may be appropriate to delivery by cesarean section those 
cases in which the abdominal mass is larger than 5 cm. 

Definition. Renal tumors are benign or malignant 
neoplasms arising in the fetal kidney. Prenatal recognition 
is extremely rare. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Mesoblastic nephroma, 
which is a benign lesion, is the most common tumor, 
followed by the malignant Wilms’ tumor (nephroblastoma). 
Some genetic markers (WT1 and WT2 on chromosome 
11 and WT3 on chromosome 16p) have been 
identified for Wilms’ tumor arising in the context of 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As for most neoplasms, 
the diagnosis is generally made in the 3rd trimester. 
The tumor mass may occupy part of the kidney or 
replace it completely (Figure 8.31). If it is very large, a 
mass effect on adjacent abdominal viscera may be 
detected. Usually, mesoblastic nephromas show illdefined 
margins due to the absence of a capsule, whereas 
neprhoblastomas are usually capsulated. Increased vascularization 
may be detected on color/power Doppler. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly adrenal 
lesions, such as hemorrhage or tumors, due to the 
location of the mass. However, if the tumor is of renal 
origin, the renal parenchyma is reduced and not compressed 
as in adrenal tumors. In addition, adrenal 
tumors tend to be hypoechoic, whereas renal tumors 
are usually weakly hyperechoic. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chormosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. Nephroblastoma may be associated with the 
following: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . 
nephroblastoma + polycystic kidney, macroglossia, 
omphalocele, and hemihypertrophy (Chapter 10). 
• Denis–Drash syndrome:3 look for . nephroblastoma 
+ ambiguous genitalia and diaphragmatic 
hernia (rare). 
260 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
RENAL TUMORS 
Incidence. Extremely rare in the fetus. 1/125 000 during childhood. 
Diagnosis. The lesion is usually unilateral. The kidney is partly or totally replaced by a mass with ill-defined 
margins and high vascularization. It may have or have not a capsule. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on histology, but is generally good. 
Postnatal treatment. In the case of bladder exstrophy, 
restoration of bladder function after surgical correction 
occurs in a significant percentage of cases. Multiple surgical 
procedures are needed in the case of cloacal exstrophy. 
Repairing the defects involves dissection of the fused rectum, 
vagina, and urethra, which have formed a common 
channel, allowing their separation and proper placement 
on the perineum. The objectives of the surgical approach 
are to achieve bowel control, urinary control, and normal 
sexual function. All three goals may be achieved; or only 
two, one, or none of them (occasionally) may be possible. 
Prognostic factors include the quality of the sacrum, the 
quality of the muscles, and the length of the common 
channel (>or <3 cm). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis for 
bladder exstrophy is better if only the bladder is 
involved, with a 90% survival rate. Until a few decades 
ago, the prognosis for cloacal exstrophy was very poor. 
Advances in surgical techniques have resulted in an 
improved survival rate (approximately 70–80% of 
cases). The functional prognosis with regard to fecal 
continence depends on the complexity of the defect and 
the status of the spine and sacrum. Urinary control 
varies, depending on the length of the common channel: 
intermittent catheterization is needed in over 60% of 
patients with common channel length of less than 3 cm 
and in about 20% of cases with common channel length 
greater than 3 cm. However, the bladder neck is competent 
in most patients, and patients who require catheterization 
remain dry between micturitions; only rarely is 
urinary continence not achieved. It should be noted that, 
in addition, the majority of male individuals have 
extremely abnormal genitalia. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 261 
AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA 
Incidence. 1/50 000–70 000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. It is difficult to differentiate micropenis with cryptorchidism from clitoromegaly with normal labia; in 
males, the main findings are micropenis, ventral curvature of the penis, retained testicles, scrotum bifidum, and 
hypospadias; in females, the main finding is clitoromegaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Good in isolated forms, unfavorable if associated with other anomalies. 
Obstetric management. Should a renal tumor be 
detected in a fetus, a thorough search for possible signs 
of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (polycystic kidney, 
macroglossia, and hemihypertrophy) must be carried 
out. Fetal karyotyping is not mandatory, because of the 
low risk of chromosomal anomalies. In large tumors, 
fetal echocardiography may be of help to detect signs of 
high-output cardiac failure, sometimes associated 
with large fetal masses. Delivery should take place in a 
tertiary referral center in order to ensure adequate diagnostic 
work-up, including abdominal ultrasound and 
magnetic resonance imaging of the neonate. Subsequent 
management is determined by the final diagnosis. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical removal of the tumor, or 
nephrectomy, may be necessary in the neonatal 
period. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In general, the 
overall prognosis is good, with good survival rates. The 
relatively few cases in which cardiac failure develops 
in utero are those more likely to die after birth. 
Figure 8.31 Nephroblastoma. 
Axial (a) and coronal (b) scans 
of the fetal abdomen showing a 
solid echogenic mass above the 
kidney (arrows). 
a b 
Definition. The term ‘ambiguous genitalia’ is used when 
the external genitalia are different from the genetic sex, 
or when they are not certainly indicative of a male or 
female phenotype. The incidence of this anomaly is 
1/50 000–70 000 newborns. 
Anatomy. Ambiguous genitalia are the expression of a 
heterogeneous group of disorders with different etiology, 
frequently referring to chromosome anomalies and/or 
endocrine disorders.15 Currently, there is no universally 
accepted classification of sexual differentiation disorders. 
The most widely accepted is based on the histology 
of the existing gonad, with an etiologic subclassification. 
According to this gonad classification there are five main 
categories: 
I. Only an ovary is present (female pseudohermaphroditism). 
II. Only a testis is present (male pseudohermaphroditism). 
III. Ovary and testis are present (true hermaphroditism). 
IV. Testis and gonadal ‘streak’ are present (mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis). 
V. Only a gonadal streak is present (pure gonadal 
dysgenesis). 

Female pseudohermaphroditism (hyperandrogenized 
female). This anomaly comprises the majority of cases of 
ambiguity in the external genitalia. These are female 
individuals with a 46,XX karyotype and ovarian 
gonadal tissue. They have normal müllerian duct structures 
(normal internal genitalia). The majority of cases 
are due to accumulation of androgens upstream of the 
enzymatic block in the biosynthesis of cortisol. The two 
main enzymatic defects responsible for virilization of the 
female fetus are the deficiencies of 21-hydroxylase and 
of 11ß-hydroxylase, which account for 95% of cases. 
The former deficiency is responsible for most cases of 
adrenogenital syndrome (AGS). Newborns with AGS 
show a degree of virilization that varies according to the 
severity of the enzymatic deficit. The most frequent 
morphologic characteristics are clitoromegaly, with 
a clitoris that may reach the dimensions of a phallus; 
the presence of a single vaginal and urethral opening 
(urogenital seat); and hyperpigmented labia majora 
characterized by roughness typical of scrotal skin, while 
the labia minora are fused. The pelvic organs are completely 
feminine and unremarkable. The diagnosis is 
based on the blood levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
and 11-deoxycorticol, and the final confirmation is 
obtained by molecular investigation of the CYP21 gene, 
the site of the mutation responsible for the enzymatic 
block. Deficiency of 11ß-hydroxylase accounts for only 
10% of the cases of congenital AGS. The CYP11B gene, 
which codes for 11ß-hydroxylase, is located at chromosome 
8q21 and comprises eight exons, whose sequence 
can be analyzed to find any mutations. Another unlikely 
cause of female pseudohermaphroditism is the maternal 
intake of androgens during pregnancy. 
Male pseudohermaphroditism (hypoandrogenized male). 
This anomaly includes all syndromes due to a deficit 
in the synthesis of testosterone or to an abnormal testosterone 
receptor that is not able to convey the hormonal 
input to the target cells. Patients belonging to this group 
are all males with a 46,XY complement. The production 
of testosterone is essential for the development of the 
external genitalia in the male. There is a close correlation 
between development of the embryo and the concentration 
of fetal testosterone. At the 6th week of gestation, in 
response to a luteinizing hormore (LH) peak from the 
hypophysis, there is a detectable increase in the production 
of testosterone by the fetal testes. The concentration 
of fetal testosterone remains high until the 14th week of 
gestation. After this period, gonadal stimulation is 
mainly sustained by placental LH. The presence of sufficient 
concentration of testosterone in the final weeks of 
gestation is responsible for further growth of penile 
dimensions until birth. The main phenotypic characteristic 
of male pseudohermaphroditism is micropenis, 
either isolated or associated with cryptorchidism. Three 
enzymatic anomalies can be responsible for inadequate 
androgen stimulation during fetal life: (i) an enzymatic 
deficit in the biochemical sequence that results in the 
synthesis of testosterone; (ii) a deficit of 5a-reductase, 
responsible for conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT); (iii) an anomaly in the cytosome 
carrier protein that causes a failure of transport of DHT 
within the cell nucleus. 
True hermaphroditism. In this extremely rare form, the 
chromosome complement is generally 46,XX, but there 
is chromatinic material from chromosome Y. Even less 
common is true mosaicism (46,XX/46,XY) or male 
genotype. The true hermaphrodite has both testicular 
and ovarian tissue represented within the same gonad 
(ovotestis). The external genitalia are ambiguous or 
female. 
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis. Children suffering from this 
anomaly show a normally differentiated testis on one 
side and a dysgenetic gonad on the other. The karyotype 
of these patients is normally characterized by mosaicism 
(45,X0/46,XY); these patients may have the classic phenotype 
of Turner syndrome or have ambiguous genitalia. 
The most significant characteristic of these patients 
is the high incidence of neoplasias of the dysgenetic 
gonad (gonadoblastoma). The gonadic dysgeneses also 
include Turner syndrome (karyotype 45,X0 and variants), 
characterized by dysgenetic gonads and female 
phenotypic appearance, and Klinefelter syndrome (karyotype 
47,XXY) characterized by gonads with a testicular 
morphology that show tubular dygenesis. 
Pure gonadal dysgenesis. This can rarely be diagnosed 
during the neonatal period, the chromosome patrimony 
may be XY, XX, or X0, and normal female external genitalia 
and dysgenetic ovaries are present. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Accurate diagnosis of genital 
anomalies is difficult. In the case of sex reversal (i.e., 
the phenotypic sex is the opposite of the genetic sex), 
diagnosis may be simple, if the fetal karyotype is available. 
Ambiguous external genitalia are difficult to diagnose, 
because a micropenis with cryptorchidism cannot 
always be differentiated on ultrasound from clitoral 
hypertrophy with normal labia. A recent investigation 
has reported that in more than 40% of abnormal external 
genitalia, the prenatal ultrasound diagnosis was not 
made or false-positive results were generated.16 In the 
male, the most frequent anomaly detected on ultrasound 
is represented by micropenis, ventral curvature 
of the penis, retained testes, scrotum bifidum and 
hypospadias (Figures 8.32 and 8.33). In females, clitoral 
hypertrophy is the only finding. Sex reversal may 
be evident in both sexes. 
262 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

• Association with other malformations. Facial clefts 
and CHD may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively 
low. The most frequent chromosomal aberrations are: 
trisomy 13, triploidy, 13q- syndrome, Xp21 duplication, 
9p23 deletion, and 10q26 deletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
• Robinow syndrome:3 look for .ambiguous genitalia 
(micropenis in males or hypoplastic clitoris and labia 
minora in females) + short upper limbs and characteristic 
facies. 
• Opitz syndrome (OMIM 300000):3 look for . 
hypospadias + hypotelorism. 
• Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome (OMIM 270400):3 
look for .ambiguous genitalia + holoprosencephaly, 
cleft palate, and FGR. 
• Denis–Drash syndrome (OMIM 194080):3 look for . 
ambiguous genitalia + nephroblastoma, and 
diaphragmatic hernia (rare). 
Obstetric management. Should ambiguous genitalia be 
confidently detected in a fetus, the first tasks are to 
ascertain whether there are maternal signs of hyperandrogenism 
and to verify if there has been ingestion 
of progesterone or androgens during the 1st trimester. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 263 
Figure 8.32 (a) Ultrasound of the fetal genitalia, showing ambiguous genitalia: a small phallus (arrow) is seen between a heart-shaped scrotal sac 
(scrotum bifidum), which mimics labia. (b) 3D surface rendering of the same finding. (c) External genitalia at birth. (d) A bifid scrotum with hypospadias 
is evident in this scan. (e) The external genitalia at birth: the urethral orifice and the incompletely fused scrotum are demonstrated. 
a b c 
d e 
Figure 8.33 (a) 2D ultrasound of fetal micropenis. 
(b, c) 3D surface rendering. 
a b c 

Definition. This is a typically benign functional cyst 
within the fetal ovary, although rare cases of ovarian 
neoplasms have been reported. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Ovarian cysts represent the 
response of the fetal ovary to increased circulating hormonal 
levels, including maternal estrogens, placental 
human chorionic gonadotropin, and fetal gonadotropins. 
An increased incidence of fetal ovarian cysts has been 
reported in cases of maternal diabetes, Rhesus isoimmunization, 
and pre-eclampsia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The most common finding on 
ultrasound is the presence of a unilocular cyst (Figure 
8.34), sometimes with a daughter cyst inside, in the 
lower lateral abdomen of a female fetus during the 3rd 
trimester of pregnancy. Bilateral ovarian cysts are exceptional. 
In rarer circumstances, the cyst is ‘complex’: 
it has a hemorrhagic echogenicity, which is usually 
secondary to torsion (Figure 8.34a). In this case, the ultrasound 
appearance varies according to the time elapsed 
from the hemorrhage: diffusely echogenic with acute hemorrhage, 
fluid–fluid level seen with repeated bleeds, or a 
clot separated from serum; sometimes, apparent septations 
due to fibrin strands can be seen.17 Polyhydramnios 
may develop in 10% of cases. It has been suggested that 
this is due to partial bowel obstruction secondary to 
compression by a large cyst. 
• Differential diagnosis. Urachal, mesenteric, and 
enteric duplication cysts are indistinguishable from an 
ovarian cyst. Recognition of a daughter cyst seems to 
be exclusive to ovarian cysts. However, it is important 
to consider the fetal gender (ovarian cysts can 
obviously be ruled out in a male fetus), confirm the 
presence of an unremarkable normal urinary tract (a 
number of cystic abdominal masses are related to the 
urinary tract), confirm the normal appearance of the 
gastrointestinal tract (a characteristic of enteric cysts is 
the ‘gut signature’), and look for cyst complications 
(torsion and hemorrhage). 
• Prognostic indicators. Torsion is the most common 
complication of ovarian cysts. The risk of torsion is 
increased if the cyst is larger than 5 cm.18 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with fetal hypothyroidism has been described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very low. 
264 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
A complete family history should be obtained. In addition, 
fetal karyotyping should be performed to determine 
the genetic sex. The amniotic fluid should also be 
analyzed for the presence of 7-dehydrocholesterol, 
which, if elevated, is suggestive of Smith–Lemli–Opitz 
syndrome. Amniocytes should be saved as a source of 
DNA for mutational analysis of the 21-hydroxylase 
gene. Treatment of the fetus/neonate with ambiguous 
genitalia should be performed in the setting of a multidisciplinary 
team (genetics, neonatal endocrinology, 
neonatology, pediatric urology, etc.). Delivery in a tertiary 
center is recommended. 
Postnatal treatment. The major considerations in the 
treatment of a newborn with ambiguous genitalia are 
determination of the sex of rearing and gender identity, 
planning for surgery if necessary, and provision of 
genetic counseling. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life It is important 
that the parents resolve any uncertainty about the sex 
of rearing of the child as soon as possible. Properly 
timed hormonal and surgical intervention should occur 
prior to and during puberty. However, several groups 
of adult patients currently advocate that genitalia 
should be left ambiguous permanently. 
OVARIAN CYST 
Incidence. Most common intra-abdominal cysts in the female fetus. 
Diagnosis. Presence of abdominal anechoic or complex cyst in a female fetus, almost always in the 3rd trimester 
of gestation. Presence of an abdominal cyst containing ‘daughter cyst’ is the best diagnostic clue. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very low. 
Outcome. Very good, unless ovarian torsion occur in the neonatal period. Most ovarian cysts regress 
spontaneously after birth. 

Obstetric management. In the extremely rare circumstance 
in which an ovarian cyst is large enough to 
distend the fetal abdomen, it may cause dystocia. In 
this case, elective cesarean section may be considered. 
In the case of complicated cyst, delivery should take 
place in a tertiary referral center with a pediatric 
surgery unit. 
Postnatal therapy. After delivery, the neonate should 
undergo an ultrasound scan to confirm the antenatal 
diagnosis. Most uncomplicated ovarian cysts regress 
spontaneously a few weeks after birth. A surgical 
approach is suggested for complex cysts or cysts larger 
than 5 cm. Surgery should aim to preserve ovarian 
parenchyma (fenestration with ovarian preservation), 
although oophorectomy may be necessary in the case 
of hemorrhagic infarction due to torsion. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival and 
quality of life are unaffected. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 265 
1. Moore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing Human. Clinically 
Oriented Embryology, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 
1998: 305. 
2. Corteville JE, Gray DL, Crane JP. Congenital hydronephrosis: 
correlation of fetal ultrasonographic findings with infant outcome. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991; 165: 384–8. 
3. Van Allen MI. Urinary tract. In: Stevenson RE, Hall JG, 
Goodman RM, eds. Human Malformations and Related 
Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1993: 502–62. 
4. Gruskin D, Kanil E, Rimoin D. Congenital disorders of the urinary 
tract. In: Rimoin D, Connor JM, Pyeritz RE, Korf BR, eds. 
Emery and Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics, 
4th edn. Edinburgh. Churchill-Livingstone. 2002: 1659–743. 
5. Winyard P, Chitty L. Dysplastic and polycystic kidneys: 
diagnosis, associations and management. Prenat Diagn 2001; 
21: 924–35. 
6. Roume J, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of genetic renal disease: 
breaking the code. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 
10–18. 
7. Brun M, Maugey-Laulom B, Eurin D. Prenatal sonographic patterns 
in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: a multicenter 
study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 55–61. 
8. Nicolini U, Vaughan JL, Fisk NM, et al. Cystic lesions of the 
fetal kidney: diagnosis and prediction of outcome. J Pediatr Surg 
1992; 27: 1451–5. 
9. Sherer DM. Is fetal hydronephrosis overdiagnosed? Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 601–6. 
10. Siemens DR, Prouse KA, MacNeily AE, et al. Antenatal 
hydronephrosis thresholds of renal pelvic diameter to predict 
insignificant post-natal pelviectasia. Tech Urol 1998; 4: 198–201. 
11. Persutte WH, Hussey M, Chyu J, et al. Stricking findings 
concerning the variability in the measurement of the fetal renal 
collecting system. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 15: 186–90. 
12. Mouriquand PDE, Whitten M, Pracros JP. Pathophysiology, 
diagnosis and management of prenatal upper tract dilatation. 
Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 942–51. 
13. Liao AW, Sebire NJ, Geerts L, et al. Megacystis at 10–14 weeks 
of gestation: chromosomal defects and outcome according to 
bladder length. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 338–41. 
14. Lee EH, Shim JY. New sonographic finding for the prenatal 
diagnosis of bladder exstrophy: a case report. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 21: 498–500. 
15. Simpson JL. Disorders of the gonads, genital tract and genitalia. In: 
Emery AEH, Rimoin, DL eds. Principle and Practice of Medical 
Genetics, 4th edn. London Churchill Livingstone 2002: 2315–51. 
16. Cheikhelard A, Luton D, Philippe-Chomette P, et al. How accurate 
is the prenatal diagnosis of abnormal genitalia? J Urol 2000; 
164: 984–7. 
17. D’Addario V, Volpe P, Kurjak A, et al. Ultrasonic diagnosis and 
perinatal management of complicated and uncomplicated fetal 
ovarian cysts: a collaborative study. J Perinat Med 1990; 18: 
375–81. 
18. Dolgin SE. Ovarian masses in the newborn. Semin Pediatr Surg 
2000; 9: 121–7. 
REFERENCES 
Figure 8.34 Ovarian cyst. 
(a) Hemorrhagic ovarian cyst: 
coronal view of the fetal 
abdomen showing a complex 
cystic mass (arrows) with an 
echogenic component. (b) Coronal 
scan of the fetal abdomen 
and pelvis in a 29-week female 
fetus, showing a unilocular and 
completely anechoic cyst just 
above the bladder; color Doppler 
demonstrates both perivesical 
arteries around the bladder. 
a b 

Ultrasound assessment of the fetal musculoskeletal 
apparatus requires a global approach to the fetal body, 
given that skeletal dysplasias and neuromuscular diseases 
involve more or all anatomic regions simultaneously, 
because of the ubiquitous distribution of bones 
and muscles. The only exceptions are reduction defects 
of the limbs, congenital or acquired (amniotic band 
syndrome), which are regional by definition. Therefore, 
unlike other systems, assessment of the fetal musculoskeletal 
apparatus requires a multistep total-body ultrasound 
approach, which should include assessment of the 
following: 
• limbs: long bones and extremities 
• spine and thorax 
• fetal head: calvarium, central nervous system (CNS), 
and splanchnocranium 
• bone mineralization 
• any joint contractures and joint dislocations 
Each of these five points should be addressed with 
separate views at different degrees of magnification, 
which makes the evaluation of the musculoskeletal 
apparatus rather time-consuming and challenging. In the 
following sections, the diagnostic approach to the various 
anomalies of bones and muscles will be dealt with 
the help of different diagnostic flowcharts, based on the 
main abnormal ultrasound finding, with the intention of 
making the very difficult and challenging issue of differential 
ultrasound diagnosis easier. 
Timing of examination. The ultrasound appearance of 
the bones changes significantly during gestation, due to 
progressive mineralization. It is common knowledge that 
in the 3rd trimester, the posterior fossa as well as the 
thoracic content are hardly evaluable due to conspicuous 
mineralization of the calvarium and ribs, respectively. 
It should also be noted that suspicion of lethal skeletal 
dysplasias is often raised as early as 12–14 weeks, due 
to severe and early-onset micromelia, rather than at 
midtrimester, as is the case for most other anomalies. 
Two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound approach and scanning 
planes (views). In this subsection, we adopt the 
multistep assessment procedure described above. The 
standard views for suspecting or diagnosing abnormalities 
of the various skeletal regions are described below. 
Long bones and extremities. To assess the anatomy of 
the limbs, two types of views should be sought: (i) 
regional views, aiming at visualization of the three components 
(rhizomelic, mesomelic, and acromelic), to 
ascertain whether the anomaly involves the whole limb 
or predominantly a part of it – this is generally carried 
out with low-magnification sagittal ultrasound views of 
the whole limb (Figure 9.1); (ii) focal, higher-magnification 
views, to study in detail the anomaly of the affected 
segment, in order to characterize possible focal defects 
and/or anomalies of the extremities (Figure 9.2). The orientation 
of the various planes needed to carry out this 
task will depend on the spatial position of the limb at the 
time of the ultrasound examination. 
Spine and thorax. The spine is electively evaluated using 
the midsagittal view, possibly performed with an anterior 
spine, in order to assess the vertebral bodies and the cutanoeus 
contour, taking care to reduce the pressure on the 
transducer to leave some amniotic fluid between the 
proximal uterine wall and the spine, which greatly 
enhances the acoustic window (Figure 9.3). This sagittal 
view allows display of neural tube defects (see Chapter 2), 
as well as possible fusions of vertebral bodies. It also 
allows the suspicion of scoliosis to be raised, if the axis 
of the spine cannot be displayed from head to breech 
on a single plane; if this is suspected, a coronal view of 
the spine allows one to evaluate the degree of scoliosis 
Chapter 9 
Skeletal dysplasias and muscular 
anomalies: a diagnostic algorithm 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE FETAL MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM: 
ULTRASOUND APPROACH, SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
267 

(Figure 9.4). Also, the midsagittal view of the spine 
allows one to identify possible focal or general mineralization 
defects of the vertebrae. Parasagittal views at the 
level of the outer thoracic walls are used to display, on 
2D ultrasound, gross mineralization or developmental 
anomalies of the ribs, as well as fractures. To exclude 
thoracic hypoplasia, the dimensions of the thorax should 
be assessed on the 4-chamber view (cardiothoracic ratio 
and thoracic circumference: see Chapter 6) and on 
the midsagittal view with ventral approach (anteroposterior 
diameter of the thorax, dip at thoraco-abdominal 
junction: Chapter 6). 
Cranium (calvarium and splanchnocranium). The classic 
axial transthalamic view (Figure 9.5) is employed to 
detect possible deformations of the calvarial contour 
possibly due to early synostoses, such as in cloverleaf 
skull (thanatophoric dysplasia) – although this anomaly 
is best displayed with a coronal approach, since the most 
significant deformation of the skull occurs below the 
transthalamic plane. The assessment of the fetal facial 
profile, performed on the midsagittal view, is needed 
to detect micrognathia, which is a frequent finding in 
skeletal dysplasias (Chapter 3). 
268 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.2 (a) High-magnification view of a single bone segment. 
As an example, the thigh is displayed. The image shows the cutaneous 
contour, up to the gluteal region, the muscles of the thigh, 
and the shaft of the femur. The mineralization, shape, and contour 
of the bone should be assessed. The epiphyses are also visible 
(arrows) as hypopechoic round structures with hyperechoic outline 
at both ends of the long bone. (b) Hand, high-magnification: 
the five rays are visible, with all digits extended (c) Foot, highmagnification: 
the toe (arrow) and the other digits are visible. The 
calcaneous and metatarsus are also visible. 
Figure 9.3 Views for the assessment of the spine. (a) 
Longitudinal view: the regular aspects of all the neural arches, 
together with the regular cutaneous contour, are evident. By confirming 
the integrity of the cutaneous contour on this view, it is 
possible to exclude open spina bifida; in front of the sacrum, the 
bladder (Bl) is visible. (b) Axial view: the three ossification nuclei 
of a throracic vertebra are shown. The arrowheads demonstrate 
the cutaneous contour. Laterally, the scapulae are visible (arrows). 
Figure 9.1 Low-magnification sagittal view of the limbs. (a) Upper 
limb, flexed: the image shows the rhizomelic segment (humerus), the 
mesomelic segment (ulna and radius), and the acromelic segment 
(hand). (b) Lower limb, abdudcted: the rhizomelic, mesomelic, and 
acromelic segments on the same axis (femur, tibia and fibula, and 
foot). 
a
b
b
a 
c 
a
b 

Calvarial mineralization. The degree of mineralization 
is best appreciated on the trans thalamic axial view 
(Figure 9.5). Also, in the case of hypomineralization, 
minor pressure exerted with the transducer can produce 
deformation of the skull, which is very soft (see below). An 
important hint to enable recognition of the presence of calvarial 
hypomineralization is the appearance of the brain: if 
the ossification of the calvarium is deficient, then the ultrasound 
waves are less absorbed by it and display the details 
of the CNS much better. The usual impression, just before 
recognizing the bone ossification defect, is: ‘see how nicely 
this brain shows up!’ (see further on in this chapter). 
Joint contractures. The display of the fetal body at low 
magnification is the best way to recognize possible joint 
contractures. Alternatively, when an advanced gestational 
age makes this approach impossible, separate sagittal 
views of the upper and lower limbs should be sought. 
When affected by pathologic contractures, the lower 
limbs often appear hyperextended and with crossed legs 
(scissors-like), due to the fact that the femoral extensor 
muscles (quadriceps) are stronger than the flexors 
(biceps). The reverse occurs for the upper limbs, where 
the flexor muscles (biceps) are stronger than the extensors 
(triceps): this is why, in the case of contractures, the 
upper limbs often appear flexed with the clenched hands 
lying on the thorax (Chapter 10). An alternative view in 
which it is possible to detect contractures of the upper 
limbs is the axial view of the thorax (4-chamber view). 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 269 
Figure 9.4 Hemivertebra. (a, 
b) 21 weeks of gestation: (a) 
coronal view of the spine 
showing the hemispondilus 
(arrows); (b) corresponding 
sagittal view, demonstrating 
the rare anterior hemispondilus 
(c, d) 16 weeks of gestation: (c) 
coronal view of the thoracic 
spine demonstrating the lateral 
hemispondilus (arrowhead); 
(d) another coronal view, 
showing the distortion of the 
spine (arrows). 
Figure 9.5 Axial transthalamic view (21 weeks of gestation). This 
view is also employed to assess the cranial suture on 2D ultrasound. 
At midtrimester, both the coronal and parieto-occipital sutures can 
be identified as small sonolucent gaps along the calvarial surface 
(arrows).
a c 
b d 

270 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Abnormal shapes of the skull (Figure 9.6). These 
are mainly related to synostoses. The most evident 
is the so-called ‘cloverleaf skull’, which is typical of 
thanatophoric dysplasia type II; this is due to very 
premature closure of the lambdoid, coronal, and sagittal 
sutures. As already mentioned, the best view in 
which to appreciate the cloverleaf deformation is the 
coronal view of the head, since the parietal bones are 
the most severely affected. Acrocephaly or turricephaly 
(Figure 9.6a) is the presence of a pointed head 
(increased craniocaudal diameter), caused by premature 
closure of all sutures. Brachycephaly (Figure 9.6b) 
is characterized by a reduced occipitofrontal diameter, 
caused by premature closure of the two coronal 
sutures. Scaphocephaly (Figure 9.6c) is characterized 
by an increased occipitofrontal diameter, due to premature 
closure of the sagittal suture. Plagiocephaly, 
which is usually not detected in utero, denotes an asymmetric 
shape of the skull, caused by unilateral premature 
closure of the coronal and lambdoid sutures. 
Trigonocephaly indicates a triangular shape of the 
uppermost part of the skull, and is due to closure of 
the metopic suture. Acrocephaly is typical of Apert 
syndrome (Chapter 10). 
Anomalies of the spine. Platyspondyly, i.e., flattened vertebral 
bodies with reduced distance between the endplates, 
which is associated with some skeletal dysplasias 
(thanatophoric dysplasia and ostheogenesis imperfecta 
type II) is not easily detectable by ultrasound. Therefore, 
we will not describe it in detail here. 
Anomalies of the limbs. The first issue to consider is the 
harmonic proportion among the three segments of the 
limb: rhizomelic (femur/humerus), mesomelic (tibia and 
fibula/ulna and radius), and acromelic (foot/hand). If 
only one of the three segments is affected, the condition 
is termed rhizomelia, mesomelia, or acromelia, respectively. 
If, on the contrary, the whole length of the limb is 
abnormal, the condition is named micromelia. 
NOMENCLATURE OF BONE DEFECTS 
Figure 9.6 Abnormal shape of the skull. (a) In Apert syndrome, the coronal suture is already sealed at 23 weeks of gestation (arrows), 
causing deformation of the skull (compare with Figure 9.5). (b) In trisomy 18, one of the common findings (especially early in gestation) is 
a strawberry-shaped skull (arrowheads); a concurrent large choroid plexus cyst is also evident here (arrows). (c) Scaphocephaly (in this case 
at 32 weeks of gestation) is due to early closure of the sagittal suture, and is characterized by an increased occipitofrontal diameter. (d) In 
thanatophoric dysplasia type II, early abnormal closure of the coronal, lambdoid, and sagittal sutures leads to the classic cloverleaf skull; 
however, in type I also, there is an abnormal shape of the skull, due to abnormal incomplete closure of the same sutures. 
c d 
a b 

Anomalies of the extremities. Pathologic contractures of the 
ankle and the wrist are associated with clubfoot (talipes) 
and ulnar deviation of the hand, respectively. In clubfoot, 
the axis of the foot is no longer that of the lower leg: the 
foot is drawn up and bent inwards (varus), and therefore, 
on the sagittal view of the leg, the sole is visible too. In the 
rarer equinus variant, the axis is the same as that of the 
leg, but the foot is in fixed, abnormal hyperextension, 
with the sole facing backwards. In ulnar deviation of the 
hands, the hand appears abnormally and fixedly extrarotated 
on the ulnar side, with overlapping fingers. 
Micrognathia. Micrognathia, which is described 
extensively in Chapter 3, can be found in a number of 
skeletal dysplasias described later in this chapter (and see 
Table 9.5). 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 271 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by micromelia (Figures 
9.7a and 9.8) Micromelia denotes severe hypoplasia of 
the three segments of the limb, and, in most cases, affects 
all limbs at the same time. This extreme hypoplasia of 
the long bones is a feature of lethal dysplasias. In general, 
all three bone segments are highly hypoplastic and 
the shafts of the long bones appear very small and 
curved. A flowchart assisting in the differential diagnosis 
of the most common skeletal dysplasias characterized by 
micromelia is shown in Table 9.1, while skeletal dysplasias 
characterized prevalently by rhizomelia are 
shown in Table 9.2. Figure 9.8 shows the same information 
as Table 9.1, with ultrasound images. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by thoracic hypoplasia 
(Figures 9.7b,c and 9.9). The ultrasound diagnosis of 
thoracic hypoplasia, if severe, does not offer particular 
difficulties, provided that, when assessing the 4-chamber 
view, the operator bears this anomaly in mind. As 
already pointed out, the first impression is always that 
of a very enlarged but anatomically normal heart. 
However, if the suspicion of a possible skeletal dysplasia 
has already been raised, then the diagnosis is straightforward 
and it becomes easy to pick up the evident disproportion 
between a normal-sized heart and a hypoplastic 
thorax (Figure 9.7b). To provide an objective impression 
of thoracic hypoplasia, the thoracic circumference and 
area and the cardiothoracic ratio should be checked 
against the appropriate normal ranges for gestational 
age, using charts published in the literature1,2 (see the 
Appendix). However, it should be underlined that the 
cardiothoracic ratio is abnormal (> 95th centile) in both 
cardiomegaly and thoracic hypoplasia (Chapter 6), 
whereas by using the simple graphs of thoracic circumference 
or area versus gestational age, the diagnosis of 
thoracic hypoplasia is straightforward. In this regard, 
care should be taken in checking the effective gestational 
age of the index pregnancy, considering the difficulties 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS 
Table 9.1 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe micromelia (see also 
Figure 9.8) 
Index sign . Severe micromelia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous fractures + hypomineralization . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Severe ubiquitous hypomineralizationa . Hypophosphatasia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia + congenital heart . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
disease + polydactyly ± hypomineralization 
a: clavicle-sparing hypomineralization 
Table 9.2 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by rhizomelia of variable severity 
Index sign . Rhizomelia 
Additional signs . Frontal bossing ± mild macrocrania . Achondroplasia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± polydactyly/renal . Asphyxiating thoracic 
anomalies distrophy 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Postural deformities + ‘hitch-hiker’s . Diastrophic dysplasia 
thumb’ + micrognathia 

related to the fact that, in skeletal dysplasias, most biometric 
measures are indeed below the normal range. It is 
useful to remember that, except for some very rare anomalies 
such as Neu–Laxova syndrome (Chapter 10), the 
transverse cerebellar diameter is not generally affected 
and its biometry gives a reliable estimate of the effective 
gestational age. Other findings possibly indicative of 
severe thoracic hypoplasia can be searched for on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal trunk obtained with a 
ventral approach. On this view, the recognition of a dip 
at the thoraco-abdominal junction (Figure 9.7c and 
Chapter 6) further supports the diagnosis of severe thoracic 
hypoplasia. On the same view, at higher magnification, 
it can be appreciated that the heart occupies the 
whole of the anteroposterior diameter of the thorax. 
Similarly to micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia, if severe, is 
a feature of lethal dysplasias (Table 9.3). In skeletal dysplasias 
associated with severe thoracic hypoplasia, the 
death is the result of the severe secondary pulmonary 
hypoplasia. It is worth underlining that, in the sub-type 
of thanatophoric dysplasia not associated with the 
cloverleaf skull (type I), the length of the long bones may 
be unaffected: if the severe thoracic hypoplasia is not 
recognised this lethal abnormality can be overlooked 
(see page 28–29 in this chapter)! 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by fractures. The ultrasound 
recognition of a fracture is straigthforward in 
some cases, but can prove difficult and tricky in others, 
especially early in gestation. The positive aspect is that, if 
fractures have been confidently recognized, the diagnosis 
is made, for there is virtually only one disease, and one 
subtype of disease, that is associated with fractures in the 
2nd trimester, namely osteogenesis imperfecta type II! 
Of the other three subtypes of osteogenesis imperfecta, 
only type III can sometimes be recognized in the 3rd 
trimester, on the grounds of bowed and short femurs 
and tibiae. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by hypomineralization 
(Figures 9.7d, 9.10, and 9.11). The ultrasound detection 
of hypomineralization is usually made on the axial 
transthalamic view of the fetal head (Figure 9.7d), or, 
alternatively, on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile. 
A peculiar feature, in the case of hypomineralization of 
the calvarium, is the perfect depiction of the fetal brain 
(‘see how nicely this brain shows up!’), due to the lack of 
ultrasound absorption by the underossified proximal 
parietal bone; and the usually bright rim of the calvarium 
is barely visible (Figures 9.7d and 9.10). An additional 
feature is the softness of the calvarium: it is 
possible to significantly deform the fetal head by applying 
moderate pressure with the transducer (Figure 9.10). 
Once the occurrence of hypomineralization has been 
established, the next step is evaluation of the involved 
regions: the selective involvement or, on the contrary, 
the selective sparing of a given region may contribute to 
the differential diagnosis. As an example, in hypophosphatasia, 
the hypomineralization involves all the bones 
except the clavicles. A flowchart assisting in the differential 
diagnosis of the most common skeletal dysplasias 
characterized by hypomineralization is shown in Figure 
9.11; and, see also Table 9.4. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by micrognathia 
(Figure 9.12 and Table 9.5). Since the diagnosis of 
micrognathia may help in the differential diagnosis of 
skeletal dysplasias, a flowchart reporting the most common 
skeletal dysplasias characterized by this feature is 
shown in Figure 9.12. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by hydrops (Table 9.6) 
Usually, lethal skeletal dysplasias, especially at 12–14 
weeks of gestation, can be associated with fetal hydrops 
or cystic hygroma. Non-immune fetal hydrops is 
described in detail in Chapter 4. The most common 
skeletal dysplasias characterized by this feature are listed 
in Table 9.6. 
272 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 9.3 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(see also figure 9.9) 
Index sign . Thoracic hypoplasia 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia ± polydactyly / renal . Thoracic asphyxiating dysplasia 
anomalies (Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralizationa . Hypophosphatasia 
Additional signs . Micromelia + polydactyly + congential . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
heart disease ± hypomineralization 
a Clavicle-sparing hypomineralization. 
Note that both ostheogenesis imperfecta type II and condroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis van Creveld) are not listed here because 
in these two disorders, the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is variable. 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 273 
Figure 9.7 Signs of lethal skeletal 
dysplasias. (a) Micromelia. (b) Severe 
thoracic dysplasia; note the predominance 
of the heart over the thorax, 
and the abnormal shape of the ribs. (c) 
Severe thoracic hypoplasia. On a lowmagnification 
sagittal view of the fetal 
body, a dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction (arrow) is a marker of severe 
thoracic hypoplasia. (d) Calvarial 
hypomineralization. Diffuse regional 
hypomineralization is a feature of some 
lethal skeletal dysplasias. Note the 
absence of the hyperechoic rim due to 
the normal mineralization of the skull 
and the evidence of the CNS structures 
(arrowheads), due to the unblocked 
penetration of ultrasound waves. 
Thanatophoric 
dysplasia type I 
Osteogenesis 
imperfecta 
type II 
Hypophosphatasia 
Achondrogenesis 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Cloverleaf 
skull 
Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Main finding 
Severe 
micromelia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Ubiquitous 
fractures 
Hypomineralization 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia Micrognathia 
Hypomineralization 
Thoracic hypoplasia 
Figure 9.8 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micromelia. 
d
b 
c
a 

274 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Thanatophoric 
dysplasia type I 
Achondrogenesis 
Hypophosphatasia 
Asphyxiaitng 
thoracic dysplasia 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Main finding 
Moderate 
rhizomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital heart 
disease 
Polydactyly Renal anomalies 
Cloverleaf 
skull 
Severe 
micromelia Micrognathia Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Hypomineralization 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Figure 9.9 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring severe thoracic hypoplasia. Note that both ostheogenesis imperfecta type II and 
condroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis van Creveld) are not listed here because in these two disorders the degree of thoracic hypoplasia in variable. 
Figure 9.10 Signs of calvarial 
hypomineralization. In the case 
of calvarial hypomineralization, 
the skull is soft and can easily be 
indented by applying moderate 
pressure with the transducer 
(arroweheads). (a) Sagittal view 
(15 weeks of gestation): note the 
deformation of the skull against 
the anterior placenta. (b) Axial 
view: vivid demonstration of CNS 
structure due to the hypomineralization 
of the calvarium. (c) In the 
same case, by applying moderate 
pressure with the transducer, it is 
possible to deform the parietal 
area (arrowheads). 
c 
a b 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 275 
Osteogenesis 
imperfecta 
type II 
Achondrogenesis 
Hypophosphatasia 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s)a 
Main finding 
Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Ubiquitous 
fractures 
Micrognathia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Figure 9.11 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring hypomineralization. a: the presence/absence of hypomineralization in 
this group of syndromes varies in the 4 types. 
Table 9.4 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by diffuse hypomineralization 
Index sign . Hypomineralization 
Additional signs . Micromelia + fractures . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
Additional signs . Micromelia . Hypophosphatasiaa 
Additional signs . Micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia + congenital heart disease + . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s)b. 
polydactyly 
a Clavicle-sparing hypomineralization. 
b The presence/absence of hypomineralization in this group of syndromes varies in the 4 types. 

276 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.12 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micrognathia. 
Main finding 
Micrognathia 
Campomelic 
dysplasia 
Achondrogenesis 
Diastrophic 
dystrophy 
Fetal akynesia 
deformation 
sequence (FADS) 
Rhizomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Hypomineralization 
Bowed tibias 
(femurs) 
Rhizomelia Postural 
deformities 
Joint 
contractures 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Hitchhiker’s 
thumb 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Table 9.5 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micrognathia 
Index sign Micrognathia 
Additional signs . Micromelia + hypomineralization + . Achondrogenesis 
thoracic hypoplasia 
Additional signs . Bowed tibias and femurs + hypoplastic . Campomelic dysplasia 
scapula 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia + joint contractures . Diastrophic dysplasia 
(thumba) 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous joint contractures + hydrops . FADSb 
a ‘Hitch-hiker’s thumb’. 
b Fetal akinesia deformation sequence. 
Table 9.6 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by early hydrops/hygroma 
Index sign Hydrops 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Micromelia + fractures + . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
hypomineralization 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia ± polydactyly / renal . Asphyxiating thoracic distrophy 
anomalies (Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Micromelia + congential heart disease + Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
polydactyly 

Objectives.3,4 The primary objectives of 3D assessment 
of the fetal skeleton are the following: 
• multiplanar imaging of skeletal structures, aiming at 
the demonstration of anomalies not readily recognizable 
on two-dimensional ultrasound 
• surface-rendering reconstructions, to highlight abnormal 
postures and joint contractures 
• surface-rendering reconstructions¸ performed mainly 
with the maximum mode, to better assess normal and 
abnormal bones, which are more difficult to explore 
with conventional 2D ultrasound, such as the ribs or 
the skull sutures (see chapter 1). 
It is important to underline that the coronal volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C) mode, which allows a real-time 
representation of the coronal plane, coupled with the 
transparent maximum mode, makes the assessment of 
the skeleton much easier and more immediate than when 
using the conventional procedure of acquiring a volume 
and then postprocessing it. By using the VCI-C mode 
‘live’, it is possible to assess quickly and efficiently 
normal and abnormal fetal bones. 
Examination protocols. An introduction to 3D volume 
acquisition and processing is given in Chapter 1. We 
describe here the modalities with which 3D ultrasound 
is to be employed for the best assessment of the musculoskeletal 
system. As far as the rendering modes are 
concerned, the transparent maximum mode is the option 
of choice for assessment of the skeleton and sutures. As 
already mentioned, the use of the VCI-C mode reduces 
examination times and is the option of choice for assessment 
of the fetal skeleton. Once acquired, the volume 
may also be further postprocessed in order to improve 
even more the display of the region of interest. This 
is accomplished by adjusting the threshold and balance 
settings to obtain the best balance between the display 
of the bones and that of the overlying soft tissues. Two 
useful hints, for a better display of the skeleton, are to 
start the acquisition with a lower than normal gain 
setting on the 2D image and to use rather hard greyscale 
settings, such as those used in fetal echocardiography. 
Districts to explore 
Cranial sutures. One of most important advantages of 
3D ultrasound concerns the visualization of the cranial 
sutures with the transparent maximum mode. In particular, 
with a correct orthogonal approach to the suture 
to explore, it is possible to actually see the bony parts 
and the wide open sutures under normal and abnormal 
conditions5–7 (see Chapter 3 for details). 
Spine and ribs. The assessment of the ribcage also benefits 
from a 3D ultrasound approach: in addition to an 
overall assessment of its integrity, high-definition renderings 
of the cervical vertebrae and the occiput allow one 
to evaluate in detail possible anomalies of this tract of 
the spine, such as fusion of the vertebrae. However, it is 
in the assessment of the ribs that 3D ultrasound shows 
its advantages most clearly: the acquision of a volume 
including the whole of the thorax and its display with 
the transparent maximum mode make the detection of 
rib number and structural anomalies much easier than 
with 2D ultrasound. In particular, additional ribs, rib 
fractures, and/or deformities are easily detected using 
this technique (Figure 9.13). Also, 3D renderings of the 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 277 
Figure 9.13 Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering. (a) Upper spine and occipital bone. The image shows the cervicothoracic 
spine, the ribs, the scapulae (S), the clavicles (appearing as two oblique echoic bars just above the scapulae), and the occipital bone (Occ). 
(b) Lower spine and sacrum. The lower ribs, the lower spine (from the thoracic to the sacral vertebrae), and the iliac wings (sa) are clearly 
shown. (c) Thanatophoric dysplasia type I. As an example, a lateral sagittal view of the body demonstrates on the same image the 
extremely short ribs (arrowheads), and the short and thickened bones (like a French telephone receiver) of the upper limb (arrows). 
3D ULTRASOUND IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIA 
AND RELATED CONDITIONS 
a b c 

278 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.15 Three-dimensional image rendering. 
(a) Surface rendering: clubfoot. This image shows 
a clubfoot in the early 3rd trimester. Note the 
abnormal axis of the foot and the normal aspect 
of the foot and calf muscles. (b) Volume contrast 
imaging (VCI) plus maximum-mode rendering 
of a normal hand. This image demonstrates the 
normal bony structure of the hand at 27 weeks of 
gestation. Note how this image modality is able 
to clearly depict the bones of the metacarpus and 
the digits. (c) Maximum-mode rendering of an 
abnormal foot. This image demonstrates an 
abnormality of the bony structure of the toe, 
which is abducted and larger than normal. In this 
case, it was an isolated anomaly. 
lower spine with the iliac bones are useful for the assessment 
of caudal anomalies of the spine and/or the neural 
tube, which are often associated in spinal dysraphisms 
(Figure 9.14). 
Long bones and extremities. The use of 3D ultrasound 
in the assessment of limb anomalies includes both 
surface-mode and maximum-mode renderings, in order 
to display the overall appearance of the limb or the bony 
parts only (Figure 9.15). The surface-rendered appearance 
of a limb defect, be it a transverse defect or a clubfoot, 
can also be used to improve the communication of 
the diagnosis to the parents. On the other hand, maximum-
mode renderings allow one to accurately define 
possible focal bony defects and/or abnormal shapes of 
the long bones (Figure 9.13c). 
Anomalies detectable by 3D ultrasound only. In the 
case of skeletal abnormalities, it is common experience 
that the employment of 3D ultrasound contributes to 
reducing the examination time and increases the diagnostic 
confidence of the sonographer by enhancing the 
display of normal and abnormal bones. However, in 
addition to these advantages, there are some pathologic 
conditions that can be reliably diagnosed only if 3D 
ultrasound is used. These include delayed or abnornal 
ossification of the cranial sutures, anomalies of rib 
number or aspect (additional ribs or fusion of the ribs) 
and fusion of vertebral bodies and hemivertebrae. It is 
useful to add here that a significant number of facial 
anomalies (e.g., facial cleftings) are also better characterized 
and/or displayed by 3D ultrasound (Chapter 3). 
Figure 9.14 Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering of 
sacrum and iliac bones. With an adequate insonation angle, it is 
possible to demonstrate the sacral vertebrae and the iliac wings. 
c
a b 

Arthrogryposis and joint contractures (Table 9.7). 
Arthrogryposis is a condition characterized by fixed 
abnormal contractures of all muscles within a given 
anatomic area. It can be regional, affecting only the 
lower or upper limbs, or ubiquitous, affecting virtually 
all muscles, as in the fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS: Chapter 10). As already mentioned, if the 
contractures affect the upper limbs, these will probably 
appear flexed, lying on the lateral walls of the thorax, 
and with clenched hands. On the contrary, if the 
contractures involve the thighs, these will often lie 
extended and crossed, scissors-like, due to the fact that 
the quadriceps are more powerful than the femoral 
biceps. Although the anomalies of the neuromuscular 
transmission often involve all of the muscles at the same 
time, in some instances the disease is confined to the 
lower limbs: in these rarer cases, the knee joints may also 
appear flexed, abducted, and crossed. It is worth underlining 
that the time of onset of arthrogryposis is 
extremely variable, between 12 and 30 weeks.8 Severe 
joint contractures can be associated with a number of 
diseases and syndromes (Table 9.7), including both chromosomal 
(trisomy 18) and non-chromosomal anomalies. 
Ulnar deviation and clubfeet as syndromic indicators 
(Table 9.8). Both of these features may characterize some 
syndromes and osteomuscular disorders. It is worth 
underlining that in ulnar deviation, the wrist is fixedly 
and abnormally rotated towards the ulna; often, clenched 
hands and clynodactyly are associated because of the 
concurrent pathologic contraction of the digital flexor 
muscles of the forearm. In the case of clubfoot, the axis of 
the foot is no longer that of the lower leg, and therefore, 
on the sagittal view of the leg, the sole is also visible, with 
the foot drawn up and bent inward (Figure 9.15a). 
Polydactyly and ectrodactyly as syndromic indicators 
(Table 9.9 and 9.10 and Figures 9.16 and 9.17). Both 
of these conditions are frequently encountered in 
syndromes. Polydactyly is defined as postaxial if the sixth 
digit, which may or may not present a bony phalanx, is 
on the ulnar/fibular side after the fifth digit (Figure 9.18 
a–e). On the contrary, if the additional digit is located on 
the radial/tibial side, before the thumb/toe, which represents 
a much rarer finding, then it is defined as preaxial 
(Figure 9.18f). Care must be taken in the ultrasound diagnosis 
of suspected polydactyly: if the hand is insonated 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 279 
Table 9.7 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions possibly associated with arthrogryposis (joint 
contractures) 
Index sign . Arthrogryposis 
Lower limbs+ . Micrognathia + microphthalmia . Cerebro-oculofacio-skeletal 
syndrome 
Lower limbs+ . Congenital heart disease + exomphalos, etc . Trisomy 18 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Microcephaly + cataract + ACC a+ 
Cerebellar hypoplasia + syndactyly . Neu–Laxova syndrome 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Micrognathia ± hydrops . FADSb 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Micrognathia + pterygia + hydrops . Multiple pterygium syndrome 
a Agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
b Fetal akynesia deformation sequence. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF JOINT CONTRACTURES, NEUROMUSCULAR 
DISEASES, AND ANOMALIES OF THE EXTREMITIES 
Table 9.8 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions possibly associated with clubfoot 
Index sign . Clubfoot 
Additional signs . Neural tube defects + banana signa . Lower spine neural tube defects 
Additional signs . Bowed tibias and femurs + micrognathia . Campomelic dysplasia 
Additional signs . Focal femoral hypoplasia + micrognathia . Femoral hypoplasia–unusual 
facies syndrome 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous arthrogriposis + pterygia . Multiple pterygium syndrome 
Additional signs . Arthrogryposis + micrognathia ± hydrops . FADSb 
a Distorted banana-shaped cerebellum. 
b Fetal akinesia deformation sequence. 

280 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 9.9 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions characterized by polydactyly (see also Figure 9.16) 
Index sign . Polydactyly 
Additional signs . Micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia + . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
congenital heart disease 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + micrognathia + . Trisomy 13 
multiple anomalies 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia + renal anomalies . Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Polycystic kidney + cephalocele . Meckel–Gruber syndrome 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + acromesomelia . Chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome) 
Table 9.10 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions characterized by ectrodactyly (see also Figure 9.17) 
Index sign . Ectrodactyly 
Additional signs . Phocomelia + cleft lip/palate . Roberts syndrome 
Additional signs . Aplasia radii + micrognathia + multiple . Trisomy 18 
anomalies 
Additional signs . Cleft lip/palate or malar hypoplasia . Ectrodactyly–Ectodermal 
dysplasia (EEC) 
Additional signs . Micrognathia + external ear anomalies . Nager syndrome 
Additional signs . None . Split-hand–split foot syndrome 
Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia (Ellis-Van 
Creveld syndrome) 
Trisomy 13 
Polydactyly 
Main finding 
Asphyxiating 
thoracic distrophy 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Meckel-Gruber 
syndrome 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Acromesomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Renal anomalies 
Moderate 
rhizomelia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Various 
malformations Micrognathia 
Cephalocele Polycystic kidney 
Figure 9.16 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring ectrodactyly. 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 281 
Roberts 
syndrome 
Trisomy 18 
Ectrodactylyectodermal 
dysplasia( EEC) 
Nager 
syndrome 
Ectrodactyly 
Main finding 
External ear 
anomalies 
Maxillary 
hypopalsia 
Micrognathia 
Cleft 
lip/palate 
Phocomelia 
Aplasia radii 
Various 
malformations Micrognathia 
Cleft 
lip/palate 
Figure 9.17 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring polydactyly. 
Figure 9.18 Polydactyly. (a) 
Postaxial polydactyly of the 
hand (arrow) at 20 weeks 
of gestation. (b) Confirmation 
at autopsy. (c) Postaxial polydactyly 
of the hand, consisting 
of an edematous appendix 
(arrow): 3D surface-rendering 
at 22 weeks of gestation. (d) 
Confirmation at autopsy. (e) 
Postaxial polydactyly of the 
foot (arrow) at 21 weeks of 
gestation: autopsy. (f) A rare 
case of preaxial polydactyly 
of the foot, in a family with 
dominant inherited polydactyly 
(arrow). 
f 
e 
d 
c
a b 

with its ulnar side proximal to the transducer, should the 
additional digit be represented by a soft appendix only 
passively floating in the amniotic fluid, this may be hidden 
by the metacarpal bones, due to gravity (Figure 
9.18c). Hence, to exclude or confirm the presence of 
hexadactyly, the hand has to be imaged either with the 
digits upwards or with the its radial aspect proximal to 
the transducer: in these positions, soft appendices would 
also easily be spotted on the ulnar margin of the hand. 
Ectrodactyly is the absence of one or more digits, 
although the term is used almost synonymously with 
thumb aplasia, since this is the variant most commonly 
seen in the fetus. However, it should be underlined that 
the absence of more than one digit or their fusion (syndactyly) 
into two gross digits (lobster-claw anomaly) are 
highly indicative of very rare conditions such as Nager 
syndrome and ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia (EEC), 
respectively (Figure 9.19). 
282 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.19 Ectrodactyly – lobster claw anomaly. 
(a) On ultrasound, the hand consists of only two 
digits. (b) Confirmation at autopsy. (c) The foot 
also consists of only the toe and another large digit. 
(d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
c d
a b 

Premises. Skeletal dysplasias include a group of diseases 
sharing an extremely low risk of chromosomal abnormalities 
and a reduced risk of associated malformations. The 
required obstetric management is rather limited, owing to 
the fact that most of the skeletal dysplasias diagnosed in 
the fetus are lethal, and, if diagnosed within the legal time 
limit for termination of pregnancy (where this is allowed), 
most will result in termination. Furthermore, karyotyping 
should be performed only in the few cases in which a differential 
diagnosis with aneuploidies need be carried out, 
as in the case of diffuse joint contractures, which may be 
associated with trisomies 18 and 13 and the neuroarthrogryposes. 
(Table 9.7). The perinatal management is also 
rather limited, due to the fact that the non-lethal forms 
will need some respiratory assistance and physiokinesiotherapy 
in the long-term. This is why, in this section of the 
chapter, the discussion of the individual dysplasias will 
deal only with ultrasound diagnosis, differential diagnosis 
and a few notes on survival and quality of life for nonlethal 
conditions. It should also be noted that ‘Incidence’ 
in the summarizing box at the start of each section refers 
not to the overall frequency of the given dysplasia, but 
rather to its frequency within the group of skeletal 
dysplasias as a whole: in fact, the overall incidence of these 
anomalies is rather low. Only the most commonly 
detected skeletal dysplasias will be described in this chapter, 
in keeping with the practical approach of this book: in our 
opinion, it would be confusing for the reader to be confronted 
with 200 or more different diseases, over 100 of 
which will probably never be detected in the fetus. The 
reader in search of further details on skeletal dysplasias 
not described in this chapter (as well as any other congenital 
syndromic condition) may refer to the various 
Medline websites (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), including the 
OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) database. 
This chapter has also been structured in such a way as 
to overcome the difficulties that may be encountered 
by the operators in the differential diagnosis of skeletal 
dysplasias: these are listed in alphabetical order, to facilitate 
their retrieval, and several flowcharts supporting the 
differential diagnosis by the main ultrasound signs, have 
already been presented. Finally, it should be noted 
that polyhydramnios is an almost ubiquitous finding in 
skeletal dysplasias and neuroarthrogryposes. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 283 
MAJOR SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS 
Figure 9.20 Achondrogenesis (16 
weeks of gestation). (a) Micromelia. 
(b) Severe micromelia and hypomineralization 
of the sacrum (arrows). 
(c) Severe rib shortening (arrowheads). 
(d) Severe, lethal, thoracic 
hypoplasia. Note the heart occupying 
the whole of the thorax. (e) Calvarial 
hypomineralization. Note how the 
calvarium can be deformed by a moderate 
pressure applied with the transducer 
(arrowheads) Note also the 
significant micrognathia (arrow). (f) 
With a lateral approach, the usual 
skull hyperechoic contour is not visible 
and the brain shows up in detail. 
This is due to the severe hypomineralization 
of the skull. 
a c e 
b d f 
ACHONDROGENESIS 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severe micromelia, with barely visible and curved bones. Severe thoracic hypoplasia. Diffuse 
hypomineralization of variable degree. 
Outcome. Lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive (25%). De novo mutations with autosomal dominant 
inheritance. 

284 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ACHONDROPLASIA 
Incidence. Relatively frequent: 1/10 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Rhizomelia, mild late-onset macrocrania, and low nasal bridge. 
Outcome. Normal lifespan. No risk of mental retardation. Orthopedic and pulmonary long-term sequelae due to 
the relatively small thorax. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Heterozygotic: due to a de novo mutation, with very low recurrence risk. 
Autosomal dominant inheritance with high incidence if one or both parents are affected (50% and 75% recurrence 
rates respectively). 
Definition. There are two types of achondroplasia 
(OMIM 100800) defined according to their inheritance 
pattern: homozygotic and heterozygotic. The 
former type, which is almost invariably lethal (severe 
pulmonary hypoplasia) is by far the rarer variant, due 
to the fact that it occurs only if both parents are 
affected. The heterozygotic variant is the commoner 
one and is the one that is usually detected at birth and, 
in some cases, in utero. The incidence at birth is relatively 
high, considering the extremely low prevalence 
of other skeletal dysplasias, with 1 case per 10 000 
livebirths. 
Definition. There are different subtypes of achondrogenesis 
that differ in inheritance pattern, genetics, and 
phenotype; however, the classification is continuously 
evolving and is not completely clear. Two main subtypes 
have been recognized, differing in inheritance 
pattern (autosomal recessive for type I and autosomal 
dominant for type II) and in a few sonographic 
aspects (see below). In type I, or Parenti–Fraccaro 
type, the ribs tend to be thin, often with multiple fractures, 
and the cranium is disproportionately large due 
to marked edema of soft tissues; in fact, hydrops is 
frequently associated. Type II, or Langer–Saldino 
type, is characterized by virtual absence of ossification 
in the vertebral column, sacrum, and pubic 
bones. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation in the COL2A1 
gene coding for collagen type II has been found in some 
cases of type II. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is based 
on the recognition of micromelia (Figure 9.20a,b), 
thoracic hypoplasia (Figure 9.20c,d), hypomineralization 
(Figure 9.20e,f), and micrognathia (Figure 9.20e). In 
particular, the long bones appear barely visible and 
curved and the thorax extremely hypoplasic due to the 
underdeveloped ribs. The hypomineralization involves 
predominatly the spine, pelvis, and calvarium. Severe 
micrognathia is also regularly associated. If the condition 
is recognized at 12–14 weeks of gestation, which is 
likely, hydrops and diffuse subcutaneous edema (‘spaceman’s 
suit’) may also be seen. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all lethal 
conditions characterized by micromelia plus thoracic 
hypoplasia plus hypomineralization (Figures 
9.8, 9.9, and 9.11), such as the lethal variant of 
osteogenesis imperfecta (type II), hypophosphatasia, 
and thanatophoric dysplasia. The constant occurrence 
of fractures in osteogenesis imperfecta type II, 
the lack of micrognathia in hypophosphatasia, and 
the only mild hypomineralization in thanatophoric 
dysplasia, which often also shows curved femurs, 
are the selective ultrasound findings that should contribute 
to reaching the correct final diagnosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Achondrogenesis 
is always lethal, due to the severity of the skeletal 
underdevelopment. The severe pulmonary hypoplasia 
secondary to the ribcage hypoplasia is likely to represent 
the actual determinant of death, should fetuses with 
achondrogenesis reach the neonatal period. 
Recurrence risk. Achondrogenesis can behave in an 
autosomal dominant or recessive manner. However, 
autosomal dominant forms are by definition due to 
de novo mutations, because of the lethality of the condition. 
Therefore, only the 25% risk associated with the 
recessive inheritance pattern should be considered. The 
real issue is that it is not always possible to define exactly 
the type of inheritance. 

Etiology and pathogenesis. The gene defect responsible for 
the disease has been identified in a de novo mutation of 
the gene for the fibroblast growth factor receptor 
(FGFR3), at chromosome 4p16.3. Ninety-seven percent 
of achodroplasic individuals show the same mutation, 
namely a guanine-to-adenine transition at nucleotide 
1138 of the complementary DNA. This mutation prevents 
binding of FGF to its receptor, which in turn impairs bone 
growth. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is difficult, 
since the rhizomelia is of late-onset, becoming evident 
only at 26–28 weeks of gestation. The femur and 
humerus are slightly–moderately shorter than normal, 
showing biometry in the 1st–5th centile range (Figure 
9.21a); in addition, the morphology of the affected long 
bones is normal, which makes the diagnosis even more 
difficult. In some cases, the involvement of the humerus 
is more severe than that of the femur. Additional criteria 
that, if present, may support the ultrasound diagnosis of 
achondroplasia are a tendency to macrocrania and a 
low nasal bridge. However, both of these features are 
difficult to diagnose (Figure 9.21b). To overcome this 
inconvenience, some authors have proposed the use of 
the HC/FL (head circumference/femur length) or 
BPD/FL (biparietal diameter/femur length) ratios, which 
should become abnormal earlier than the measurement 
of the single parameters, due to the fact that the biometric 
parameters nominator and denominator should deviate 
in opposite directions, i.e., towards or above the 95th 
centile for the cranial biometric variables, or towards or 
below the 5th centile for the femur length (see the 
Appendix). In addition, a ‘trident’ position of the hands 
(Figure 9.21: inset) has been described among the possible 
ultrasound features of achondroplasia. As is evident, 
most of the aforementioned ultrasound features are very 
difficult to spot and confirm with the exception of moderate 
rhizomelia. These diagnostic difficulties, together 
with the late onset of most sonographically detectable 
signs, are responsible for the very low prenatal detection 
rate of achondroplasia. To reach a definite diagnosis of 
achondroplasia should short or borderline femur length 
and a tendency to macrocrania be detected in the 2nd 
trimester, a search for the gene mutation responsible for 
most cases of achondroplasia in fetal blood or amniocytes 
can be requested, although, in most cases of short 
femur this procedure will result only in the exclusion of 
achondroplasia as a likely cause of the femur growth 
deficit. However, in pregnancies at risk for achondroplasia, 
such as those in which one of the parents is affected, 
this search may be done on the chorionic villi, so that the 
diagnosis of achondroplasia can be confirmed or 
excluded at the end of the 1st trimester, and this possibility 
should be mentioned to couples with one affected 
individual. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
should include the other conditions that are possibly 
characterized by a borderline or short femur. The 
first, and the easiest to rule out, is trisomy 21: a simple 
karyotype can serve this purpose. In addition, the 
same cells may be used to extract the DNA needed for 
the diagnosis of achondroplasia. The other most 
important condition to rule out is early-onset atypical 
fetal growth restriction (FGR), the onset of which 
may rarely be characterized by selective underdevelopment 
of the long bones. The other skeletal dysplasias 
that may enter in the differential diagnosis, 
due to the presence of moderate rhizomelia (at least 
in the 2nd trimester), are campomelic dysplasia, 
which is often characterized by micrognathia, and, 
always by bowed bones, chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(Ellis–Van Creveld Syndrome), which is associated 
with significant thoracic hypoplasia, polydactyly, and 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 285 
Figure 9.21 Achondroplasia (24 weeks of gestation). (a) 
Moderately short femur. Compare the menstrual age (23 weeks 
and 3 days, arrow) with the dates corresponding to the length of 
the femur (19 weeks and 5 days). (b) Midsagittal view of the fetal 
profile, showing the tendency to macrocrania and the low nasal 
bridge (arrow). The inset shows the so-called ‘trident hand’, which 
is another typical feature of achondroplasia. 
b
a 

congenital heart disease (50% of cases); and the 
non-lethal variants of osteogenesis imperfecta (types 
I, III and IV), which may feature late-onset fractures 
and bowing of long bones. 
• Note. When assessing fetal growth and biometry one 
should use nomograms customized at least for the ethnic 
origin of the studied population: the charts for 
head, abdomen, and long-bone biometry usually available 
in most ultrasound systems are those developed 
many years ago by American or British authors.9–12 If 
these curves are used to assess the biometry of fetuses 
of Asian couples, or, to a lesser extent, those of Latin 
origin, the number of cases featuring long-bone biometry 
below the 5th centile would be higher than 
expected, due to the significant differences in height of 
the two populations. Care should be taken to use biometric 
charts developed from fetal populations of the 
same ethnic origin, or, if these are not available, from 
the most closely similar populations, to limit falsepositive 
diagnoses of short femur.13 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The life expectancy 
is virtually normal, as is the quality of life. The only difficulties 
that most achondroplasic individuals may 
encounter are related to architectural barriers, because of 
their short stature, and to respiratory limitations related to 
the small thorax. The only other significant problem concerns 
the stenotic vertebral canal, which is responsible in 
some cases for peripheral neurologic deficits. 
Recurrence risk. Achondroplasia, in the heterozygotic 
variant, is always due to a de novo mutation. Hence, the 
recurrence risk is definitely low. On the contrary, the 
recurrence risk reaches 50% if one parent is affected and 
is as high as 75% if both parents are affected, being as 
this disorder is inherited as a dominant trait. 
286 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ASPHYXIATING THORACIC DYSTROPHY (JEUNE SYNDROME) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Thoracic hypoplasia. Moderate rhizomelia. Renal anomalies. 
Outcome. Lethal in 60% of cases due to pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive. 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. The name underlines the main feature of the 
disorder, namely the extremely small thorax. The real 
incidence of the disease (OMIM 208500) is not known, 
although it is a rare disorder. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A locus has been mapped to 
15q13. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The main ultrasound finding that 
leads to the diagnosis is the extremely severe thoracic 
hypoplasia (Figure 9.22a, c, d). The additional findings, 
such as moderate rhizomelia and renal anomalies, are not 
always easy to recognize on ultrasound (Figure 9.22b). It 
should be noted that this condition may escape prenatal 
diagnosis, especially in non-lethal cases; in fact, the long 
bones may be only moderately affected (moderate rhizomelia) 
and the thoracic hypoplasia is not always severe. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should take into consideration 
chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis–van Creveld 
syndrome), because of the mild to moderate degree of 
limb shortening. However, chondroectodermal dysplasia 
is also characterized by frequent cardiac defects 
(although these are often represented by simple atrial 
septal defects) and by polydactyly (mainly of the 
hands), which is absent in Jeune syndrome. In addition, 
the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is higher in the latter 
disorder than in chondroectodermal dysplasia. To a 
lesser extent, the differential diagnosis may include the 
other skeletal dysplasias with severe thoracic dysplasia, 
such as achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, 
hypophosphatasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. 
However, all of these disorders are also characterized 
by severe micromelia, which is absent in asphyxiating 
thoracic dystrophy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The neonatal 
mortality rate is 60% with the cause of death being 
severe secondary pulmonary hypoplasia. Surviving 
neonates will have short stature, renal and (above all) 
cardiovascular problems, always related to the degree of 
thoracic hypoplasia. Intelligence is normal. 
Recurrence risk. Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy has an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% 
recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case of termination of 
pregnancy, a confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct counseling 
and for advising early ultrasound monitoring of 
the next pregnancy in referral centers. 

Definition. The term ‘campomelic’ (from Ancient Greek 
camptos = bowed) refers to the abnormal curvature of the 
long bones, which is the most peculiar anomaly in this disease. 
The incidence of campomelic dysplasia (OMIM 
114290) is low, with only 0.02 cases per 10 000 live births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The mutation responsible for 
the disease, which always occurs as a de novo mutation, 
has been identified in the SOX9 allele, which codes for 
the SRY-box 9 protein, expressed in the testis and the 
fetal skeleton. The body distribution of this protein 
explains both the bone abnormalities and the sex reversal 
(see below), which is typical of affected males. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis can 
sometimes be rather difficult because of the extreme 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 287 
Figure 9.22 Asphyxiating thoracic 
dystrophy – Jeune syndrome (20 weeks 
of gestation). (a) Coronal view of the thorax, 
showing severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrows), with the heart (H) squeezed into 
the center of the thorax. (b) Axial view 
of the abdomen, showing the horseshoe 
kidney (arrowheads). (c) Axial view of the 
thorax, confirming severe hypoplasia: the 
heart is almost outside the ribcage due to 
the extremely reduced dimensions of 
the thorax. (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Note the severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrowheads). 
CAMPOMELIC DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. Very rare: 0.02/10 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Bowed tibias and, to a lesser extent, femurs. Scapular hypoplasia. Micrognathia. Sex 
reversal in male fetuses. 
Outcome. Lethal in most cases. Rare cases of long-term survival. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Almost always due to a de novo mutation, with very low recurrence risk. 
In the rare autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, the recurrence rate is 25%. 
a
b 
c
d 

phenotypic variability of the syndrome. The ultrasound 
features indicative of campomelic dysplasia are bowing 
of variable degree of the tibias, femurs, and humeri 
(Figures 9.23a–c,e), micrognathia, inconstantly (Figure 
9.23d), sex reversal in male fetuses, and scapular 
hypoplasia (which is difficult to detect in utero). In particular, 
bowing involves the tibia and, to a lesser extent, 
the femur; the fibula can be hypoplastic, or sometimes 
completely absent. Also, the humerus and the ulna may 
be bowed, but in a significantly smaller number of cases. 
Besides, it should be noted that the long bones are 
bowed in the sagittal plane: therefore, if the bone shaft is 
visualized with a lateral approach, severe bowing may 
not show up. Talipes and micrognathia are often associated, 
while congenital heart disease is found in only onethird 
of cases. Care should be taken in diagnosing sex 
reversal in male fetuses, since this may consist of a bifid 
scrotum with a micropenis only, or may feature real 
ambiguous or female-like genitalia. 
• Differential diagnosis. This involves mainly the 
non-lethal forms of osteogenesis imperfecta (types I, 
III and IV). In fact, in the small number of cases of 
non-lethal osteogenesis imperfecta variants that are 
diagnosed in utero, the most common abnormal 
finding is late-onset bowing of long bones; and this is 
similar to what occurs in campomelic dysplasia. 
The detection of calvarium hypomineralization (in 
the osteogenesis imperfecta variants) may help in the 
differential diagnosis: however, this is an all but 
inconstant finding, and, in the non-lethal variants, of 
extremely variable degree as well. Much more rarely, 
campomelic dysplasia should be differentiated from 
incomplete variants of hypophosphatasia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Campomelic 
dysplasia is almost always lethal, because of the severity 
of the ubiquitous laryngotracheomalacia. In very 
rare instances, survival until adolescence has been 
reported. 
Recurrence risk. Since it is almost always due to a de 
novo mutation, the recurrence risk is insignificant except 
for the very rare cases in which an autosomal recessive 
inheritance pattern has been found, with a consequent 
25% recurrence risk. 
288 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CHONDROECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA (ELLIS–VAN CREVELD SYNDROME) 
Incidence. Very rare: 1/60 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Acromesomelia and moderately severe thoracic hypoplasia. Post-axial polydactyly of hands 
and, rarely, of feet. Congenital heart disease (atrial septal defect). 
Outcome. Lethal in 50% of cases. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Figure 9.23 Campomelic dysplasia 
(22 weeks of gestation). 
(a) Anterior bowing of the tibia. 
(b) Concomitant bowing of the 
femur. (c) Low-magnification 
view of another case showing 
mild bowing of the femur. (d) 
3D surface rendering: moderate 
micrognathia (arrow). (e) 
3D maximum-mode rendering 
demonstrating the abnormal 
features of the femur (arrows). 
(f) Specimen after termination 
of pregnancy: note the moderate 
shortening of the limbs. 
e f 
c d 
a b 

Definition. The name chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(OMIM 225500) refers to the main features of the syndrome, 
the anomaly of the cartilagineous layer between 
the diaphysis and the epiphysis and the dysplasia of 
the ectodermal tissues (nails and teeth). This very rare 
condition (1/60 000 live births) is an autosomal recessive 
disease with variable phenotypic expression. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation in chromosome 
4p16 has been found; this is the same allele involved in 
achondroplasia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The signs of the ectodermal dysplasia 
(nail dysplasia, hypodontia, and delayed eruption) 
are not recognizable by ultrasound. Ultrasound 
diagnosis of chondroectodermal dysplasia is based on 
detection of the following signs: mild to moderate 
acromesomelia; moderately severe thoracic hypoplasia 
with short ribs (Figures 9.24a, 9.25a); postaxial polydactyly, 
which involves the hands in virtually 100% of 
the cases and the feet in significant lower percentage of 
cases (10–25%) (Figure 9.24b and Figure 9.25b,c); and 
congenital heart disease, although the heart defect most 
frequently associated with chondroectodermal dysplasia, 
namely atrial septal defect, is difficult to diagnose in 
the fetus because of the patency of the foramen ovale 
(Figure 9.24a). 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly thoracic 
asphyxiating dystrophy (Jeune syndrome) and the 
group of short-rib polydactyly syndromes. In particular, 
condroectodermal dysplasia is characterized by 
thoracic hypoplasia of variable degree and polydactyly, 
whereas, in thoracic asphyxiating dystrophy, 
the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is significantly more 
pronounced and polydactyly is absent. Also short-rib 
polydactyly syndromes present more severe thoracic 
hypoplasia and, above all, micromelia, which is absent 
in thoracic asphyxiating dystrophy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia shows a 50% infant mortality rate, which is 
related to the severity of the thoracic hypoplasia and the 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 289 
Figure 9.24 Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia – Ellis–Van Creveld 
syndrome (20 weeks of gestation) 
(a) Moderate thoracic hypoplasia 
and atrioventricular septal defect. 
(b) Postaxial polydactyly of one 
hand (arrowhead). 
Figure 9.25 Chondroectodermal dysplasia – (Ellis–Van Creveld 
syndrome) (20 weeks of gestation): specimen after termination 
of pregnancy. (a) Moderate thoracic hypoplasia (arrowheads). (b) 
Postaxial polydactyly of feet (arrowhead). (c) Postaxial polydactyly 
of hands (arrowhead). 
a b 
c 
a
b 

consequent severe cardiopulmonary problems. Survivors 
have normal intelligence but short stature. The need to 
correct the cardiac septal defect does not affect survival 
or quality of life, if the respiratory problems related to 
the thoracic hypoplasia have been overcome. The signs 
of the ectodermal dysplasia are easier to approach, 
although dentition defects often require orthodontic 
procedures. 
Recurrence risk. The disease is inherited with an autosomal 
recessive pattern, which means that there is a 25% 
risk of recurrence after a pregnancy with an affected 
fetus/neonate. Therefore, in the case of termination of 
pregnancy, a confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct counseling 
and for advising early ultrasound monitoring of 
the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
290 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
DIASTROPHIC DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. ‘Hitch-hiker’s thumb, joint contractures, micrognathia. 
Outcome. Lethal in 25% of cases. In survivors, severe muscular and postural handicap due to the joint 
contractures and the kyphoscoliosis with spinal cord compression. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. This extremely rare skeletal dysplasia is 
defined as ‘diastrophic’ in relation to its main features: 
postural abnormalities and joint contractures. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The underlying genetic defect 
consists of a mutation in the DTDST gene, located on 
chromosome 5q32–33.1. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The key diagnostic finding on 
ultrasound, in addition to ubiquitous joint contractures, 
is the so-called ‘hitch-hikes thumb’: the first digit is fixed 
in extreme abduction because of the contractures of the 
extensor muscles, while the hand shows ulnar deviation 
and the other digits are clenched (Figure 9.26). Other 
signs detectable on ultrasound are severe rhizomelia, 
flexion contractures of the elbows, talipes equinovarus, 
and micrognathia (see Figures 10.18 and 10.28). 
• Differential diagnosis. This involves mainly the neuroarthrogryposes, 
in which the bone length is not 
affected. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Diastrophic dysplasia 
is associated with a 25% infant mortality rate, 
mainly related to severe respiratory obstruction. 
Survivors experience significant limitations in physical 
activity due to the severe kyphoscoliosis and the joint 
contractures. Kyphoscoliosis may also be responsible for 
symptomatic spinal cord compression. 
Recurrence risk. This disorder shows an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern with variable expression. 
This yields a 25% recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case 
of termination of pregnancy, confirmation of the ultrasound 
diagnosis by autopsy is of the utmost importance 
for correct counseling and for advising early ultrasound 
monitoring of the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
Figure 9.26 Dyastrophic dysplasia. The image shows the ‘hitchhiker’s 
thumb’ (arrowhead) typical of this disorder, which is due to 
contracture of the extensor of the thumb and the flexors of the 
other digits. 

Definition. This disorder is characterized by a defect in 
serum and tissue alkaline phosphatase. Only the most 
severe, lethal form (of the three recognized) can be 
detected in the fetus (OMIM 241500). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The basic defect concerns the 
tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) 
gene, which maps to chromosome 1p36.1–p34. Different 
mutations within the same locus have been 
described. The degree of malfunction of the bone isoform 
correlates with the severity of the phenotypic 
expression. The severity ranges from clinically inapparent 
cases diagnosed only on the basis of biochemical 
features to lethal cases detected in the fetus, the latter 
showing an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based on the detection of 
severe micromelia, severe thoracic hypoplasia, diffuse 
hypomineralization involving virtually all of the bones 
with the exception of the clavicles (Figure 9.27), and 
hydrops and subcutaneous edema (‘spacesuit’) in the 
case of early (12–14 weeks) detection. 
• Differential diagnosis. Hypophosphatasia should be 
differentiated from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias 
presenting with micromelia and thoracic hypoplasia, 
namely achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, 
and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. It should be 
underlined that in some cases a final diagnosis cannot 
be reached on the basis of the ultrasound findings. In 
general, hypomineralization with clavicle sparing is 
typical of hypophosphatasia. Micrognathia, which is 
present in achondrogenesis, is absent in hypophosphatasia, 
while fractures are characteristic of osteogenesis 
imperfecta type II. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The most severe 
type of hypophosphatasia (the only type detectable in 
the fetus) is always lethal. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 291 
HYPOPHOSPHATASIA 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia, severe hypomineralization (clavicles spared). Hydrops and 
subcutaneous edema if detected at 12–14 weeks. 
Outcome. The forms detectable in utero are always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Figure 9.27 Hypophosphatasia (14 weeks of gestation). The 
transvaginal scan (10 MHz transducer) shows; (a) complete 
absence of calvarial mineralization (arrowheads); (b,c) multiplanar 
imaging of the fetal body demonstrating complete absence of 
mineralization involving virtually all districts with the significant 
exception of the clavicles, that are spared (arrows). In the sagittal 
plane (b), due to the transparent ribs, the moderately hyperechoic 
lung is also visible below the clavicle. On the coronal view 
(c), the complete absence of mineralization of the calvarium and 
the spine allows a neat unobscured demonstration of the spinal 
cord and the brain, with the two lateral ventricles and the 
choroid plexuses (Arrows: clavicles). 
b 
a 

Definition. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) comprises a 
spectrum of congenital disorders characterized by very 
fragile bones. Four types have been identified; of these 
types I and IV are not detectable in the fetus, since the 
fractures occur only after birth. Type III can sometimes 
be recognised in the 3rd trimester. The lethal OI type II is 
the only one that can be consistently detected in utero. 
The incidence of OI is relatively high, with 0.4 cases per 
10 000 live births, half of which are represented by type 
II (OMIM 166210). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. OI is due to a mutation in 
one of the two genes involved in the production of collagen 
type I (COLIA1 and COLIA2). Since this type of 
collagen is present in bones, tendons, tooth enamel, and 
sclera, the anomaly in collagen I is the cause of all 
expressions of the disease in the various subtypes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound findings described 
below refer to OI type II only. The main sonographic 
features of this disorder are diffuse hypomineralization 
292 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Recurrence risk. Hypophosphatasia has an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern, which determines the 
25% recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case of termination 
of pregnancy, confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct 
counseling and for advising early ultrasound monitoring 
of the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent: 0.4/10 000 live births, 50% of which are accounted for by type II. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Type II: ubiquitous and diffuse fractures, thoracic hypoplasia, hypomineralization of the 
calvarium. Type III: late onset bowing of long bones and fractures. Types I and IV are not diagnosable in the fetus. 
Outcome. Lethal in type II. Motor disability of various forms in type III. Recently, therapy with bisphosphonates 
and stem cell transplantation have given good results in the non-lethal forms. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. However, all cases are due to 
de novo mutations, and therefore the recurrence risk is very low, although some authors have reported a 6% risk. 
Figure 9.28 Osteogenesis 
imperfecta type II (lethal)(16 
weeks of gestation). (a) On 
transvaginal ultrasound, the 
complete hypomineralization 
of the calvarium is evident 
(arrowheads). (b) Axial view 
of the thorax: abnormal ribs 
with thoracic hypoplasia. (c) 
Fractured and bowed femur 
(arrow). (d) Fractured tibia, 
with an acute angle deformation 
(arrow). 
c d 
a b 
OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA (OI) 

of the calvarium (Figure 9.28a); thoracic hypoplasia of 
variable degree (Figure 9.28b), sometimes associated 
with rib fractures; and diffuse and early fractures, causing 
severe micromelia (Figure 9.28c, d). In the type III 
variant, the ultrasound diagnosis is made in only a 
minority of cases during the late 2nd or early 3rd 
trimester, following the recognition of late-onset bowing 
of long bones and, rarely, of fractures. 
• Differential diagnosis. OI type II should be differentiated 
from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias 
presenting with micromelia and calvarial 
hypomineralization, namely, achondrogenesis, 
and hypophosphatasia. It should be underlined 
that in some cases a final diagnosis cannot be 
reached on the basis of the ultrasound findings. In 
general, hypomineralization with clavicle sparing 
is typical of hypophosphatasia. Micrognathia, 
which is present in achondrogenesis, is absent in 
hypophosphatasia, while fractures are characteristic 
of OI type II. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. OI type II is 
invariably lethal. OI type III shows motor disability of 
variable severity (kyphosis and fractures) and worsening 
with age, due to the extreme fragility of the bones. By 
adulthood, hearing loss (otosclerosis), a need for walking 
aids, and dentition problems are extremely frequent. 
Types I and IV, which cannot be detected in the fetus, are 
associated with a better prognosis. In the non-lethal variants, 
promising results have recently been obtained with 
oral bisphoposphonates (aledronate and pamidronate). 
These are synthetic pyrophosphate analogs that seem to 
increase bone mineral density while decreasing bone 
remodeling markers, pain, and fracture rate in infants and 
children with OI.14 Experimentally, transplantation of 
totipotent stem cells that may differentiate into osteocytes 
has been attempted with some success.15 
Recurrence risk. OI type II shows an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern. However, all cases are due to de novo 
mutations, and therefore the recrrence risk is very low, 
although some authors have reported a 6% risk. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 293 
SHORT-RIB POLYDACTYLY SYNDROMES (SRPS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. Four subtypes have been identified. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia with short ribs, polydactyly. In some cases, cardiac defects too. 
Regional hypomineralization, in some cases. 
Outcome. Always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive. 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. The short-rib polydactyly syndromes (SRPS) 
comprise basically four subtypes (Saldino–Noonan, 
Majewsky, Verma–Naumoff, and Beemer–Langer). All 
are characterized by micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia 
with short ribs, and postaxial polydactyly. Some feature 
other anomalies, including median cleft lip, congenital 
heart disease (transposition of the great arteries) and 
renal dysplasia. However, there is significant phenotypic 
overlap among the different subtypes and this has been 
controversially interpreted as being due to variable 
expression or to genetic heterogeneity. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The real incidence of these 
syndromes is not known, but they are very rare disorders. 
The genetic defect responsible for the SRPS is still 
unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is based 
on the detection of severe micromelia, severe thoracic 
hypoplasia with short ribs, and postaxial polydactyly 
(Figure 9.29). Other anomalies that may be detected by 
ultrasound in the various types include: congenital heart 
disease, median cleft lip, polycystic kindey/renal dysplasia, 
and anophthalmia. 
• Differential diagnosis. SRPS should be differentiated 
from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias presenting 
with micromelia and thoracic hypoplasia, namely 
achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, hypophosphatasia, 
and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. 
However, postaxial polydactytly is present in SRPS 
only, and, at the same time, hypomineralization is only 
rarely present in some subtypes of SRPS. Another condition 
to be distinguished from SRPS is chondroectodermal 
dysplasia (Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome), which 
also features thoracic hypoplasia and postaxial polydactytly; 
however, in the latter disorder, thoracic 
hypoplasia is less pronounced and the limbs are less 
affected. The occurrence of median cleft lip identifies 
SRPS types II and IV (Majewsky and Beemer–Langer). 

Definition. This condition is termed ‘thanatophoric’ 
(death-bringing) to emphasize its lethality. Two subtypes 
of thanatophoric dysplasia (OMIM 187600) have been 
identified: type I, which is the most frequent, is characterized 
by curved femurs, whereas type II is characterized 
by straight femurs and the classic cloverleaf skull (see 
below). The reported incidence is 0.69/10 000 live births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. An anomaly of the 
FGFR3 gene has been found in both subtypes of this 
disorder. In particular, all cases showing a 
Lys650Glu substitution are type II and show straight 
femurs and cloverleaf skull. All other types of mutations 
found in the same gene have bowed femurs and 
no cloverleaf skull (type I). The latter subtype is 
resposible for 80% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis (Figure 9.30 and 9.31). The 
ultrasound signs that may lead to the diagnosis of 
thanatophoric dysplasia are short limbs associated 
294 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.29 Short-rib polydactyly 
syndrome (20 weeks of 
gestation). (a) Severe thoracic 
hypoplasia. (b) Postaxial polydactyly 
of one hand (arrow). 
(c) Confirmation of polydactyly 
at autopsy. (d) Specimen after 
termination of pregnancy, showing 
severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrowheads). Note also the 
dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. SRPS are invariably 
lethal. 
Recurrence risk. All SRPS have an autosomal recessive 
inheritance pattern, which determines the 25% recurrence 
rate. Therefore, in the case of termination of pregnancy, 
confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis by autopsy is of 
the utmost importance for correct counseling and for 
advising early ultrasound monitoring of the next pregnancy 
in referral centers. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severe limb shortening (femurs in particular). Lethal thoracic (and secondary pulmonary) 
hypoplasia. Type I: bowed femurs; type II: cloverleaf skull and straight femurs. 
Outcome. Always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Both types are due to de novo mutations. Therefore, the recurrence risk is 
very low. 
d 
c 
a
b 
THANATOPHORIC DYSPLASIA 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 295 
Figure 9.30 Thanatophoric dysplasia 
(22 weeks of gestation). (a) 3D maximummode 
rendering of the upper limb. The 
involvement of the three segments is evident. 
Note the ‘French telephone receiver’ 
aspect of the humerus. (b) Confirmation of 
the micromelia at autopsy. (c) Maximummode 
rendering of the lower limb. The 
thickening and shortening of the long 
bones is evident, together with the redundancy 
of the soft tissues. (d) Confirmation 
of the micromelia at autopsy. (e) Lowmagnification 
midsagittal view of the fetal 
body showing the severe thoracic hypoplasia 
with a dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction (arrowheads). 
Figure 9.31 Thanatophoric dysplasia (22 
weeks of gestation). (a) Axial transthalamic 
view demonstrating the abnormal 
shape of the skull and the early closure of 
some sutures (arrowheads). (b) 3D surface 
rendering of the fetal head, demonstrating 
moderate macrocrania, frontal bossing, 
and a low nasal bridge. (c) Confirmation of 
the macrocrania at autopsy. (d) 3D maximum-
mode rendering of the fetal chest 
demonstrating severely hypoplastic ribs 
(arrows) and thorax. 
b 
c d e 
a
c d 
a b 

with severe thoracic hypoplasia. In particular, type I is 
characterized by bowed and extremely short femurs and 
humeri with metaphyseal cupping (Figure 9.30a–d). 
This unusual aspect, also evident on ultrasound, has 
been noted as resembling the shape of a French telephone 
receiver. The ribs are very short and, on the midsagittal 
low-magnification view of the fetal trunk, a dip 
typical of severe thoracic hypoplasia can be seen at the 
level of the thoraco-abdominal junction (Figure 9.30e). 
The head is large, with frontal bossing and a low nasal 
bridge (Figure 9.31 a–c); no major synostoses are present 
in type I thanatophoric dysplasia. On the contrary, 
in type II, there is a classic cloverleaf skull, recognizable 
on a coronal view of the fetal head, which is due to synostosis 
of the lambdoid, coronal, and sagittal sutures, 
responsible for the temporal bossing. Characteristically, 
in these rarer cases, the sonographer reaches the diagnosis 
through the impossibility of obtaining the classic 
axial transthalamic view for measurement of the biparietal 
diameter. The femurs are short, although less so 
than in type I, and, above all, they tend to be straighter. 
Severe polyhydramnios is constantly associated. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes the other skeletal 
dysplasias characterized by micromelia and 
severe thoracic hypoplasia, namely achondrogenesis, 
hypophosphatasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta type 
II. In achondrogenesis, additional findings are 
micrognathia and severe hypomineralization, which 
are absent in thanatophoric dysplasia. Hypophosphatasia 
is characterized, in addition to micromelia 
and thoracic hypoplasia, by ubiquitous hypomineralization. 
Fractures are only seen in the lethal type II 
osteogenesis imperfecta. With regard to type II 
thanatophoric dysplasia, the cloverleaf skull can 
also be present in very rare syndromes such as 
Pfeiffer syndrome (different skeletal anomalies) and 
Crouzon syndrome (no limb shortening). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Thanatophoric 
dysplasia is always lethal, due to the severe pulmonary 
and thoracic hypoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Both types are due to de novo mutations. 
Therefore, the recurrence risk is trivial. 
296 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ULTRASOUND DIAGNOSIS OF REDUCTION DEFECTS OF THE LIMBS 
In this section, the ultrasound diagnosis of focal and 
transverse defects of the limbs is described. According to 
the EUROCAT definition,16 an intercalary reduction 
defect is represented by a usually severe underdevelopment 
of one mesomelic bone segment only, whereas a terminal 
transverse reduction defect is complete absence of 
the terminal part of one limb (upper or lower). It is generally 
accepted that the latter type of defect can be congenital 
or acquired in utero. If congenital, it is the result of a 
vascular insult during organogenesis; in the very rare 
acquired forms, it is the result of amputation due to an 
amniotic band. Assessment of the reduction defects of 
the limbs is quite straightforward, since the differential 
diagnosis is limited to a small number of conditions. It 
should be noted that non-syndromic isolated defects of 
the limbs can involve all limbs at all levels. However, 
there are some types of defects that carry a higher syndromic 
risk. These include aplasia radii and focal femoral 
hypoplasia. 
Aplasia radii. Aplasia/severe hypoplasia of the radius is 
commonly associated with ectrodactyly (absence of the 
thumb, which represents the terminal part of the radial 
ray). Ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward: the rhizomelic 
part of the upper limb is unremarkable, while 
the mesomelic component is highly abnormal: the radius 
Figure 9.32 Aplasia radii (29 
weeks of gestation). This is almost 
always associated with ectrodactyly 
(absence of the thumb), 
due to the severe hypoplasia/ 
aplasia of the radial ray. This also 
causes severe ulnar deviation of 
the hand. (a) 2D ultrasound. (b) 
3D maximum-mode demonstration 
with low threshold, demonstrating 
both the bony defect and 
the soft tissues. (c) 3D maximummode 
demonstration with high 
threshold, to highlight the bony 
defect. (d) Specimen after delivery 
(stillborn). 
a b c d 

can be completely absent or severely hypoplastic. The 
ulna can be normal or moderately hypoplastic. If radial 
aplasia is suspected, the hand should be carefully evaluated, 
since in virtually all cases the thumb is absent 
(Figure 9.32). The various disorders possibly associated 
with radial aplasia are listed in Table 9.11. 
Femoral hypoplasia–unusual-facies (femoral–facial) 
syndrome (FHUFS). Severe unilateral or bilateral focal 
hypoplasia of the femur(s), possibly associated with 
facial clefting and/or micrognathia, identifies FHUFS. 
Suspicion of this very rare syndrome should be raised 
whenever a focal defect of the femur is seen on ultrasound, 
especially if the pregnant woman has insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus. In fact, a relationship 
between maternal dysmetabolism and FHUFS has been 
described in the literature. FHUFS is described in detail 
in Chapter 10. 
Terminal transverse reduction defects. It has been hypothesized 
that the cause of these not infrequent defects might 
be an interruption of the blood supply to the developing 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 297 
Table 9.11 Differential diagnosis of syndromes characterized by aplasia radii 
Index sign . Aplasia radii ± ectrodactyly 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + multiple anomalies + . Trisomy 18 
micrognathia 
Additional signs . Abnormal thumb + congenital heart disease (30%) . TARa syndrome 
Additional signs . Syndactyly + congenital heart disease . Holt–Oram syndrome 
Additional signs . Phocomelia + cleft lip/palate + congenital . Roberts syndrome 
heart disease 
Additional signs . Micrognathia + external ear anomalies . Nager syndrome 
Additional signs . Vertebral + renal anomalies + tracheo-esophageal . VA(C)TER(L) 
fistula associationb 
a Thrombocytopenia with absent radius. 
b Vertebral anomalies, anal anomalies, cardiac defects, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb anomalies. 
Figure 9.33 Limb reduction defects. (a) Terminal 
transverse reduction defect (acheiria): all digits and 
part of the metacarpus are completely absent. (b) 
Severe hypoplasia of the lower half of the calf and the 
foot (arrow). (c) Confirmation at autopsy: compare 
with the size of the normal contralateral limb and foot. 
b
a c 

limb bud during organogensis. However, if the defect 
involves more than one limb, then it has a syndromic context. 
We will briefly review this anomaly here because of 
its high functional significance and because its missed 
diagnosis at midtrimester screening ultrasound represents 
one of the most frequent sources of medicolegal litigation. 
The defect can involve the hand/foot only (Figure 9.33), or 
a variable part of the mesomelic segment (Figure 9.34). In 
general, if the hand is partially absent, some hypoplastic 
digits are present on the terminal part of the wrist or 
metacarpus. An important part of the prognostic evaluation 
concerns the presence of the opposing digit, represented 
by the thumb; its absence significantly increases the 
functional invalidity of the hand. 
Anomalies of the feet 
Classic talipes. This is one of the minor anomalies most 
commonly encountered at birth. It comprises a spectrum 
of lesions characterized by contracture of variable severity 
of the ankle joint, possibly associated with tendon 
abnormalities: the two most common entities are talipes 
varus and talipes equinus. Talipes can occur as an isolated 
anomaly or can represent the effect of severe disorders 
of neurologic (spinal bifida), neuromuscular (FADS), 
or enviromental (rupture of membranes, uterine hypoplasia, 
or twinning) origin. It is bilateral in roughly half of 
the cases. On ultrasound, the diagnosis is made when, on 
the sagittal view of the lower leg and calf, the sole, which 
in normal conditions is on another axis, is displayed 
(Figure 9.35). It is important to underscore that talipes 
can also develop, as already mentioned, as a result of 
enviromental factors such as prolonged olygohydramnios 
from early rupture of membranes, uterine hypoplasia, 
and fetal crowding from multiple pregnancies. Therefore, 
in a significant percentage of cases, this anomaly may be 
298 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.35 Talipes (clubfoot). (a) 3D maximum-mode rendering 
of a clubfoot in a fetus affected with myotonic dystrophy (21 
weeks of gestation). Note the severe hypoplasia of the calf muscles. 
(b) 3D surface rendering of the same case. Note the thin aspect of 
the calf, also in comparison with (c) isolated clubfoot (talipes 
varus) at 30 weeks of gestation (note the normal development of 
the calf and foot muscles). 
Figure 9.34 Terminal transverse 
reduction defect of the 
upper limb (22 weeks of gestation). 
Sometimes, the absent 
part of the limb involves the 
hand and part of the forearm 
(arrowheads), as in this case. 
(a) 2D ultrasound. (b) 3D surface 
rendering of the soft tissues. 
(c) 3D maximum-mode demonstration 
of the bony defect. 
(d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
b 
b c
a d 
c 
a 

overlooked in utero and be diagnosed only at birth. 
Postnatal treatment depends on the cause of the deformation. 
With isolated talipes, the most favorable cases benefit 
from manipulation and casting first, followed by 
maintenance with strapping and splinting. If, at the end 
of casting (6 weeks), the defect is still not corrected, this 
is an indication for surgery. In general, 50% of all talipes 
will be corrected at the end of casting at 6 weeks (90% of 
the mild form, 50% of the moderate form, and 10% of 
the severe form). If the defect is not corrected by the end 
of the casting period, surgery is needed: this consists 
mainly of posteromedial subtalar release with Z-lengthening 
of the Achilles tendon, with a success rate of 
60–85%. In surgically corrected cases, the outcome is 
variable, and the condition may relapse in up to one-third 
of the cases. However, in cases not associated with other 
major disorders, the outcome is generally good. 
Rockerbottom foot (congenital vertical talus). This is 
characterized by the following anomalies of the foot and 
ankle joint: calcaneus in equinus and valgus; hypoplasia 
and plantarflexion of the talus; abduction of the forefoot; 
and all dorsal tendons being tethered medial to the 
midline of the ankle. (Figure 9.36). Ultrasound diagnosis 
is relatively simple, relying on recognition of the anomaly 
of the plantar aspect of the foot, which is convex 
on a sagittal view of the lower leg. It is important 
to underline that this anomaly is very often associated 
with chromosomal aberrations, mainly trisomies 18 and 
13. However, the importance of diagnosis of this anomaly 
is limited by the ubiquitous occurrence of other more 
evident and severe malformations in trisomies 18 and 
13: it is highly unlikely that such chromosomal aberrations 
are disclosed only following the detection of 
rockerbottom feet. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 299 
Figure 9.36 Rockerbottom foot. This deformation is typical of trisomy 
18 and of other muscular and chromosomal anomalies. It is 
characterized by severe anomalies of the muscles and tendons of the 
lower leg and foot. On ultrasound, the most typical feature is the 
prominent calcaneus. 
1. Paladini D, Chita SD, Allan LD. Prenatal measurement of cardiothoracic 
ratio in the evaluation of heart disease. Arch Dis Child 
1990; 65: 20–3. 
2. Chitkara U, Rosenberg J, Chervenak FA, et al. Prenatal 
sonographic asessment of fetal thorax: normal values. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1987; 156: 1069–74. 
3. Krakow D, Williams J 3rd, Poehl M, Rimoin DL, Platt LD. Use 
of three-dimensional ultrasound imaging in the diagnosis of prenatal-
onset skeletal dysplasias. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 
21: 467–72. 
4. Ruano R, Molho M, Roume J, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of 
fetal skeletal dysplasias by combining two-dimensional and 
three-dimensional ultrasound and intrauterine three-dimensional 
helical computer tomography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 134–40. 
5. Faro C, Benoit B, Wegrzyn P, Chaoui R, Nicolaides KH. Threedimensional 
sonographic description of the fetal frontal bones 
and metopic suture. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
618–21. 
6. Chaoui R, Levaillant M, Benoit B, et al. Three-dimensional sonographic 
description of abnormal metopic suture in second- and 
third-trimester fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
761–4. 
7. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyn P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
8. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
with variable onset in three consecutive pregnancies. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001; 17: 163–5. 
9. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of 
fetal size: 2. Head measurements. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1994; 
101: 35–43. 
10. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of 
fetal size: 3. Abdominal measurements. Br J Obstet Gynecol 
1994; 101: 125–31. 
11. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of fetal 
size: 4. Femur length. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1994; 101: 132–5. 
12. Hadlock FP, Deter RL, Harris RB, Park SK. Fetal femur length 
as a predictor of menstrual age: sonographically measured. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 1982; 138: 875–8. 
13. Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the 
Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and long 
bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 
14. Forin V, Arabi A, Guigonis V, et al. Benefits of pamidronate in 
children with osteogenesis imperfecta: an open prospective 
study. Joint Bone Spine 2005; 72: 313–18. 
15. Millington-Ward S, McMahon HP, Farrar GJ. Emerging therapeutic 
approaches for osteogenesis imperfecta. Trends Mol Med 
2005; 11: 299–305. 
16. EUROCAT (European Surveilance of Congenital Anomalies) 
Guide 3: For the Description and Classification of Congenital 
Limb Defects, 2nd edn, 2004, www.eurocat.ulster.ac.uk. 
REFERENCES 

In this chapter, a limited number of chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromic conditions will be described. 
There are two criteria used to define what disorders 
should appear in this section of the book: the first is that 
all syndromes described here should be reliably diagnosable 
by ultrasound, on the basis of a cluster of major and 
minor sonographic signs; the second is the availability of 
both sonographic and postmortem pictures needed to 
comprehensively describe the syndrome. This chapter 
does not claim to compete with more comprehensive 
textbooks and manuals of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis, 
fetal dysmorphology, or genetics, to which the reader 
may wish to refer for extensive treatment. The real aim 
of this chapter is to provide the reader with support in 
his or her daily practice by reviewing, with ample use of 
images, the most common chromosomal anomalies and 
some of the rare non-chromosomal syndromes that may 
be diagnosable by every professional involved in the field 
of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of congenital anomalies 
with a little dedication and understanding. 
Chapter 10 
Chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromes 
DEFINITION 
Definition. Down syndrome is named after John 
Langdon Down, the first scientist to describe the pattern 
of congenital anomalies characterizing individuals with 
trisomy 21. The overall incidence in an unselected 
population at 20 weeks is about 1/500. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Down syndrome is due to trisomy 
of chromosome 21; this is a free trisomy in 95% of 
the cases, while the remaining 5% are represented by 
robertsonian translocation and mosaicisms of variable 
degree. It is well established that the occurrence of the trisomy 
has a positive correlation with advancing maternal 
age, especially after 35 years of age. Molecular biologic 
assays have demonstrated that in 95% of cases, the 
trisomy is the result of a non-disjunction during maternal 
meiosis (meiosis I in 75–80% of cases). In the remaining 
5% of cases due to a paternal error, this occurs most 
frequently during meiosis II. 
Genetics. The genetic defect, namely the extra copy of 
chromosome 21, was discovered at the end of the 1950s. 
The first amniocentesis leading to a diagnosis of trisomy 
21 in a fetus was reported in 1968. Since then, the diagnosis 
of trisomy 21 has been made on chorionic villi, 
amniocytes, and peripheral lymphocytes through the 
G-banding technique. 
TRISOMY 21 – DOWN SYNDROME 
Incidence. Very high: 1/500 at 20 weeks of gestation. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 21 (95%); trisomy from robertsonian translocations or mosaicisms (5%). 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: gastrointestinal atresias; atrioventricular septal defect; ventricular septal 
defect; exomphalos. Minor anomalies: enlarged nuchal translucency/nuchal edema/fold; nasal bone hypoplasia; 
pyelectasis. 
Outcome. Mental retardation of variable degree. Overall survival reaches 20 years and depends on the associated 
anomalies. 
Recurrence risk. 1% empiric risk, as for all autosomal trisomies. 25% in case of parental robertsonian 
translocations. 
301 

Ultrasound diagnosis. From postnatal and prenatal data, 
it is evident that 50% of individuals with Down syndrome 
do not show any major/minor anomaly possibly 
detectable in utero. The remaining 50% show one or 
more than one of the major anomalies described below, 
involving mainly the cardiovascular (50%) and gastrointestinal 
(30%) systems. As a consequence, should any of 
the following anomalies be detected on ultrasound, 
karyotyping is mandatory: 
• Esophageal atresia is suspected on the axial view of 
the upper abdomen, where the gastric bubble cannot 
be visualized (Figure 10.1a). Polyhydramnios develops 
in the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester. 
• Duodenal atresia is suspected on the axial view of the 
upper abdomen, where the classic double-bubble sign 
is found. However, as already pointed out, this sign is 
fully appreciated after 23–24 weeks of gestation 
(Figure 10.1b). Also in this case, polyhydramnios 
develops in the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester. 
• Exomphalos, especially if of small dimensions and 
without the liver, may be associated with trisomy 21. 
The diagnosis is made on the axial or sagittal view of 
the fetal abdomen. At the level of the cord insertion, 
the exomphalos appears as a round, solid mass that 
deforms the anterior abdominal wall (Figure 10.1c); it 
may contain the right hepatic lobe and/or some ileal 
loops. The cord insertion is typically on the mass. 
• Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is classically 
detected on the 4-chamber view of the fetal heart. A 
common atrioventricular valve is found, and the central 
crux of the heart is missing (Figure 10.1d). Note that 
only AVSD with balanced ventricles is associated 
with trisomy 21 (see Chapter 5). 
302 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.1 Down syndrome: major signs. Axial view of the upper abdomen. (a) Esophageal atresia: the stomach (ST?) cannot be seen. 
(b) Duodenal atresia: the typical double bubble (arrowhead) is evident. (c) Omphalocele: the mass departing from the anterior abdominal 
wall (Onf) can be seen. The arrows indicate the abdominal defect. (d) Complete, balanced AVSD: a common atrium (CA) and a single 
atrioventricular valve are seen (LV, left ventricle). (e) Inlet VSD: small defect of the septum below the atrioventricular plane (arrow). 
a
b
c 
d 
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 303 
• Ventricular septal defect is detected on the 4-chamber 
view of the fetal heart or on the left outflow tract 
view, according to the site of the defect. If it involves 
the inlet portion of the septum, the diagnosis is made 
in the former view, where the defect appears as a 
small interruption just below the atrioventricular 
plane (Figure 10.1e); if, on the contrary, the VSD 
involves the outlet portion of the septum, then this is 
best appreciated on the left outflow tract view as a 
discontinuity of the septo-aortic tract (see Chapter 5). 
In addition to the described major malformations there are 
a number of ‘minor’ signs, or soft markers which are associated 
with Down Syndrome. This term refers to the fact 
that these signs do not represent actual malformations, but 
only particular findings evident on ultrasound. The detection 
of any of these soft markers increases the risk of trisomy 
21. In this regard, it should be underlined that we do 
not believe that the description of all the signs that have 
been considered as soft markers for Down syndrome in the 
literature (a partial list of which is given in Table 10.1) may 
be of relevance here. In line with the practical approach of 
this book – from ultrasound sign to diagnosis – we have 
arbitrarily decided to include here only descriptions of the 
few such markers that greatly increase this risk and the significance 
of which is indisputable. 
• Nasal bone hypoplasia (2nd trimester) (Figure 
10.2a,b). This marker should be assessed on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile, where the reduced 
longitudinal diameter of the nasal bone can be easily 
appreciated and checked on nomograms for the normal 
population (Figure 10.2a). As a comparison, a 
normal fetus of the same gestational age as that of 
Figure 10.2a is shown in Figure 10.2b. This is the most 
recently described soft marker for the 2nd trimester,1 
which seems to have a detection rate comparable to 
that of the nuchal fold (described below). Two issues 
should be considered when measuring the nasal bone 
in the 2nd trimester: (i) the insonation angle between 
the transducer and the nasal bone must be as close as 
possible to 90°, otherwise the nasal bone plate may 
not show up properly (the images of Figure 10.2a and 
b have been rotated to better show the profile, but the 
original scanning plane was as mentioned), (ii) as with 
other proposed soft markers, the incidence of apparent 
nasal bone hypoplasia is much higher in Asian populations, 
which limits to some extent the usefulness of this 
marker in those populations. 
• Nuchal abnormalities (Figure 10.2c,d). We include 
in this paragraph both the early (12–14 weeks) 
anomalies, such as nuchal translucency (Figure 
10.2c), and those visible at a later stage, which 
include the nuchal fold (Figure 10.2d) and nuchal 
edema. As far as the nuchal fold is concerned, this 
was described for the first time in 1985;2 it is found 
in about 40% of fetuses with trisomy 21 at 19–22 
weeks of gestation. It should be measured on the 
modified axial view of the posterior fossa used for 
the assessment of cerebellar anatomy, positioning 
the calipers on the external echogenic rim of the skin 
and on the outer aspect of the occipital bone. The 
nuchal fold is normal if less than 6 mm.3 It should be 
underlined that an increased risk of Down syndrome 
remains if the nuchal fold partially regresses during 
the 3rd trimester. 
Differential diagnosis. This involves the other conditions 
in which one of the above-mentioned soft markers may 
be present, since the other autosomal trisomies are characterized 
by multiple congenital anomalies rather than 
soft markers only. 
• Cystic fibrosis: look for . hyperechogenic ileus + 
possible meconium peritonitis/ileal atresia. 
• Fetal toxoplasmosis: look for . hyperechogenic ileus + 
hydrocephalus/cerebral calcifications + maternal positive 
serology. 
• Achondroplasia: look for . short femur/humerus + 
moderate macrocrania + low nasal bridge. 
• Early fetal growth restriction (FGR): look for . short 
femur/humerus (hyperechogenic ileus) + abnormal 
growth + Doppler velocimetry abnormalities (umbilical 
artery and ductus venosus). 
• Familial short stature: look for . short femur/ 
humerus + parental short stature. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The risk of mental 
retardation is around 50%: in 45% of these cases, the IQ 
Table 10.1 Soft markers associated with Down 
syndrome (2nd trimester: 18–22 weeks of gestation) 
Biometric 
Short femur/humerus 
Observed/expected femur length ratio 
Observed/expected humerus length ratio 
Pyelectasis 
Wide iliac bone wings 
Borderline ventriculomegaly 
Morphologic 
Nuchal edema/folda 
Nasal bone hypoplasiaa 
Intracardiac foci 
Hypoplasia 2nd phalanx V digit 
Hyperechogenic ileus 
Sandal gap 
Macroglossia 
Small ears 
a These are the most sensitive (see text). 

is < 70, while only in 5% of the cases does the IQ 
remains within the normal range. Among long-term 
sequelae, Down syndrome individuals may experience 
high-airway obstruction, which in some circumstances 
may be so severe as to require tracheotomy. In addition, 
if brachysyndactyly is severe, this may limit the functionality 
of the hands. Cosmetic surgery has been used in 
some cases to remove the facial features typical of Down 
syndrome if these are particularly pronounced. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 
1%. However, if the syndrome is due to a parental balanced 
translocation, then the recurrence risk reaches 
25%, since it becomes an autosomal recessive condition. 
304 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TRISOMY 18 – EDWARDS SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/6000 at birth. M/F ratio 0.65. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 18 (> 99%); rarely mosaicisms/structural anomalies involving 
chromosome 18. 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: congenital heart disease; CNS anomalies; micrognathia; urinary tract 
malformations; radial ray anomalies; cystic hygroma; esophageal atresia; early symmetric FGR. Minor anomalies: 
enlarged nuchal translucency/choroid plexus cysts, etc. 
Outcome. High intrauterine mortality. 5% survival at birth (30% of those diagnosed in utero survive until birth). 
Severe psychomotor delay and mental retardation. Mean postnatal survival is 1 week (90% mortality rate within 6 
months). 
Recurrence risk. 1% empiric risk, as for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.2 Down syndrome: minor signs (soft markers). (a) Nasal bone hypoplasia in the 2nd trimester (arrow). Compare with (b) 
normal-sized nasal bones in a normal fetus of the same gestational age (arrowhead). (c) Enlarged nuchal translucency (4 mm in this case). 
(d) Nuchal fold > 6 mm (7 mm in this case), to be measured on the transcerebellar plane. 
a
c 
b
d 

Definition. Edwards syndrome was first recognized and 
related to an extra copy of the chromosome 18 in 1960. 
More than 100 different malformations have been 
described in association with this trisomy. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Edwards syndrome is due to 
an extra copy of chromosome 18. In addition, rare cases 
of mosaicisms (with a normal second cellular line) showing 
extreme phenotypic variability in relation to the percentage 
of the trisomic line have been reported. As with 
Down syndrome, direct correlation with advancing 
maternal age has been shown for this autosomal trisomy. 
Genetics. The genetic defect in Edwards syndrome, the 
extra copy of chromosome 18, is now easily recognizable 
on chorionic villi, amniocytes, and peripheral leukocytes. 
Molecular biologic assays have demonstrated that 
in 90% of cases, the trisomy is the result of a nondisjunction 
during the maternal meiosis II. In the remaining 
10% of cases, due to a paternal error, this occurs 
always after fertilization. 
Ultrasound diagnosis.There is a wide spectrum of major 
anomalies that have been described in fetuses/neonates 
with trisomy 18.4 The following are the major anomalies 
most commonly encountered in fetuses with Edwards 
syndrome: 
• CNS anomalies: neural tube defects (NTDs), agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, and posterior fossa anomalies 
(Figure 10.3a). 
• Micrognathia of variable severity is associated in 
50–70% of cases. 
• Congenital heart disease: septation, conotruncal malformations 
(Figure 10.3b), and polyvalvular disease. 
• Abdominal wall anomalies: exomphalos (Figure 10.3c). 
• Urinary tract anomalies: cystic renal dysplasia (Figure 
10.3d) and horseshow kidney. 
• Cystic hygroma. 
• Skeletal anomalies: micrognathia, clenched hands with 
overlapping fingers, aplasia radii (Chapter 9: Figure 
9.32), and rockerbottom feet (Chapter 9: Figure 9.36). 
• Fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
Some of these anomalies, such as NTDs and cystic 
hygroma, are usually detected early in gestation, while 
congenital heart disease and cerebral anomalies 
(Dandy– Walker variant and agenesis of the corpus callosum) 
are more commonly recognized at the 
midtrimester scan. FGR is already evident in the 2nd 
trimester in over 50% of cases. Of the various soft 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 305 
Figure 10.3 Trisomy 18. (a) Agenesis of the corpus callosum. Note the radial pattern of the fibers and the absence of the pericallosal 
artery on power Doppler. (b) Congenital heart disease: malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding aorta. Ao, aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (c) Bowel-containing omphalocele (arrowheads). Note that the risk of chromosomal anomalies is maximum 
for small lesions without the liver in the sac. (d) Hyperechoic kidney, with or without dysplasia. 
a b 
c d 

markers described in association with trisomy 18, we 
think it worthwhile listing only the following: 
• Nuchal abnomalities: enlarged nuchal translucency 
(Figure 10.2c). 
• Strawberry-shaped skull (Figure 10.4). 
• Choroid plexus cysts (Figure 10.4). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes other chromosomal 
anomalies characterized by multiple malformations and 
early FGR, as well as the group of neuroarthrogryposes: 
• Trisomy 13:5 look for . FGR + holoprosencephaly + 
microphthalmia + congenital heart disease + bilateral 
cleft lip/palate. 
• Triploidy:5 look for . FGR (very early) + posterior 
fossa anomalies + macrophthalmia + oligohydramnios. 
• Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS):5 look for 
.FGR + micrognathia + diffuse joint contractures. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Trisomy 18 is a 
lethal condition in most cases: of the relatively few liveborns, 
90% die within 6 months and less than 5% of 
cases reach 12 months of life. In the survivors, severe 
mental retardation is constantly associated. Significant 
hearing and sight impairment is frequent and growth is 
severely compromised. In addition to the major anomalies, 
another determinant of mortality and morbidity is 
the predisposition to infections. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 1% for 
all autosomal trisomies. 
306 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. 1/12 500 at birth. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 13 (75%); trisomy from robertsonian translocations (25%). 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: congenital heart disease; CNS (holoprosencephaly, etc.) and craniofacial 
(microphthalmia, cleftings) anomalies; exomphalos; cystic renal dysplasia; postaxial polydactyly. Minor 
anomalies: enlarged nuchal translucency. 
Outcome. Extremely high intrauterine mortality rate, with 2.5% of prenatally diagnosed cases reaching term. 
Severe psychomotor delay. 3% survival rate at 6 months of life. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 1% for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.4 In trisomy 18, one of the additional signs, especially 
in the early 2nd trimester, is the so-called ‘strawberry-shaped 
skull’. This anomaly is due to a reduced occipitofrontal diameter 
and scalloped frontal bones (arrowheads). Note the concurrent 
presence of a soft marker typical of trisomy 18, namely a large 
choroid plexus cyst (arrow). 
TRISOMY 13 – PATAU SYNDROME 
Definition. Patau syndrome was described and related 
to an extra copy of chromosome 13 for the first time in 
1960. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Patau syndrome is due to 
an extra copy of chromosome 13. In addition, rare 
cases of mosaicisms (with a normal second cellular 
line) showing extreme phenotypic variability in relation 
to the percentage of the trisomic line have been 
reported. In these cases, the recognition of a pigmentary 
cutaneous mosaicism may lead to disclosure of 
the two cellular populations. As with Down and 
Edward syndromes, a positive correlation with 
advancing maternal age has been described for 
trisomy 13. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by G-banding 
of chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, 
and peripheral leukocytes. A free trisomy is responsible 
for 75% of cases, while in the remaining 25%, 
a robertsonian translocation, the most common of 
which is rob(13q14q), is found. This is why, should 
a trisomy 13 be identified in a fetus, the genetic 
assessment should include karyotyping of both parents. 
Molecular biologic assays have demonstrated 
that in 90% of cases, the trisomy is the result of a 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 307 
non-disjunction during the maternal meiosis II 
(absence of chyasms). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. There is a wide spectrum of 
major anomalies that can be associated with trisomy 
13. The following are those most commonly encountered 
in the fetus: 
• CNS anomalies (45–55%): holoprosencephaly 
(Figure 10.5a), agenesis of the corpus callosum, and 
cerebellar malformations. 
• Craniofacial anomalies (80%): bilateral cleft 
lip/palate (Figure 10.5b), micro/anophthalmia, and 
micrognathia. 
• Congenital heart disease (40–50%): septation defects 
and absent pulmonary venous return (Figure 10.3b). 
• Urinary tract anomalies (30–35%): cystic renal dysplasia 
(Figure 10.3d). 
• Skeletal anomalies (20–30%): postaxial polydactyly 
(Figure 10.5c,d). 
• Abdominal wall anomalies (30%): exomphalos 
(Figure 10.3c). 
• FGR (45–55%). 
Trisomy 13 is associated with an enlarged nuchal 
translucency at 12–14 weeks of gestation. 
Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the following 
two conditions: 
• Trisomy 18:5 look for . FGR + CNS anomalies (not 
holoprosencephaly) + congenital heart disease + 
micrognathia + skeletal anomalies (rockerbottom feet 
on clenched hands with overlapping fingers not hexadactyly). 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:5 look for . polycystic 
kidney + cephalocele + microcephaly + polydactyly. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Trisomy 13 is a 
lethal condition in most cases, and 95% of the survivors 
die within 6 months. Very rare cases without severe malformations 
have survived for several years. However, 
severe psycomotor delay is constantly associated; most 
survivors are also blind, due to the frequent anophthalmia, 
and do not thrive. Epilepsy can also be associated. 
Recurrence risk. This is emphirically estimated at 1% 
for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.5 Trisomy 13. (a) Alobar holoprosencephaly: coronal view of the fetal head demonstrating a single cerebral ventricle (SV) 
and absence of the midline. (b) Bilateral cleft lip and palate: midsagittal view demonstrating additional tissue on the philtrum (arrow) 
and the cleft palate – the interruption of the bony palate is evident below the power Doppler signal in the nasal cavity. 
(c) Surface-rendered image of postaxial polydactyly (arrowhead). (d) Confirmation at autopsy. (e) Confirmation at autopsy of the 
bilateral cleft lip/palate.
a b 
c d e 

308 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Relatively rare: 1/2500–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. Monosomy of chromosome X (X0). 
Ultrasound signs. Hydrops; cystic hygroma; left heart defects (hypoplastic left heart, aortic coarctation); short 
femur; renal anomalies (horseshoe kidney). 
Outcome. Mental retardation of variable degree complicates 50% of cases. 
Recurrence risk. Not modified in comparison with the normal population. 
Definition. This syndromic condition is named after HH 
Turner, who first described its clinical features in 1938. 
The incidence at birth is 1/2500–5000.6 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Turner syndrome is due to 
complete or partial chromosome X monosomy in all 
or some of the body cells. The missing chromosome is 
usually the paternal one. No apparent relationship with 
advancing maternal age has been described. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is based on simple G-banding 
of chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, and 
peripheral leukocytes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Major anomalies (Figure 10.6) 
are present in about 50% of cases detected in utero:6 
• Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF): showing early 
onset and involving all districts (Figure 10.6a). 
• Cystic hygroma: evident on the sagittal and axial 
views of the fetal head (Figure 10.6b). The hygroma is 
usually large and predominantly septate. It can persist 
or disappear during the 2nd trimester. In the latter 
instance, the classic pterygium coli is found at birth. 
• Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: recognizable on the 
4-chamber view of the fetal heart (Figure 10.6c). 
Figure 10.6 Turner syndrome. (a) Diffuse hydrops: 4-chamber view showing bilateral hydrothorax (LL, left lung; RL, right lung) and severe 
subcutaneous edema (arrowheads) of the thorax. (b) Septate cystic hygroma (arrows). (c) Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: 4-chamber view 
showing severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle (arrowhead) and mitral atresia. RV, right ventricle. (d) Aortic coarctation: 3-vessel view showing 
severe hypoplasia of the aortic arch, which also shows reverse flow on color Doppler. Ao, aortic arch; D, arterial duct; Pa, pulmonary artery. 
a b 
c d 
MONOSOMY X – TURNER SYNDROME 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 309 
Incidence. Relatively rare: 1/2500–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. An extra set of chromosomes is present (69). 
Ultrasound signs. Early-onset and very severe asymmetric FGR; hypotonia; CNS anomalies; congenital heart 
disease; syndactyly; vacuolar placenta (molar changes). 
Outcome. Intrauterine demise in most cases. 
Recurrence risk. Not modified in comparison with the normal population. 
Definition. Triploidy is due to an extra set of chromosomes 
of maternal or paternal origin. The incidence at 
birth is 1/2500–5000, and there is no relationship with 
advancing maternal age. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Of all triploidies, about twothirds 
are 69,XXY and one-third XXX (Table 10.2), 
whereas in very few cases the complement is 69,XYY. 
The overwhelming majority of triploidies undergo early 
spontaneous miscarriage. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by G-banding of 
chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, and 
peripheral leukocytes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Major anomalies are present in 
most cases of triploidy, but the malformative cluster 
differs according to the origin of the extra set of chromosomes: 
these differences are shown in Table 10.2. In 
addition, the recognition of these anomalies is often 
made more difficult by the frequent association of 
oligohydramnios. The most common anomalies 
detectable in triploidy are as follows: 
• FGR: very early onset and severe. Characteristically 
asymmetric and associated with conspicuous 
generalized hypotonia and oligoamnios (Figure 
10.7a). 
• CNS anomalies: agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
hydrocephaly, Dandy–Walker variant (Figure 10.7b), 
and holoprosencephaly. 
• Syndactyly (Figure 10.7c). 
• Craniofacial anomalies: Micrognathia, microphthalmia, 
and macrophthalmia (Figure 10.7d). 
• Congenital heart disease: VSD. 
• Renal anomalies: cystic renal dysplasia (Figure 10.7f). 
Differential diagnosis. This is virtually non-existent, 
owing to the early onset and the peculiar cluster of 
anomalies. In rare cases, triploidy should be differentiated 
from other chromosomal anomalies featuring 
multiorgan involvement, such as trisomies 13 
and 18. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overwhelming 
majority of cases die by the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, 
and the rare cases reaching term survive for only 
a few hours after birth. 
Recurrence risk. This is not modified in comparison with 
the normal population. 
TRIPLOIDY 
• Aortic coarctation: directly recognizable on the upper 
mediastinal 3-vessel view (Figure 10.6d). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support the 
ultrasound suspect of Turner syndrome, are as follows: 
• Renal anomalies: frequently represented by a horseshoe 
kidney, which in some series is associated in 
40–50% of cases. 
• A short femur. 
Differential diagnosis. An early cystic hygroma, 
detected at the end of the 1st trimester, can also be due 
to trisomy 21 or be of non-chromosomal origin. For 
small, septate hygromas, the possibility of Noonan syndrome, 
which cannot be diagnosed in utero, should 
also be considered. Since in those cases in which the 
hygroma undergoes intrauterine regression, a pterygium 
is likely to remain, among the conditions to be 
differentiated from Turner syndrome is also the multiple 
pterygium syndrome. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Most fetuses with 
Turner syndrome die in utero, often in the 1st, or early 
2nd trimester. An additional group die later due to generalized 
hydrops. Hence, only a minority of Turner syndrome 
fetuses reach term of gestation. After birth, these 
females show short stature, pterygia, borderline mental 
retardation, and, later, amenorrhea from non-functioning 
streak gonads (primary hypogonadism). Survival is 
generally good, except for cases affected by hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome, which represents a life-threatening 
condition. Hearing problems are also present in a significant 
percentage of these women. 
Recurrence risk. This is not modified in comparison with 
the normal population. 

310 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
MICRODELETION 22q11.2 – DIGEORGE SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/4000–1/10 000 at birth (5–7% of neonates with congenital heart disease). 
Etiology. Microdeletion of variable extent in the locus 22q11. The deletion is recognizable in 15–20% of cases only 
on classic G-banded chromosomes; in most instances (80–85%), a FISH analysis is necessary. The phenotype can be 
due, much more rarely, to other defects such as monosomy 10p13 and deletion 18q21.33. 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: conotruncal and aortic arch heart defects; thymus aplasia/hypoplasia; isolated 
cleft palate; bifid uvula. 
Outcome. Good survival. The most important determinants of survival are the type of heart defect and the 
association of T-cell immunodeficiency from thymus aplasia, associated in DiGeorge syndrome with parathyroid 
hypoplasia/aplasia (hypocalcemic tetany and seizures). 
Recurrence risk. 50% if one of the parents is affected (5–10% of all cases). Extremely low (<1%) in cases due to 
de novo deletions. 
Figure 10.7 Triploidy. (a) FGR (triploidy type II). Early, severe growth retardation with generalized muscular hypotonia: often, the 
fetal head and the abdomen are visible on the same plane. Note the disproportion between head and abdomen, demonstrating the 
asymmetric type of FGR, and the ubiquitous oligohydramnios. (b) Dandy–Walker variant (arrow), severe oligohydramnios, and molar 
placenta (triploidy type I). (c) Syndactyly: the single digits cannot be individually identified (compare with (h)). (d) Macrophthalmus: a 
large orbit, the outline of which is outside the facial profile (proophthalmus), is visible (compare with (g)). (e) Ovarian hyperstimulation 
due to high titers of ß human chorionic gonadotropin (triploidy type I). (f) Cystic renal dysplasia, with parenchymal hyperechogenicity. 
The macerated specimen, after termination of pregnancy, demonstrates the macrophthalmos (g) and the syndactyly (h). 
Table 10.2 Triploidy: breakdown by phenotype and origin of the extra set of chromosomes 
Type Provenence FGR Placenta Maternal hCG 
I Paternal Symmetric Molar changes High 
II Maternal Asymmetric Small Unchanged 
FGR, fetal growth restriction; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin. 
a d 
b e 
c f 
g 
h 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 311 
Definition. The phenotype of the DiGeorge syndrome 
(OMIM 188400) was first described in 1965 
by Angelo DiGeorge. In the 1990s, it was found that 
more than 90% of individuals diagnosed with the 
DiGeorge syndrome have a deletion/microdeletion 
of the long arm of chromosome 22 (locus 22q11.2). 
The same genetic defect has been successively 
demonstrated also in other conditions featuring 
craniofacial and cardiac defects, such as velocardiofacial 
syndrome and the conotruncal anomaly face. 
This is why nowadays all of these phenotypes are 
considered as various expressions of the same 
genetic anomaly, namely 22q11 microdeletion. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The various phenotypes 
are due to microdeletions in the 22q11.2 locus. In 
over 80% of cases, a 3 Mb region between two 
repeated sequences (low copy repeats, LCRs) on 
chromosome 22 is deleted. The frequency of the 
defect is due to the fact that, because of the high 
homology, unequal crossing-over links occur during 
meiosis. The recent discovery of a rare microduplication 
22q11.2 syndrome seems to confirm this pathogenetic 
mechanism. As already mentioned, the term 
‘microdeletion 22q11.2 syndrome’ encompasses different 
clinical entities, including DiGeorge 
syndrome, the Sphrintzen (velocardio-facial) syndrome, 
and the Takao (conotruncal anomaly face) 
syndrome. In particular, the phenotypic expression 
of the 22q11.2 microdeletion is extremely variable; 
however, in most cases, cardiac conotruncal defects, 
thymus hypoplasia/aplasia, parathyroid hypoplasia/ 
aplasia, and anomalies of the palate are associated 
with minor craniofacial anomalies. All of these malformations 
involve anatomic structures developing 
from the third and the fourth pharyngeal arches. The 
underlying defect consists of an arrest in the development 
and migration of neural crest cells towards the 
pharyngeal arches.7 
Genetics. A deletion involving the locus q22.1 on 
chromosome 22 is present in over 90% of the cases. 
As already pointed out, this lesion is rarely so large 
as to show up on G-banded chromosomes; this happens 
in only 15–20% of cases. In most cases, to 
reveal the microdeletion, a fluorescence in-situ 
hybridization (FISH) analysis is needed. Several manufacturers 
have been producing kits for FISH diagnosis 
of the 22q11 microdeletion (Vysis, Oncor, etc.). 
These kits are based on DNA probes for the locus 
that is usually deleted in this condition, namely 
22q11.2. The commercial availability of these kits 
has allowed prenatal diagnosis of the 22q11 
microdeletion. As reported below, this test is now 
recommended in those fetuses in which a conotruncal 
anomaly at high risk of 22q11 microdeletion is 
found.8,9 In a very limited number of cases, the 22q11 
microdeletion syndrome may be due to other chromosomal 
defects, such as a 10p13 monosomy or an 
18q21.33 deletion. In these cases, also, it has been 
speculated that genes involved in the neural cell 
migration process may be deleted. Finally, it it interesting 
to note that some teratogens (e.g., retinoic acid 
derivatives) and maternal insulin-dependent diabetes 
may induce a DiGeorge-like phenotype. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A significant number of the 
anomalies characterizing the DiGeorge syndrome and, in 
general, 22q11 microdeletion, can be diagnosed by 
ultrasound: 
• Congenital heart disease of the conotruncal type 
(including interruption of the aortic arch type B): 
present in most cases of 22q11 microdeletion 
(Figure 10.8a,b), and detectable on outflow 
views.8,9 
• Thymus hypoplasia/aplasia (Figure 10.8c; see also 
Chapter 6, Figure 6.26): always present in DiGeorge 
syndrome, and detectable on the axial 3-vessel view 
of the upper mediastinum.10 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of 22q11 microdeletion syndrome, 
are as follows: 
• Renal anomalies: often represented by uni/bilateral 
hydronephrosis. 
• Polyhydramnios. 
• FGR. 
Note that cleft palate, which usually involves the soft 
posterior palate, and minor facial dysmorphisms are not 
detectable in utero. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The survival of 
individuals diagnosed with the 22q11 microdeletion 
depends on the phenotypic expression of the syndrome, 
on the severity of the associated conotruncal 
defect, and on the presence or absence of T-cell 
immunodeficiency due to thymus aplasia. Hence, if the 
phenotype is that of the classic DiGeorge syndrome, 
which also features primary hypoparathoyroidism, the 
prognosis is guarded. As far as the quality of life and 
the long-term prognosis are concerned, the first issue 
to be considered is the fact that mental retardation of 
variable severity affects roughly 30% of cases and that 
its occurrence cannot be predicted in the fetus. This 

312 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
APERT SYNDROME 
Incidence. Very rare: 1/70 000 at birth. 
Etiology. Mutation of the FGFR2 gene (98% of cases). 
Ultrasound signs. Turricephaly (due to synostoses) + brachy-syndactyly; frontal bossing; hypertelorism; congenital 
heart disease; vertebral and renal anomalies. 
Outcome. 50% risk of mental retardation. Motor disabilities due to the syndactyly, if particularly severe. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low. However, if one parent is affected, the transmission becomes autosomal 
dominant, with a 50% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Apert syndrome (OMIM 101200) is also 
defined as acrocephalosyndactyly, to underscore the two 
major features of the condition, namely the early closure 
of the coronal suture, which is responsible for the turricephaly, 
the hypertelorism and frontal bossing, and the 
brachysyndactyly of variable severity. In addition, other 
major anomalies, such as congenital heart disease, fusion 
of the cervical vertebrae, and renal anomalies, are often 
associated. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. One of two missense 
mutations of the gene coding for the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) is present in 98% 
of cases of Apert syndrome. It has been demonstrated 
that the pathogenetic mechanism involves an increase 
in the number of precursor cells entering the 
osteogenic pathway, induced by the FGFR2 mutations. 
This in turn leads ultimately to increased bone 
matrix formation and premature calvarial ossification 
in the fetus. 
Genetics. In families at risk, molecular diagnosis is feasible, 
through direct search for the above-mentioned mutations 
on DNA from chorionic villi. 
Figure 10.8 22q11 microdeletion. Cardiovascular anomalies commonly associated with this deletion include particular conotruncal 
anomalies and also thymus hypoplasia/aplasia. (a) Common arterial trunk, type I: left outflow tract view showing the main pulmonary 
artery (P) with the branches (arrows) departing from the common arterial trunk (T). (b) Right aortic arch: color Doppler image of the 
3-vessel view showing the aortic arch located on the right of the trachea (arrowhead). In the normal left-sided arch, this is located on the 
left of the trachea. Ao, aortic arch; Pa, ductal arch. (c) Thymus hypoplasia at 36 weeks of gestation in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot: 
3-vessel view. Note the reduced volume of the thymus (T and arrows) in front of the great vessels. The arrowhead indicates the trachea; 
Pa, ductal arch; SVC, superior vena cava. 
a b c 
consists of borderline mental retardation (borderline 
IQ) in 50% of cases, mild mental retardation (IQ <70) 
in 45%, and moderate/severe learning disabilities in 
the remaining 5%.7 Hypocalcemic tetany and the 
consequent seizures may be avoided with careful 
supplementation. 

Ultrasound diagnosis. Most of the anomalies characterizing 
Apert syndrome may be diagnosed in the fetus. 
The major malformations, the recognition of which 
leads to the diagnosis in most instances, are as follows: 
• Facial anomalies (turricephaly, depressed nasal 
bridge¸ and mandibular prognatism): these can be 
detected on the midsagittal view of the facial profile 
(Figure 10.9; see also Chapter 3) and on the coronal 
view of the face. 
• Brachy-syndactyly of hands and feet: this is usually 
evident and may be severe (Figure 10.10a,b,d). 
• Craniosynostosis of the coronal suture: this can 
also be detected on two-dimensional (2D) imaging, 
by the indentation of the frontoparietal junction 
evident on the axial transthalamic view 
(Figure 10.10c). However, the use of 3D ultrasound 
with the transparent maximum mode makes 
diagnosis of the premature closure of the coronal 
suture straightforward.11 (Figure 10.9b; see also 
Chapter 3). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of Apert syndrome, are 
as follows: 
• Congenital heart disease (10% of cases) (Figure 
10.11a,b) – VSD in particular (Figure 10.11a). 
• Fusion of cervical vertebrae (C5–C6) (Figure 10.11c). 
• Renal anomalies (Figure 10.11d). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes all other clinical 
conditions characterized by cranial synostoses and due 
to the same missense mutations of the FBGR2 gene, such 
as Carpenter, Pfeiffer, and Crouzon syndromes (in some 
circumstances, it is impossible to reach a definite diagnosis 
by ultrasound): 
• Carpenter syndrome.5 look for . craniosynostosis + 
polysyndactyly + congenital heart disease (50%). 
• Pfeiffer syndrome (OMIM 101600):5 look for . 
craniosynostosis + hypertelorism + syndactyly. 
• Crouzon syndrome (OMIM 123500):5 look for . 
craniosynostosis + maxillary hypoplasia (nonsyndactyly). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Individuals 
with Apert syndrome face a 50% risk of mental 
retardation. Long-term sequelae also include respiratory 
problems due to obstruction of the high airways, 
which may be so severe as to require tracheotomy. 
Difficulties in the use of the hands may be associated 
if the syndactyly is severe. Cosmetic surgery is 
employed in cases characterized by major facial dysmorphisms. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases occur sporadically, being 
due to de novo mutations, and thus the recurrence 
rate is extremely low. However, if one parent is 
affected, the transmission shows an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, with a recurrence rate of 
50%. 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 313 
Figure 10.9 Apert syndrome: major signs. On the midsagittal view of the facial profile, the increased craniocaudal diameter of the skull 
(turricephaly), due to the closure of the coronal sutures, and the low nasal bridge are evident. (a) 2D imaging. (b) 3D maximum-mode 
image showing the sealed coronal suture (see Chapter 3 for suture abnormalities). (c) Three-dimensional surface-mode image showing the 
characteristic features of Apert syndrome: turricephaly, low nasal bridge, and tendency to macrophthalmia. (d) The specimen after termination 
of pregnancy. 
a b c d 

314 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.10 Apert syndrome: major signs. (a) 
3D maximum-mode image showing syndactyly 
of one hand. Note the abnormal metacarpal and 
phalangeal bones. This image is much more 
informative than the 2D one (b), in which only a 
few of the bones can be imaged, being in different 
planes (arrows). With the 3D technique, it is 
possible to display also thicker slices, and this 
leads to clearer evidence of the syndactyly. (c) 
The closure of the coronal suture can also be 
detected in some cases on the 2D axial transthalamic 
view: the indentation at the level of the 
coronal suture (arrowheads) and the absence of 
the normal sonolucent gap between the frontal 
and the parietal bones is seen. (d) Syndactyly of 
one foot on 2D ultrasound (arrows). 
Figure 10.11 Apert syndrome: additional 
signs. (a) Congenital heart disease: malalignment 
VSD wth an overiding aorta (Ao). RV, right ventricle. 
(b) Abnormal venous return: the ductus 
venosus is absent and the umbilical vein (arrow) 
drains directly into the right atrium (RA) via a 
collector coursing on the anterior surface of the 
liver. (c) Fusion of the cervical vertebrae: on the 
midsagittal view of the spine, the spinous 
processes are abnormal and fused (arrows). (d) 
Renal anomalies: on the coronal view of the 
abdomen, a horseshoe kidney is found (arrows); 
mild pyelectasia was associated. Bl, bladder. 
a b 
c 
d 
a c 
b d 

Definition. Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) 
(OMIM 130650) is the most common congenital disorder 
characterized by neonatal overgrowth and gigantism. 
Its most common features are macroglossia (98%), 
pre/postnatal gigantism (>90th centile) (87%), abdominal 
wall defects (exomphalos and diastasis recti: 
77%), external ear anomalies (75%), and visceromegaly 
(62%). In 7% of cases, embryonal tumors may arise 
(Wilms’ tumor, hepatoblastoma, and adrenal carcinoma). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. BWS is due to genetic anomalies 
in chromosome 11p15. Several genes with a role in 
growth control are located in this region; their imbalance 
determines the overgrowth and the gigantism characteristic 
of BWS. There are three mechanisms that may cause 
BWS in sporadic cases: (i) chromosomal anomalies involving 
the 11p15 region (duplications, unbalanced translocations, 
and inversions) (2% of cases); (ii) single-gene 
mutations (so-called BWS genes), for example mutations 
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor gene CDKN1C, 
loss of imprinting and overexpression of gene encoding 
insulin-like growth factor type 2, IGF-2, and methylation 
and silencing of the H19 gene (5%); (iii) uniparental disomy 
11p15 (20%). In some cases (2–3%), mutations of 
the NSD1 gene, mapping to 5q35, have been found; it 
seems that this gene controls the imprinting of the region 
11p15. Familial cases (15%) are transmitted with an autosomal 
dominant pattern with incomplete penetrance. 
Genetic heterogeneity has also been found in these cases: 
40% of them are due to mutations of the CDKN1C gene. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis of BWS is feasible only in 
those cases in which the molecular defect is known. In 
this regard, some genotypic–phenotypic correlations 
should be considered: 
• paternal 11p15 duplication and risk of mental 
retardation 
• CDKN1C gene mutations and occurrence of 
exomphalos 
• uniparental disomy/defects of BWS genes and absence 
of exomphalos 
No correlations have been found with the tendency to 
develop embryonal tumors, although Wilms’ tumor has 
only been found in patients with uniparental disomy 
and/or BWS gene defects. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most anomalies characterizing 
BWS can be detected in the fetus.12 Major malformations, 
the recognition of which leads to the diagnosis in 
most instances, are as follows: 
• Exomphalos (Figure 10.12a), usually without the liver; 
in the case of a normal karyotype, this is the main sign 
that may lead to a prenatal diagnosis of BWS. 
• Visceromegaly. 
• Macroglossia.12 
• Gigantism (better appreciated in the 3rd trimester). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of BWS are as follows: 
• Polyhydramnios (usually in the 3rd trimester). 
• Renal anomalies (polycystic kidneys: Figure 10.12b). 
Differential diagnosis. This should include primarily 
Perlman and Zellweger syndromes; Down syndrome 
should also be differentiated from BWS (a normal karyotype 
rules out this possibility): 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 315 
BECKWITH–WIEDEMANN SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/14 000. 
Etiology. Structural anomalies of chromosome 11p15 (duplications, inversions). Uniparental disomy (20%). 
Mutations of genes CDKN1C, IGF2 (LOI). Mutations of the gene NSD1 at 5q35. 
Ultrasound signs. Exomphalos; macroglossia; gigantism; polycystic kidneys; genital anomalies. 
Outcome. 21% perinatal mortality rate (preterm delivery and hypoglycemia are common); overgrowth during 
infancy, tendency to develop embryonal neoplasia (7%). If neonatal asphyxia due to macroglossia is prevented, 
the intelligence is normal. 
Recurrence risk. The empiric risk, in cases with no family history, is 1–2%. In the 15% of familial cases, the 
transmission is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance (50%). 

316 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Perlman syndrome (OMIM 267000): look for . 
visceromegaly + gigantism + diaphragmatic hernia + 
micrognathia. 
• Zellweger syndrome (OMIM 214100): look for . 
visceromegaly + micrognathia + cataract + talipes + 
macrosomia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Fetal overgrowth 
and the risk of hypoglycemia may induce preterm delivery 
and perinatal complications, responsible for the 21% 
neonatal mortality rate. Overgrowth is associated 
with accelerated bone maturation, but this overgrowth is 
no longer evident in adulthood. The advantage of a prenatal 
diagnosis of BWS lies in the prevention of premature 
birth, hypoglycemic complications, and cerebral 
asphyxia due to macroglossia. At the same time, it 
allows one to determine an appropriate follow-up 
protocol aiming at early discovery of possible embryonal 
tumors, which arise in 7% of cases.13 As already 
mentioned, intelligence is normal. 
Figure 10.12 Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. (a) Omphalocele: the arrowheads point to the abdominal defect; only bowel loops have 
herniated. (b) Cystic renal dysplasia: note the hyperechogenicity of the cortex. 
CAT-EYE SYNDROME (CES) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Etiology. Presence of a marker extra-chromosome: invdup(22). 
Ultrasound signs. CHD (60%) (mainly abnormal pulmonary return), urogenital (70%), gastrointestinal, facial 
(pre-auricular tags in >80%) anomalies. 
Outcome. 20% infant mortality rate. Mild to moderate developmental delay in 60% of cases; severe in 5–8%. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low in cases with no family history. If one parent is affected, the recurrence risk 
becomes 50%, but the reproductive function of the affected individuals is severely compromised. 
Definition. Cat-eye syndrome (CES: OMIM 115470) is a 
rare disorder with variable expression characterized by 
five types of anomalies: (i) pre-auricular tags; (ii) anorectal 
malformations; (iii) urogenital malformations; (iv) 
ocular colobomas; and (v) congenital heart disease. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. CES is due to the presence of 
a supernumerary bisatellited chromosome, resulting 
from an inversion/duplication of the regions 22q11.1 
and 22q11.21 (invdup(22)). According to the break 
point, two types of CES have been identified (CES I and 
II). No correlation has been found between the subtype 
of CES and the phenotypic expression. 
Genetics. The original genetic defect was identified 
for the first time in 1965 and thoroughly described 
in 1981. Prenatal diagnosis of CES is feasible on 
fetal cells harvested with chorionic villus sampling, 
amniocentesis, on cordocentesis. A FISH analysis with 
probes specific for chromosome 22 is needed for the 
final diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Only few of the numerous malformations 
characterizing CES are recognizable at 
midtrimester ultrasound. The major malformations, the 
recognition of which leads to the diagnosis in most cases, 
are as follows:14 
• Congenital heart disease (Figure 10.13) – in particular 
abnormal pulmonary venous return. It should 
be underlined that the prospective diagnosis of 
this anomaly requires a highly experienced fetal 
a b 

cardiologist, an optimal acoustic window and a 
favorable fetal lie. 
• Anorectal atresia: this is not always diagnosable 
prenatally. 
• Pre-auricular tags (Figure 10.14): these can be more 
easily recognized on 3D ultrasound (see also Chapter 3). 
• Urogenital anomalies. 
Differential diagnosis. The association of pre-auricular 
tags and abnormal pulmonary venous return is typical of 
CES. However, in most cases, the diagnosis is made as 
an incidental finding during karyotyping performed for 
other indications. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. CES has an infant 
mortality rate of 20%, mainly due to cardiac failure and 
recurrent infections. Mental retardation occurs in 50% 
of cases and is severe in 5–8%. In cases with no family 
history, the recurrence risk is extremely low. However, if 
one parent is affected, the risk becomes 50%, although 
the reproductive function of the affected individuals is 
severely compromised. 
FEMORAL HYPOPLASIA/UNUSUAL FACIES SYNDROME (FHUFS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. The syndrome is often associated with maternal insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. 
Ultrasound signs. Focal femural hypoplasia, uni- or bilateral, possibly associated with fibular hypoplasia. 
Micrognathia, cleft lip/palate, and mandibular asymmetry. 
Outcome. Normal survival and intelligence. Motor disabilities due to the femoral hypoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Sporadic. 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 317 
Figure 10.13 Cat-eye syndrome: partial abnormal pulmonary venous return. (a) Normal size of the coronary sinus (arrows). 
(b) Abnormal drainage of one pulmonary vein (arrows) into the coronary sinus, which is consequently dilated (arrowheads). Modified 
from reference 14. 
Figure 10.14 Cat-eye syndrome: 3D rendering of the lateral 
aspect of the fetal face, showing two pre-auricular tags (arrow). 
a b 

318 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The definition of FHUFS (OMIM 134780) 
is based upon two major signs: focal femoral hypoplasia 
and the unusual face, characterized by a small nose, 
possible cleft lip/palate, and micrognathia. FHUFS was 
described for the first time in 1975. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
However, a significant association with maternal insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus has been reported. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is not possible, since 
the involved gene(s) are unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The two main features, both of 
which can be recognized on ultrasound, are: 
• Micrognathia: this is detected on the midsagittal view 
of the fetal profile (Figure 10.15a,b). 
• Focal femural hypoplasia: This is of variable degree, 
uni- or bilateral; sometimes it is associated with fibular 
hypoplasia (Figure 10.15c–e). 
Additional findings include the following: 
• Cleft lip/palate: inconstantly associated. 
• Mandibular asymmetry: very difficult to detect. 
If the femoral hypoplasia is found in association with 
one of the other features reported above, the diagnosis of 
FHUFS is virtually certain. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is rather 
limited, because of the rarity of the focal femoral 
hypoplasia. If no craniofacial anomalies are detected in 
association, the occurrence of a focal ischemic event during 
embryogenesis may be considered. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival and 
intelligence are normal. The only major disability is 
physical and is due to the femoral hypoplasia, which 
impairs ambulation. 
Incidence. Variable, according to diagnostic criteria. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Diffuse joint contractures with extended and crossed legs, flexed and adducted arms, talipes, 
and clenched hands with overlapping fingers; lethal thoracic hypoplasia; micrognathia. 
Outcome. Lethal in the majority of cases. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. Sporadic cases have also 
been described. 
FETAL AKYNESIA DEFORMATION SEQUENCE (FADS) 
Figure 10.15 Femoral hypoplasia/unusual facies syndrome. (a) 
Severe micrognathia (arrow). (b) Confirmation, at autopsy, showing 
also the long philtrum and the thin upper lips, which are typical 
features of this syndrome. (c) Focal femoral hypoplasia: 
(arrows). (d) The contralateral femur, showing normal length. (e) 
Confirmation at autopsy: the white bars indicate the size and 
position of the femurs. 
a
c
d 
b
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 319 
Definition. The fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS: OMIM 208150) includes a large group of syndromic 
conditions characterized by fixed joint contractures. 
The list of anomalies included in this group featuring 
joint contractures varies among the different textbooks 
and web resources. In our opinion, the easiest way to deal 
with this entity(ies) is the following. There is a first group 
of disorders strictly related to the occurrence of diffuse and 
total neuromuscular block. These share a very high perinatal 
mortality rate, mainly due to the lethal pulmonary 
hypoplasia induced by the ubiquitous thoracic hypoplasia. 
This group comprises the classic FADS (including also 
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and Pena–Shokeir 
syndrome), Neu–Laxova syndrome (OMIM 256520), 
multiple pterygium syndrome (OMIM 253290), and 
cerebro-oculofacioskeletal (COFS syndrome – OMIM 
214150). A second group of conditions is characterized by 
joint contractures of variable severity and different etiologies. 
This larger group includes congenital myotonic dystrophy 
(OMIM 214150), restrictive dermopathy, Alpers 
syndrome (OMIM 203700), and Gaucher storage disease 
(OMIM 231000). In the acronym ‘FADS’, the term 
‘sequence’ is appropriate since, according to numerous 
authors, this sequence of events represents the common 
final pathway of completely differerent pathogenetic 
mechanisms rather than a single neuromuscular disease. In 
this section, FADS itself will be described in detail, while in 
the following sections, most of the other prenatally recognizable 
disorders mentioned above will be illustrated. 
However, the description of conditions characterized by 
joint contractures that may not be diagnosed in the fetus 
will not be described here. The reader may wish to consult 
more comprehensive textbooks and/or websites on neonatal 
genetic diseases in order to find additional information 
regarding these conditions (Gaucher storage disease, 
restrictive dermopathy, etc.). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The basic defect of FADS and 
related conditions is the presence of severe and progressive 
contractures involving virtually all muscles. To 
explain this event, several hypotheses have been made, 
variously involving a central neuromuscular anomaly (1st 
motorneuron), a malfunction of neuromuscular transmission, 
and a peripheral muscular defect. There is only one 
finding that has been repeatedly found in families with 
multiple reproductive failures due to recurrence of FADS, 
namely high maternal titers of autoantibodies directed 
against the muscular acetylcholine receptor, which are 
usually detected in patients with acquired myasthenia 
gravis. However, in these cases, the mothers were asymptomatic 
and the antibodies were directed against different 
domains of the receptor compared with the autoantibodies 
usually associated with myasthenia gravis.15 
Genetics. Since the gene(s) responsible for the disease are 
still unknown, prenatal molecular diagnosis is not possible. 
Deformation sequence (Figure 10.16). Regardless of the 
time of onset and of the underlying cause, the ubiquitous 
contractures of all muscles result in a particular position 
of the limbs, due to the different opposing forces. As far 
as posture is concerned (see also Chapter 9), the lower 
limbs are in fixed extension and crossed, since the quadriceps 
(extensors) are more powerful than the femoral 
biceps (flexors). Talipes are often associated. On the contrary, 
the upper limbs show flexion deformities and 
appear adducted on the thorax, because of the prevalence 
of the flexors (biceps) over the extensors (triceps). The 
hands often show ulnar deviation, and clenched and 
overlapping fingers. The contractures of the diaphragm 
and the intercostal muscles lead to frequently lethal thoracic 
hypoplasia. Finally, the impairment of the swallowing 
reflex and the contracture of the masseter are 
responsible for micrognathia (and polyhydramnios). 
Sometimes, the contractures may involve the lower limbs 
only, and in these cases the knees appear flexed. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. All of the above mentioned signs 
are detectable in the fetus. In this regard, it should be 
noted that the onset of the contracture is variable, from 
12 to 30 weeks of gestation, also in consecutive pregnancies 
of the same couple.16 The major signs, the recognition 
of which may lead to the diagnosis, are as follows 
(Figures 10.16–10.19): 
• Complete absence of active fetal movements (akinesia): 
this is due to complete motor paralysis. If the 
ultrasound examination is performed midway through 
the development of the akynesia, it is possible to spot 
en bloc movements of the limbs, which show no joint 
articulation. 
• Limb contractures: involving the arms and legs 
(Figures 10.17b,c and 10.18a–d). 
• Micrognathia: this is due to the block of the temporomandibular 
joint (Figures 10.17a and 10.18e,f). 
• Abnormal positioning of hands and feet: ulnar deviation, 
clenched and overlapping fingers and talipes 
(Figures 10.17b,c and 10.18a-d). 
• Thoracic hypoplasia: this is due to the fixed contractures 
of the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles. 
• Severe polyhydramnios: this is due to the absence of 
swallowing. 
Additional, inconstant, signs include the following: 
• Microstomia: this is due to the masseter contracture 
(Figure 10.19). 
• Cystic hygroma: this may be associated with FADS in 
some cases (Figures 10.16c and 10.17d). 
• Non-visualization of the gastric bubble: this is due to 
the absence of swallowing. 
Differential diagnosis. The first entity to be ruled out is 
trisomy 18, because contractures of the legs are relatively 
often present in this aneuploidy. The recognition of 

320 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.17 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). In this case (the same as in Figure 10.16c), the following anomalies can be 
seen: (a) micrognathia, due to the paralysis of the masseter (blocked temporomandibular joint); (b) arthrogryposis of the upper limbs, 
which appear flexed and adducted; (c) arthrogryposis of the lower limbs, with talipes; (d) cystic hygroma (arrows), which is inconstantly 
associated with FADS.
a b 
c d 
Figure 10.16 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). The specimens shown here demonstrate how joint contractures may variously 
affect the limbs. (a) 21-week-old fetus: predominant involvement of the lower limbs, which appear flexed and crossed, with talipes. 
Clinodactyly of the hands and low-set ears are also present. (b) 19-week-old fetus: classic FADS, with the lower limbs extended and 
crossed, scissors-like, while the upper limbs appear adducted and flexed. Talipes and ulnar deviation of the clenched hands are also evident. 
Note the severe hypoplasia of all muscles, defined as congenital amyoplasia, which is the result of the prolonged akynesia (corresponding 
to ultrasound shown in Figure 10.18). (c) Neonate dead just after birth: diffuse contractures, ulnar deviation of the hands, microstomia 
(small mouth), and cystic hygroma (arroowheads) are seen (this is the same case as in Figure 10.17). 
a b c 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 321 
major anomalies possibly associated with trisomy 18 
and, above all, fetal karyotyping may help rule out trisomy 
18. In addition, a differential diagnosis with the 
other neuroarthrogryposes should be carried out, 
although this procedure does not have an important 
prognostic role, since all of these disorders are almost 
invariably lethal, with the exception of a few cases of 
late-onset FADS. The features to consider in the differential 
diagnosis of the various neuroarthrogryposes are as 
follows: 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:5 look for . arthrogryposis 
+ pterygia + edema + cystic hygroma. 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:5 look for . arthrogryposis + 
microcephaly + hypertelorism + cataract + micrognathia + 
CNS anomalies + syndactyly + subcutaneous edema. 
• COFS syndrome:5,17 look for .arthrogryposis + anophthalmia/
microphthalmia + cataract + micrognathia + CNS 
anomalies + scoliosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Most FADS cases 
reach term, although preterm delivery may occur because of 
the severe associated polyhydramnios. However, after 
birth, death ensues in a few minutes to some hours due to 
the lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. The extremely rare lateonset 
cases, in which the pulmonary hypoplasia is not so 
severe as to be lethal, may survive the neonatal period. 
However, the quality of life is often extremely poor because 
of the severe contractures requiring multiple orthopedic surgical 
procedures to release the hypoplastic tendons and 
long-term physiotherapy. Significant respiratory complications 
can also occur. In a small subset of these cases, the outcome 
may be fair, after surgery and physiotherapy. 
Figure 10.18 Fetal Akynesia Deformation 
Sequence (FADS). Two cases of FADS at 21 (a,b) 
and 19 weeks (c-f) of gestation. (a) arthogryposis of 
the lower extremities, with the legs fixed in extension 
and abnormal feet; (b) confirmation at 
autopsy; (c) in this case, the legs appear extended 
and crossed, scissor-like. Note also the dislocation 
of the knee (arrow); (d) confirmation at autopsy. e) 
severe, early onset micrognathia (arrowhead), due 
to the block of the temporomandibular joint, from 
paralysis of the masseter; (f) confirmation at 
autopsy. 
a
b 
c e 
d f 
Figure 10.19 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). In 
some cases, the neuromuscular block of the masseter and of the 
orbicular muscles impairs the normal development of the mouth, 
eventually leading to a smaller than normal mouth (microstomia). 
(a) On the oblique view of the lips, the small size of the mouth is 
evident. Note the concurrent polyhydramnios, which is constantly 
associated and is due to lack of swallowing. (b) Confirmation at 
autopsy following birth. This is the same case as in Figure 10.16(c) 
and 10.17. 
a
b 

322 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Recurrence risk. FADS is mainly transmitted with an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which implies 
a 25% recurrence risk. Rarer X-linked and sporadic 
cases have also been described. 
Incidence. Extremely rare: 1/200 000 at birth. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Laryngeal atresia; cleft lip/palate; congenital heart disease; microphthalmia; bilateral renal 
agenesis; syndactyly. 
Outcome. Lethal. A few reports of survivors after EXIT procedure. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance, with 25% recurrence risk. Sporadic cases have also been 
described. 
Definition. Fraser syndrome (OMIM 219000), which 
shows an extremely variable phenotypic expression, is 
named after the author who first described the cluster of 
anomalies in 1962. The malformations that characterize 
Fraser syndrome are: laryngeal atresia, cleft lip/palate, 
congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, bilateral renal 
agenesis, and syndactyly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In a few families with Fraser 
syndrome, a missense mutation of the FRAS1 gene, 
at chromosome 4q21, has been described. This gene 
encodes a putative extracellular matrix (ECM) protein. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the fetus, the malformation 
that in most cases leads to the suspicion or diagnosis 
of Fraser syndrome is laryngeal/tracheal atresia, due to 
the frequent association of bilateral renal agenesis and 
consequently of severe oligohydramnios, which makes 
the assessment of fetal anatomy very difficult.18 Major 
anomalies, the recognition of which may lead to the 
diagnosis of Fraser syndrome, are as follows: 
• Laryngeal atresia: this can be diagnosed on the axial 
and coronal views of the fetal thorax (Figure 10.20; 
see also Chapter 6: Figures 6.5 and 6.21). Both lungs 
are severely enlarged and hyperechoic; the heart is 
squeezed into the center of the thorax. Inconstantly, 
a bronchogram (dilatation of the trachea and 
bronchi by the entrapped fluid) is seen. 
• Bilateral renal agenesis: this is responsible for the 
frequently associated severe oligohydramnios. 
• Congenital heart disease: this is constantly associated. 
• Microphthalmia: this is detected on the axial view of 
the orbits. 
Additional anomalies, the detection of which is hampered 
by the severe oligohydramnios, are as follows: 
Figure 10.20 Fraser syndrome: laryngeal atresia. (a) On the axial 
view of the thorax, the severely enlarged and hyperechoic lungs 
(arrowheads) are visible. The heart (H) is squeezed into the mediastinum 
by compression from the lungs. Behind the heart, the trachea 
(Tr) can be seen: the whole bronchial tree is dilated due 
to the fluid trapped below the atretic larynx (bronchogram). (b) 
Power Doppler examination demonstrating that the hollow structure 
behind the heart is not of cardiovascular origin. It should 
be noted that, for a diagnosis of Fraser syndrome, other major 
anomalies should be present (see text). 
a
b 
FRASER SYNDROME 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 323 
• Syndactyly. 
• Cleft lip/palate. 
Differential diagnosis. This is virtually non-existent, due 
to the peculiarity and the rarity of the malformations, 
especially laryngeal atresia. It should be pointed out that 
laryngeal atresia is not always present, but this is the 
only anomaly that may lead to the diagnosis in the fetus, 
because of the difficulties in recognizing the other craniofacial 
and/or skeletal signs due to the constant oligohydramnios 
(renal agenesis). The differential diagnosis of 
laryngeal atresia is described in Chapter 6. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Fraser syndrome 
is almost always lethal, due to the bilateral renal agenesis 
and laryngeal atresia. There are a few descriptions of 
survivors following an EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapartum 
treatment: see Chapters 3 and 6). In these cases, 
the microphthalmia and syndactyly, if severe, represent 
the main problems. 
Recurrence risk. Fraser syndrome is transmitted with an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which implies a 
25% recurrence risk. However, a few sporadic cases 
have been described. 
GOLDENHAR SYNDROME (OAVS – OCULO-AURICULO-VERTEBRAL SPECTRUM) 
Incidence. 1/3000–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Hemifacial microsomia; cleft lip/palate; external ear anomalies; vertebral anomalies. 
Outcome. Relatively good survival. Intelligence is normal in most cases. High cosmetic impact. 
Recurrence risk. The empiric recurrence risk, in the absence of a positive family history, has been set at 2%. 
Families with autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance patterns have been described (50% and 25% 
recurrence risk, respectively). 
Definition. Goldenhar syndrome – or more generally the 
oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) – (OMIM 
164210) represents a cluster of malformations due to 
abnormal development of the first and second branchial 
arches, associated in some cases with ocular and vertebral 
anomalies. The association of an epibulbar dermoid 
with vertebral anomalies specifically identifies Goldenhar 
syndrome within OAVS. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
Pathogenetically, a derangement in the development of 
the neural crest has been discovered in OAVS, which 
links this malformative cluster with the CHARGE 
(Coloboma, Heart defects, Atresia of choanae, Retarded 
growth, Genital anomalies) association. OAVS shows 
genetic heterogeneity, since linkage analysis has shown 
possible involvement of the chromosome 14q32 region 
in one family but not in others. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is still not available, 
because of the above-mentioned genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most malformations characterizing 
OAVS can be recognized prenatally.19,20 Major 
anomalies, the recognition of which may lead to the 
diagnosis of Goldenhar syndrome, are as follows: 
• Cleft lip/palate (Figure 10.21a): this is detected on the 
axial and oblique views of the lips and palate and/or 
on 3D surface-rendered images of the fetal face. 
Figure 10.21 Goldenhar syndrome – oculo-auriculo-vertebral 
spectrum, (OAVS). (a) 3D surface-rendered image of the fetal face 
showing cleft lip/palate and hemifacial microsomia (note the 
hypoplastic orbit on the same side of the clefting). (b) Axial view of 
the orbits showing unilateral microphthalmia. (c) Pre-auricular 
tag. (d) Left superior vena cava (arrow) A, aorta; C, right superior 
vena cava; P, pulmonary artery. 
a c 
b d 

324 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Hemifacial microsomia (Figure 10.21a,b): this 
becomes evident on the coronal view of the face 
and/or 3D surface-rendered images of the fetal 
face. 
• Unilateral microphthalmia (Figure 10.21a,c): this is 
detected on the axial view of the orbits. 
• Unilateral external ear anomalies (Figure 10.21b): 
these are detected on the parasagittal view of 
the head, for the external ear or, more advantageously, 
3D surface-rendered images of the fetal 
face. 
• Vertebral anomalies: often involving the cervical and 
thoracic region, these are recognized on the sagittal 
view of the spine. 
Additional anomalies include the following: 
• Congenital heart disease (Figure 10.21d): these often 
involve the interventricular septum. 
• Urinary tract anomalies. 
• CNS anomalies: most often agenesis of the 
corpus callosum and cerebellar abnormalities (also 
hemihypoplasia.19 
Differential diagnosis. This includes the CHARGE 
association and Treacher–Collins syndrome: 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome: look for .cleft lip/palate + 
mandibular hypoplasia + external ear anomalies. 
• CHARGE association: look for . external ear anomalies 
+ ocular anomalies + congential heart disease + 
urinary tract anomalies + FGR. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is normal. 
The risk of mental retardation is relatively low, 
with 13% of affected individuals showing an IQ < 85. 
Usually, individuals with mental retardation also have 
microtia. Hearing loss may also be present, due to the 
involvement of the external ear. Cosmetic surgery is 
indicated in all cases to reduce the aesthetic impact of 
the hemifacial microsomia. 
HOLT–ORAM SYNDROME (HOS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Mutations in the TBX5 (T-box) gene at chromosome 12q24.1. Genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound signs. Anomalies of the thumb (absence, bifid, syndactyly) and/or of the upper limb (phocomelia, 
radial–ulnar anomalies), and congenital heart disease (mainly atrial/ventricular septal defects). 
Outcome. Depends on the degree of upper-limb involvement. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, with 50% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Holt–Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) was 
described by Holt and Oram in 1960. It is characterized 
by usually asymmetric anomalies of the upper limbs, 
ranging from absence of the thumbs to phocomelia and 
by septal cardiac defects (mainly atrial and interventricular 
septal defects). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the TBX5 
gene, at chromosome 12q24.1, has been found in 25% 
of affected families and 50% of sporadic cases. HOS 
shows anticipation, with increasing severity of the syndrome 
in succeeding generations. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is possible if the TBX5 
gene mutation has been identified in the affected family. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is based, in 
the cases at risk, on the recognition of upper-limb anomalies. 
As pointed out, these range from thumb absence to 
bifid thumb to three-phalangeal thumb to syndactyly 
with the index finger (Figure 10.22a). In 10–15% of 
cases, phocomelia can occur. Cardiac septal defects are 
commonly associated. However, only the occurrence of 
a ventricular septal defect may, if it is large enough, be 
recognized on ultrasound (Figure 10.22b). Atrial septal 
defects often escape prenatal diagnosis. 
Differential diagnosis. In families at risk, the diagnosis is 
usually straightforward,21 also early in gestation, due to 
the specific search for upper-limb anomalies. In the 
absence of a positive family history, the prospective diagnosis 
may be very difficult, unless both the cardiac and 
limb anomalies are at the more severe end of the spectrum 
(e.g., a large ventricular septal defect or a hypoplastic 
left heart plus phocomelia). On such occasions, it 
may be necessary to distinguish HOS from other syndromes 
possibly featuring phocomelia and congenital 
heart disease, such as Roberts syndrome: 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 325 
• Roberts syndrome (OMIM 268300):5 look for . 
phocomelia + congenital heart disease + cleft lip. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is generally 
unaffected. The quality of life depends on the degree 
of limb involvement and on the residual function of the 
hands. Conduction defects may worsen with time and 
require pacemaker implantation. 
Recurrence risk. HOS has an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, which yields a 50% recurrence 
risk. 
Figure 10.22 Holt-Oram syndrome. (a) 3D maximum-mode rendering showing syndactyly of one hand (arrowheads). (b) 4-chamber 
view of the heart showing a ventricular septal defect (arrow) and a small left atrium (arrowhead). 
KLIPPEL–TRENAUNAY–WEBER SYNDROME (KTWS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Abnormal contour of one or more limbs due to large hemangiomas sometimes also involving the 
trunk. Hypertrophy and microcystic appearance of soft tissues. 
Outcome. Depends on the site and extent of the hemangiomas. These undergo significant regression after birth. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low. Most cases are sporadic, although families with an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, implying a 50% recurrence risk, have been described. 
Definition. KTWS (OMIM 149000) was described by 
Klippel and Trenaunay in 1900 and by Weber in 1907. 
It is characterized by multiple hemangiomas variously 
involving the limbs, the trunk and the internal organs 
(CNS, abdominal, etc.). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the VG5Q 
gene, at chromosome 5q13.3, has been found in a few 
cases. This mutation results in increased production of 
the protein coded by the malfunctioning gene, which is 
a potent angiogenic factor, found in endothelial cells, 
myocytes, and osteoblasts. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is possible if 
the VG5Q mutation has been identified in the affected 
family. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward 
because of the uniqueness of the sonographic 
appearance of the hemangiomas. The only issue to consider 
is that, due to the rarity of KTWS, most sonographers 
have never seen such lesions on ultrasound and 
therefore may reach the diagnosis only if they recall it 
from textbooks. The ultrasound signs of KTWS are as 
follows: 
a b 

• Hemangiomas involving one or more limbs: these 
have an abnormal cutaneous contour and diffuse 
microcystic changes of the subcutaneous tissue, with 
some calcified spots (Figures 10.23a and 10.24a). 
• Soft tissues and bone hypertrophy, at the level of the 
affected limb: the degree of hypertrophy can be appreciated 
by comparing the cross-sectional views of the two 
limbs – the affected and the normal (Figure 10.23b). 
• Trunk involvment (less evident and less common): 
at this level, the hemangiomatosis can appear as 
regional thickening of the subcutaneous tissues, with 
or without a microcystic subcutaneous mass (Figures 
10.23c, 10.24b). When involving internal organs, the 
lesion shows the classic microcystic aspect. 
Like most conditions characterized by hyperplasia of 
mesenchyme-derivated tissues, KTWS changes during 
the course of gestation. The lesions tend to increase in size 
and extend to the trunk, with new hemangiomas possibly 
appearing at a later stage. If the number and/or extent of 
the lesions are significant, cardiac decompensation due 
to high-output failure may develop.21 However, as 
reported below, all lesions tend to significantly regress 
with time. 
Differential diagnosis. In most cases, the hemangioma is 
sonographically indistinguishable from a lymphangioma. 
However, the latter is frequently single and 
localized, whereas in KTWS the hemangiomas are multiple 
and/or massive, involving large areas of a limb. 
Another condition that should be differentiated 
from KTWS is Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:5 both 
share hypertrophy/hyperplasia of bone and soft tissues. 
However, Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome is characterized 
also by exomphalos and macroglossia, both of 
which are absent in KTWS. Also, the Proteus syndrome 
(OMIM 176920) shows hemihypertrophy and macroglossia; 
in addition, the Proteus syndrome may show lymphangiomas. 
Thus, this is the single disorder that is most 
difficult to differentiate from KTWS. However, the multiple 
location of the hemangiomas and the absence of real 
hemihypertrophy may allow one to recognize KTWS. 
326 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.23 Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome at 19 weeks of gestation. (a) The thigh shows an irregular cutaneous outline, both on 
the anterior aspect (arrowhead) and posteriorly, at the popliteal region, where a conspicuous hemangioma (arrow) is visible. (b) Axial view 
of the lower limbs at the level of the middle part of the femur showing an evident discrepancy in size due to bone and soft tissue hypertrophy 
(arrowheads) and to hemangiomatosis (hypoechoic areas). (c) Arrowheads indicate the involvement of the gluteal region, which 
appears as a spongious aspect of the subcutaneous tissue. (d) Autopsy after termination of pregnancy showing diffuse hemangiomatosis 
(the letters relate to the sonographic findings in parts (a) and (b). 
a d 
b
c 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 327 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. As already 
pointed out, the hemangiomas of KTWS show a significant 
tendency to regress after birth. The size of the 
lesions may shrink dramatically in a few months. 
However, the final prognosis is highly variable and 
depends mainly on the size and the location of the 
hemangiomas: cerebral hemangiomas may induce 
seizures or epilepsy; they can bleed or may cause severe 
cerebral atrophy, which, though rare, is one of the 
most ominous sequelae. Thrombocytopenia can also be 
associated owing to the platelet sequestration within 
the hemangiomas. If the hemangiomas involve only 
superficial areas, such as the limbs or the trunk, to a 
certain extent, the prognosis is more favorable, and, in 
selected cases, resection or plastic surgery may be considered. 
Laser treatment may lead to improvement of 
the superficial hemangioma component of the affected 
areas. 
Recurrence risk. KTWS is generally a sporadic condition, 
but a few cases with autosomal dominant inheritance, 
with a 50% recurrence risk, have been described. 
Figure 10.24 Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber 
syndrome at 20 weeks of gestation. (a) Huge 
hemangioma of the axilla, appearing as a 
cystic mass (arrowheads, to be compared 
with the arrowheads on the specimen (c)). 
(b) Involvement of the lateral aspect of the 
fetal trunk (arrows, to be compared with the 
arrows on the specimen (c)). (c) Specimen 
after termination of pregnancy: note the various 
hemangiomas and the involvement of 
the right pelvic area. 
MECKEL–GRUBER SYNDROME 
Incidence. Frequent: 1/9000 live births. 
Etiology. The involved gene maps to chromosome 17q21–24, but there is genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound signs. The phenotypic expression of the syndrome is variable, as a consequence of its genetic 
heterogeneity. The three signs that usually lead to the diagnosis, namely occipital cephalocele, cystic renal 
dysplasia, and postaxial polydactyly, are present in 60% of cases. Additional anomalies include CNS, craniofacial 
and gastrointestinal malformations. 
Outcome. Lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. Rare sporadic cases have 
been described. 
a
b 
c 

328 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The original malformative cluster of Meckel– 
Gruber syndrome (OMIM 249000) was first described 
by Meckel in 1822, although the number of anomalies 
found in Meckel–Gruber syndrome is huge. The three 
classic signs (occipital cephalocele, cystic renal dysplasia, 
and postaxial polydactyly) is present in 60% of cases. 
Other malformations found in this syndrome involve the 
CNS (Dandy–Walker complex, cerebellar hypoplasia, 
and hydrocephaly), gastrointestinal tract (exomphalos, 
asplenia, splenomegaly, and imperforate anus), and the 
cardiovascular system (septal defects). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A significant number of cases 
show mutations at chromosome 17q21–24, but the 
genetic heterogeneity is high, with other cases mapping 
to different loci. This leads to the variable clinical 
expression of the syndrome. 
Genetics. This is not available, due to the high genetic 
heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. There are three anomalies that lead 
to the diagnosis in most of the cases detected in utero: 
• Occipital cephalocele: the detection of this may 
be difficult due to the frequently associated severe 
oligohydramnios (Figure 10.25a, b). 
• Cystic renal dysplasia, with enlarged and hyperechoic 
kidneys: this is the sign that is most promptly 
detected, since the kidneys fill most of the fetal 
abdomen (Figure 10.25c, d). 
• Postaxial polydactyly: also in this case, recognition of 
the anomaly is hampered by the severe oligohydramnios. 
If the fetal lie is favorable, the bony phalanges 
may be recognized, and this may lead to a diagnosis 
Figure 10.25 Meckel-Gruber syndrome at 19 weeks of gestation. (a) Occipital encephalocele: axial transventricular view showing the 
large occipital bone defect through which the meninges and the cerebral parenchyma (arrowheads) have migrated. (b) Confirmation at 
autopsy. (c) Cystic renal dysplasia: low-magnification view of the fetus showing that the whole abdomen is occupied by the severely 
enlarged polycystic kidneys (arrowheads). Note also the severe thoracic hypoplasia. (d) Specimen of the polycystic kidney, showing the 
parenchymal cysts. (e) Polydactyly of one foot. (f) Postaxial polydactyly of one hand at autopsy. 
a
c 
b 
d e
f 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 329 
of polydactyly (Figure 10.25e, f). In a few cases, the 
extra digit may also be preaxial. 
In the rare cases in which a definite diagnosis is not 
reached due to concomitant severe oligohydramnios, 
unfavorable fetal lie, or maternal obesity, both a transvaginal 
approach and a diagnostic amnioinfusion may 
solve the problem. In families at risk (with a positive history), 
ultrasound diagnosis of Meckel–Gruber syndrome 
has been reported as early as the 12th–13th weeks of 
gestation. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis includes 
different conditions according to the sign considered. The 
most important one to address, since it may also occur in 
other syndromic disorders, is cystic renal dysplasia. The 
sonographic appearance of the kidney is often indistinguishable 
from that of classic autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease. The same enlarged and hyperechoic 
kidneys are also characteristic of other syndromes: 
a thorough description is given in Chapter 8. If multiple 
anomalies involving the CNS and the heart are found, 
one of the other conditions to be ruled out is trisomy 13, 
in which polydactyly, renal dysplasia, CNS and cardiac 
anomalies can be found. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome is invariably lethal, due to the severe pulmonary 
hypoplasia induced by the oligohydramnios. 
Recurrence risk. Meckel–Gruber syndrome has an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% 
recurrence risk, although rare sporadic cases have been 
described. Therefore, a correct diagnosis is of the utmost 
importance in order to allow early ultrasound assessment 
of any following pregnancy. 
MULTIPLE PTERYGIUM SYNDROME 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. It belongs to the neuroarthrogryposes (FADS). 
Ultrasound signs. Ubiquitous and severe joint contractures; multiple pterygia at elbows and knees; cystic hygroma. 
Outcome. Invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Different variants of this syndrome (OMIM 
253290) have been described according to the lethality 
and to the diffusion of the pterygia. The lethal form is 
included in the group of neuroarthrogryposes (FADS), 
together with Neu–Laxova syndrome, the COFS syndrome 
and classic FADS (or Pena–Shokeir syndrome). In 
multiple pterygium syndrome, the four limbs are flexed 
from the early weeks, and this leads to the development of 
the pterygia at the level of the main joints. Facial abnormalities 
(cleftings), cystic hygroma, early and severe FGR, 
and polyhydramnios complete the prenatal appearance. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. It 
is considered to be a neurogenic neuroarthrogryposis. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The sonographic features are 
striking: 
• Arthrogryposis: this involves all muscles, with 
flexed and adducted limbs, deformed extremities, 
and clinodactyly. 
• Multiple pterygia: these are difficult to recognize, 
due to the fixed adduction of all limbs (Figure 
10.26a). 
• Cystic hygroma-lymphangiomas: these are of early 
onset and severe (Figure 10.26b). 
• Craniofacial anomalies: these comprise mainly cleft 
lip/palate and micrognathia. 
• FGR: this is severe, symmetric, and of early onset. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is limited 
to the other neuroarthrogryposes and to cystic 
hygroma. The second issue is the most important one, 
due to the completely different recurrence risk shown by 
the two conditions: 25% for the autosomal recessive 
inherited multiple pterygium syndrome, compared with 
the 1% recurrence rate of cystic hygroma, if due to 
aneuploidy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. This syndrome is 
invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. There is an autosomal recessive inheritance 
pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 

330 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Neu–Laxova syndrome (OMIM 256520) is 
named after the two authors who first described the condition 
in 1971–72. This syndrome is included in the group of 
neuroarthrogryposes (FADS), together with the multiple 
pterygium syndrome, COFS syndrome, and classic FADS 
(or Pena–Shokeir syndrome). In addition to the diffuse and 
severe arthrogryposis, the following malformations are 
also present: severe CNS anomalies (extreme cerebellar 
hypoplasia, Dandy–Walker complex, agenesis of the corpus 
callosum); severe early-onset microcephaly; proptosis 
and corneal opacities; diffuse edema of the limbs and, 
especially, of the extremities, which appear severely distorted; 
early-onset symmetric FGR; and polyhydramnios. 
There are also two other abnormalities, which are not 
detected on ultrasound in most cases (at least in the 2nd 
trimester), namely lissencephaly and ichthyosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
Neo–Laxova syndrome, like the multiple pterygium syndrome, 
is considered to be a neurogenic arthrogryposis. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound appearance of 
Neu–Laxova syndrome is striking, with multiple severe 
anomalies present at the same time: 
• Microcephaly (severe and of early onset): This is 
detectable also subjectively by assessing the midsagittal 
view of the fetal profile, on which the severely slanting 
forehead, macrophthalmia, and micrognathia are evident 
at the same time (Figures 10.27a–c and 10.28). 
• CNS anomalies: these include extremely severe cerebellar 
hypoplasia (Figure 10.27b). 
• Micrognathia: this is subjectively detectable on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile, on which the 
severely slanting forehead, the macrophthalmia and 
micrognathia are evident at the same time (Figures 
10.27a,c and 10.28). 
• Arthrogryposis: this involves all of the muscles, with 
fixed and adducted limbs and distorted and edematous 
extremities (Figure 10.27d, f). 
• Edema of the extremities: this may give a false 
impression of ectrodactyly, due to the swelling of the 
digits (Figure 10.27E, F). 
• Proptosis and corneal opacities. these are recognized 
on the coronal view of the orbits and the face (Figure 
10.27g, h). 
• FGR: this is severe, symmetric, and of early onset. 
• Lissencephaly: this can be suspected on ultrasound 
only in the 3rd trimester, when gyri and sulci become 
evident. In the case of lissencephaly, the outer surface 
of the brain is smoother. 
Differential diagnosis. This is limited to the other neuroarthrogryposes. 
However, none of these is associated 
with so many and so severe anomalies at the same time. 
Figure 10.26 Multiple pterygium syndrome. 
(a) Lymphangioma of the knee (arrow), which, 
regressing, transforms into a pterygium. (b) 
Lymphangioma of the antero-lateral thoracic 
wall (arrow). 
NEU–LAXOVA SYNDROME 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. It belongs to the neuroarthrogryposes (FADS). 
Ultrasound signs. Microcephaly; CNS anomalies; macrophthalmia and proptosis; external ear anomalies; 
micrognathia; arthrogryposis; lymphedema of the limbs and extremities; ichthyosis; FGR. 
Outcome. Invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 
a b 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 331 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. This condition is 
invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Neu–Laxova syndrome has an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence 
risk. 
Figure 10.27 Neu–Laxova syndrome. (a) Severe micrognathia 
(compare with (c)). (b) Severe cerebellar hypoplasia and microcephaly 
(compare with (c)). (c) Specimen after birth showing severe 
microcephaly (sloping forehead), facial soft tissue edema, and 
micrognathia. (d) Diffuse joint contractures, with abnormal posture 
of the heel (compare with (f)). (e) Edema of foot and toes (compare 
with (f)). (f) Specimen after birth showing arthrogryposis and the 
abnormal posture of the edematous feet. (g) Corneal opacity (arrowhead). 
(h) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Figure 10.28 Neu–Laxova syndrome. (a) 3D rendering of the 
fetal head and trunk demonstrating microcephaly, macrophthalmia, 
and arthrogryposis of the upper limbs, which appear 
adducted and with clenched hands. (b) Confirmation at autopsy. 
(c) 3D rendering of the fetal profile demonstrating microcephaly, 
low-set ears, and micrognathia. (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
RUBINSTEIN–TAYBI SYNDROME (RSTS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. In 20% of cases, a mutation of the gene encoding CBP, a transcriptional coactivator, mapping to 
chromosome 16p13.3, has been found. 
Ultrasound signs. Wide and abducted thumbs and toes; CNS anomalies; beaked nose; small mouth. 
Outcome. Moderate risk of neonatal death. Survivors show moderate–severe mental retardation (mean IQ 51) and 
a tendency to develop neoplasias. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. In the 20% in which the above-mentioned mutation is found, the 
inheritance pattern becomes autosomal dominant (50% recurrence risk). 
a a 
b
d
e g h 
c 
f 
c 
b
d 

332 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome (RSTS: OMIM 
180849) is named after the two authors who independently 
described the condition in 1963. It is characterized 
by moderate–severe mental retardation, microcephaly 
and other CNS anomalies, and a peculiar facies with a 
beaked nose and a small mouth. However, the most typical 
feature of the syndrome, which can be recognized on 
ultrasound, is the presence of wide and abducted thumbs 
and toes. Inconstantly, clinodactyly and polydactyly can 
be associated. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the gene encoding 
the transcriptional coactivator CBP (CREB-binding 
protein, where CREB is C-AMP response-element-binding 
protein), mapping to chromosome 16p13.3, has been 
found in 20% of individuals affected with RSTS. 
According to the studies reporting this genetic anomaly, it 
seems that both a microdeletion and a mutation with gene 
amputation are sufficient to cause the syndrome. 
Genetics. Genetic diagnosis might be performed in cases 
with a mutation of the CBP gene, which account for 
20% of all RSTS. Hence, a positive result may confirm 
the diagnosis, but a negative one cannot exclude it. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. RSTS can be suspected on ultrasound 
if CNS anomalies are found in association with 
the above-mentioned abnormalities of the extremities: 
• Microcephaly: this may also be of late onset; it is 
detectable on the axial transthalamic view. 
• Other CNS anomalies: for example, cerebellar 
hypoplasia and agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
• Wide fontanelles: these may be seen on 3D ultrasound 
(see Chapter 2). 
• Micrognathia, of variable degree: this may be 
detected on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile 
(Figure 10.29a, b). 
• Wide and abducted thumbs and toes (Figure 
10.29c, d). 
• Beaked nose: this may be detected on the midsagittal 
view of the fetal profile (Figure 10.29a,b). 
• Polyhydramnios, of variable degree. 
Differential diagnosis. This is limited to diastrophic 
dysplasia, which is characterized by the typical ‘hitchhiker’s 
thumb’. However, in this disorder, the thumbs 
are of normal dimensions and there are other anomalies 
of the osteomuscular apparatus, that may help in reaching 
the correct diagnosis (Chapter 9). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. RSTS is not always 
lethal. If the neonate does not die within the first few 
weeks of life, the chances of reaching adulthood are high. 
With regard to the overall prognosis, this should take into 
account that RSTS individuals are subjected to failure to 
thrive, moderately severe mental retardation (with a mean 
IQ of 51), and a tendency to develop neoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. Those in which 
the CBP mutation is found show an autosomal dominant 
transmission pattern, with a 50% recurrence risk. 
Figure 10.29 Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome. (a) Midsagittal view 
of the facial profile showing a beaked nose (consider the outline of 
the soft tissue (arrowheads), not the nasal bones) and the micrognathia 
(arrow). (b) Confirmation at autopsy. (c) Feet, showing 
the enlarged and abducted toes. (d) Confirmation at autopsy, with 
the right toe abducted and the left toe enlarged. 
a b 
c d 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 333 
Definition. In 1972, this malformative cluster of various 
apparatus was defined as VATER–VACTER–VACTERL 
(OMIM 192350), according to the different anomalies 
present at the same time. The original acronym (VATER) 
included the following malformations: vertebral anomalies 
(fusion, hemivertebrae, and scoliosis), anal anomalies 
(anorectal atresia), tracheo-esophageal fistula, and 
renal anomalies (dysplasia, hydronephrosis, and ectopia). 
Then, the ‘C’ (for cardiac defects: VSD, tetralogy of 
Fallot, and transposition of the great arteries) and the ‘L’ 
(for limbs: aplasia radii, and polydactyly) were added if 
necessary. Caudal regression syndrome is characterized 
by agenesis of the sacrum and, in some cases, of the lower 
lumbar part of the spine as well. The extremely rare 
sirenomelia is the most severe form of causal regression 
syndrome, in which the two lower limbs are fused in a 
single abnormal limb. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown, but 
a significant association with maternal insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus has been found. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is difficult, because 
of the wide spectrum of anomalies that can be present for 
each apparatus. The major anomalies most frequently 
recognized in the fetus are as follows: 
VA(C)TER(L) 
• Scoliosis or hemivertebrae: this is evident on the 
coronal view of the spine (Figure 10.30a). 
• Esophageal atresia: this can be recognized from the 
non-visualization of the gastric bubble associated 
with polyhydramnios. 
• Cardiac defects: these include various types of 
congenital heart defect. 
• Renal anomalies: these include agenesis, ectopia, hydronephrosis 
(Figure 10.30a: inset), and horseshoe kidney. 
• Limb anomalies: the most common of these is aplasia 
radii (see Chapter 9: Figure 9.32). 
Caudal regression syndrome (in addition to one or more 
of the above-mentioned anomalies) 
• Sacral agenesis: this is recognizable on the longitudinal 
view of the spine by the absence of lumbosacral 
ossification (Figure 10.30b–e). 
Sirenomelia (in addition to one or more of the abovementioned 
anomalies) 
• Single lower limb, resulting from fusion of the two 
legs: the two legs may still be evident but fused 
(Figure 10.31) or may be replaced by a single abnormal 
limb (Figure 10.32). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes, for the VA(C)TER(L) 
association, trisomies 13 and 18, because most of the 
malformations included in the VA(C)TER(L) spectrum 
may also be present in these autosomal trisomies. In particular, 
for aplasia radii the differential diagnosis includes 
Fanconi anemia, TAR (thrombocytopenia with absent 
radius) syndrome, and trisomy 18 (Chapter 9). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. All cases associated 
with bilateral renal agenesis are lethal. Sirenomelia 
is almost always lethal. If the various anomalies can be 
surgically corrected, as is the case in a significant number 
of neonates, the survival rate is high, although with a 
low (but not absent) risk of mental retardation. 
Recurrence risk. VA(C)TER(L), caudal regression syndrome, 
and sirenomelia are all sporadic anomalies, and 
therefore their recurrence risk is extremely low. 
VATER (VACTERL) – CAUDAL REGRESSION – SIRENOMELIA 
Incidence. Rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. In some cases, maternal insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is associated. 
Ultrasound signs. Vertebral anomalies; anal anomalies; cardiac defects; tracheo-esophageal fistula; renal anomalies; 
limb anomalies (aplasia radii). Caudal regression syndrome and sirenomelia represent extremely severe variants of 
the VA(C)TER(L). 
Outcome. Depends on the severity of the various anomalies. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. 

334 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.30 VA(C)TER(L).(a) Severe 
scoliosis due to a hemivertebra and a 
complex and large defect of the caudal 
part of the spine involving the lumbar and 
sacral tracts. The inset shows bilateral 
renal dysplasia. (b) 3D maximum-mode 
rendering demonstrating the vertebral 
anomalies and the wide sacral defect 
(arrow). (c) The same image, but with surface-
mode rendering showing the cystic 
sacral lesion (arrow). (d, e) Confirmation 
at autopsy (compare with (b) and (c)). 
Figure 10.31 Sirenomelia. Ultrasound examination is difficult because of the constant severe oligohydramnios due to renal agenesis. In 
addition to this anomaly, the following malformations are found. (a) Fused lower limbs, with two sets of long bones but soft tissue fusion. 
In the inset, note the absence of the fibulas and the abnormal bone between the tibias (arrow). (b) On the axial view of the pelvis, it is 
possible to recognize a horseshoe kidney (arrows) and sacral agenesis (arrowheads): in fact, only the two iliac bones are visible above the 
kidney, with no sacral vertebral appearing between them. (c) Axial view of the feet fused at the heels. (d) Confirmation at autopsy: note the 
single lower limb resulting from the fusion of the soft tissues of the two legs. The inset shows the fused feet (compare with (c)). 
a
b 
a 
c 
d 
b 
c d 
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 335 
1. Lee W, DeVore GR, Comstock CH, et al. Nasal bone evaluation 
in fetuses with Down syndrome during the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 2003; 22: 
55–60. 
2. Benacerraf FR, Barss VA, Laboda LA. A sonographic sign for 
the detection in the second trimester of the fetus with Down 
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985; 151: 1078–80. 
3. Benaceraf B. The significance of the nuchal fold in the second 
trimester fetus. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 798–801. 
4. DeVore GR. Scond trimester ultrasonography may identify 
77% to 97% of fetuses with trisomy 18. J Ultrasound Med 
2000; 19: 565–76. 
5. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
6. Surerus E, Huggon IC, Allan LD.Turner’s syndrome in fetal 
life. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 264–7. 
7. Goldmunts E. DiGeorge syndrome: new insights. Clin Perinatol 
2005; 32 :963–78, ix–x. 
8. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosiss of interruption of the aortic arch and its association 
with deletion of chromosome 22q11. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2002; 20: 327–31. 
9. Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of congenital heart disease in the Naples area 
during the years 1994–1999 – the experience of a joint 
fetal–pediatric cardiology unit. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 
545–52. 
10. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in 
fetal cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 
546–52. 
11. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyn P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
12. Williams DH, Gauthier DW, Maizels M. Prenatal diagnosis 
of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 
879–84. 
13. Rump P, Zeegers MPA, van Essen AJ. Tumor risk in 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: a review and meta-analysis. 
Am J Med Genet 2005; 136A: 95–104. 
14. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
15. Brueton LA, Huson SM, Cox PM, et al. Asymptomatic maternal 
myasthenia as a cause of the Pena–Shokeir phenotype. Am 
J Med Genet 2000; 92: 1–6. 
16. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
in three consecutive pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2001; 17: 163–5. 
17. Paladini D, D’Armiento MR, Ardovino I, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
diagnosis of the cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 91–3. 
18. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a family with 
negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
19. Martinelli P, Maruotti GM, Agangi A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis 
of hemifacial microsomia and ipsilateral cerebellar hypoplasia 
in a fetus with oculoauricolovertebral spectrum. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 199–201. 
20. Volpe P, Gentile M. Three-dimensional diagnosis of Goldenhar 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 798–800. 
21. Brons JT, van Geijn HP, Wladimiroff JW, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of the Holt–Oram syndrome. Prenat Diagn 
1988; 8: 175–81. 
22. Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis 
and hemodynamic evaluation of Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998; 11: 215–17. 
Figure 10.32 Sirenomelia. In addition to 
severe oligohydramnios, the following 
malformations are found. (a) Upper limb: 
only the ulna is visible, while there is complete 
radial aplasia (Ra?). (b) Single lower 
limb (no long bone possibly indicating the 
presence of the other limb was found on 
ultrasound), with a single mesomelic bone – 
aplasia of the fibula (Fi?). (c) Specimen 
after termination of pregnancy. Note the 
sirenomelia and the severe defects of the 
upper limbs (bilateral radial aplasia with 
ectrodactyly: arrow). 
REFERENCES 
a
b 
c 

NORMAL FETAL BIOMETRY 
Appendix 
Normal and special fetal biometry 
Table A.1 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: biparietal diameter (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 35.8 36.2 36.7 37.7 38.8 39.9 40.8 41.4 41.8 
18 38.4 38.9 39.6 40.7 42.0 43.3 44.5 45.2 45.6 
19 41.1 41.6 42.4 43.7 45.2 46.7 48.0 48.9 49.4 
20 43.7 44.2 45.2 46.7 48.3 50.0 51.5 52.4 53.0 
21 46.3 46.9 47.9 49.6 51.4 53.2 54.9 55.9 56.5 
22 48.9 49.6 50.6 52.4 54.4 56.4 58.2 59.2 59.9 
23 51.5 52.2 53.3 55.2 57.3 59.4 61.3 62.5 63.2 
24 54.0 54.8 56.0 58.0 60.2 62.4 64.4 65.6 66.4 
25 56.6 57.4 58.6 60.7 63.0 65.3 67.4 68.6 69.4 
26 59.1 59.9 61.2 63.4 65.7 68.1 70.2 71.5 72.3 
27 61.6 62.4 63.7 65.9 68.4 70.8 73.0 74.3 75.1 
28 64.0 64.9 66.2 68.5 70.9 73.4 75.6 76.9 77.8 
29 66.5 67.3 68.7 70.9 73.4 75.9 78.1 79.5 80.3 
30 68.9 69.7 71.1 73.3 75.8 78.2 80.5 81.9 82.7 
31 71.2 72.0 73.4 75.6 78.1 80.5 82.8 84.1 84.9 
32 73.5 74.3 75.7 77.9 80.3 82.7 84.9 86.2 87.1 
33 75.8 76.6 77.9 80.0 82.4 84.8 86.9 88.2 89.0 
34 78.0 78.8 80.0 82.1 84.4 86.7 88.8 90.0 90.8 
35 80.1 80.9 82.1 84.1 86.3 88.5 90.5 91.7 92.5 
36 82.2 83.0 84.1 86.0 88.1 90.2 92.1 93.3 94.0 
37 84.3 85.0 86.0 87.8 89.8 91.8 93.6 94.7 95.3 
38 86.3 86.9 87.9 89.6 91.4 93.2 94.9 95.9 96.5 
39 88.2 88.8 89.7 91.2 92.9 94.5 96.1 97.0 97.5 
40 90.0 90.5 91.4 92.7 94.2 95.7 97.1 97.9 98.4 
41 91.8 92.3 93.0 94.2 95.5 96.7 97.9 98.6 99.1 
42 93.5 93.9 94.5 95.5 96.6 97.6 98.6 99.2 99.6 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 
337 

338 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.2 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: head circumference (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 125.6 127.1 129.7 133.8 138.4 143.0 147.1 149.7 151.2 
18 138.0 139.7 142.3 146.7 151.5 156.4 160.7 163.4 165.1 
19 150.2 151.9 154.7 159.3 164.4 169.4 174.0 176.8 178.6 
20 162.0 163.9 166.8 171.6 176.9 182.2 187.0 189.9 191.7 
21 173.6 175.5 178.5 183.5 189.1 194.6 199.6 202.7 204.6 
22 184.7 186.7 189.9 195.1 200.9 206.6 211.9 215.1 217.0 
23 195.6 197.6 200.9 206.4 212.3 218.3 223.8 227.1 229.1 
24 206.0 208.1 211.6 217.2 223.4 229.6 235.3 238.7 240.8 
25 216.0 218.2 221.8 227.7 234.1 240.5 246.4 249.9 252.1 
26 225.7 227.9 231.6 237.7 244.3 251.0 257.0 260.7 263.0 
27 234.9 237.2 241.0 247.3 254.1 261.0 267.3 271.1 273.4 
28 243.6 246.0 250.0 256.4 263.5 270.6 277.0 281.0 283.4 
29 251.9 254.4 258.4 265.1 272.4 279.7 286.3 290.4 292.9 
30 259.7 262.3 266.4 273.3 280.8 288.3 295.1 299.3 301.9 
31 267.0 269.7 273.9 281.0 288.7 296.4 303.4 307.7 310.3 
32 273.8 276.5 280.9 288.1 296.1 304.0 311.2 315.6 318.3 
33 280.1 282.9 287.4 294.8 302.9 311.0 318.4 322.9 325.7 
34 285.8 288.7 293.3 300.8 309.2 317.5 325.1 329.7 332.6 
35 290.9 293.9 298.6 306.4 314.9 323.4 331.2 335.9 338.8 
36 295.5 298.5 303.3 311.3 320.0 328.7 336.7 341.5 344.5 
37 299.5 302.6 307.5 315.6 324.5 333.5 341.6 346.5 349.6 
38 302.8 306.0 311.0 319.3 328.4 337.5 345.8 350.9 354.0 
39 305.6 308.8 313.9 322.4 331.7 341.0 349.5 354.6 357.8 
40 307.7 310.9 316.2 324.8 334.3 343.8 352.4 357.7 360.9 
41 309.1 312.4 317.7 326.5 336.2 345.9 354.7 360.1 363.4 
42 309.8 313.2 318.6 327.6 337.5 347.3 356.3 361.7 365.1 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 339 
Table A.3 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: abdominal circumference (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 113.3 114.8 117.3 121.4 125.9 130.4 134.5 137.0 138.5 
18 122.0 123.8 126.7 131.6 137.0 142.3 147.2 150.1 152.0 
19 130.6 132.7 136.1 141.7 147.9 154.0 159.6 163.0 165.1 
20 139.3 141.7 145.5 151.8 158.7 165.6 171.9 175.7 178.1 
21 148.0 150.6 154.8 161.7 169.3 176.9 183.9 188.1 190.7 
22 156.7 159.5 164.1 171.6 179.8 188.1 195.6 200.2 203.0 
23 165.4 168.4 173.3 181.3 190.2 199.0 207.1 212.0 215.0 
24 174.0 177.2 182.4 191.0 200.4 209.7 218.3 223.5 226.7 
25 182.7 186.0 191.5 200.5 210.4 220.2 229.2 234.7 238.1 
26 191.2 194.8 200.5 209.9 220.2 230.5 239.9 245.6 249.1 
27 199.8 203.5 209.4 219.1 229.8 240.5 250.3 256.2 259.9 
28 208.3 212.1 218.2 228.2 239.3 250.3 260.4 266.5 270.3 
29 216.7 220.6 226.9 237.2 248.5 259.8 270.2 276.4 280.3 
30 225.1 229.1 235.5 246.0 257.5 269.1 279.6 286.0 290.0 
31 233.4 237.5 243.9 254.6 266.4 278.1 288.8 295.3 299.3 
32 241.7 245.7 252.3 263.1 275.0 286.8 297.6 304.2 308.3 
33 249.8 253.9 260.5 271.4 283.3 295.3 306.1 312.7 316.8 
34 257.9 262.0 268.6 279.5 291.4 303.4 314.3 320.9 325.0 
35 265.8 269.9 276.5 287.4 299.3 311.3 322.1 328.7 332.8 
36 273.7 277.7 284.3 295.1 307.0 318.8 329.6 336.2 340.2 
37 281.4 285.4 291.9 302.6 314.3 326.1 336.7 343.2 347.2 
38 289.0 293.0 299.4 309.9 321.4 333.0 343.5 349.9 353.8 
39 296.5 300.4 306.6 316.9 328.3 339.6 349.9 356.1 360.0 
40 303.9 307.6 313.7 323.8 334.8 345.8 355.9 362.0 365.8 
41 311.1 314.7 320.6 330.4 341.1 351.8 361.5 367.4 371.1 
42 318.1 321.7 327.4 336.7 347.0 357.3 366.7 372.4 375.9 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

340 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.4 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: femur length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 20.1 20.6 21.4 22.6 24.0 25.4 26.7 27.4 27.9 
18 23.2 23.6 24.4 25.6 27.0 28.3 29.6 30.3 30.8 
19 26.1 26.6 27.3 28.5 29.9 31.2 32.4 33.2 33.6 
20 28.9 29.4 30.1 31.4 32.7 34.0 35.2 36.0 36.4 
21 31.7 32.1 32.9 34.1 35.4 36.8 38.0 38.7 39.2 
22 34.3 34.8 35.5 36.8 38.1 39.4 40.7 41.4 41.9 
23 36.9 37.3 38.1 39.3 40.7 42.0 43.3 44.0 44.5 
24 39.3 39.8 40.6 41.8 43.2 44.6 45.8 46.6 47.1 
25 41.7 42.2 42.9 44.2 45.6 47.0 48.3 49.1 49.6 
26 43.9 44.4 45.2 46.5 48.0 49.4 50.7 51.5 52.0 
27 46.1 46.6 47.4 48.8 50.3 51.7 53.1 53.9 54.4 
28 48.1 48.6 49.5 50.9 52.4 54.0 55.4 56.3 56.8 
29 50.0 50.6 51.5 53.0 54.6 56.2 57.6 58.5 59.1 
30 51.9 52.5 53.4 54.9 56.6 58.3 59.8 60.7 61.3 
31 53.6 54.2 55.2 56.8 58.6 60.3 61.9 62.9 63.5 
32 55.3 55.9 56.9 58.6 60.5 62.3 64.0 65.0 65.6 
33 56.8 57.5 58.6 60.3 62.3 64.2 66.0 67.0 67.7 
34 58.3 59.0 60.1 62.0 64.0 66.0 67.9 69.0 69.7 
35 59.6 60.4 61.5 63.5 65.6 67.8 69.8 70.9 71.7 
36 60.9 61.6 62.9 65.0 67.2 69.5 71.6 72.8 73.6 
37 62.0 62.8 64.1 66.3 68.7 71.1 73.3 74.6 75.4 
38 63.0 63.9 65.3 67.6 70.1 72.7 75.0 76.4 77.2 
39 64.0 64.9 66.4 68.8 71.5 74.1 76.6 78.0 79.0 
40 64.8 65.8 67.4 69.9 72.7 75.6 78.1 79.7 80.6 
41 65.6 66.6 68.2 71.0 73.9 76.9 79.6 81.3 82.3 
42 66.2 67.3 69.0 71.9 75.0 78.2 81.0 82.8 83.8 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 341 
Table A.5 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: tibia length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 16.9 17.5 18.4 20.0 21.7 23.4 25.0 25.9 26.5 
18 19.7 20.3 21.2 22.7 24.3 26.0 27.5 28.4 28.9 
19 22.5 23.0 23.9 25.3 26.9 28.5 29.9 30.8 31.4 
20 25.1 25.7 26.5 27.9 29.4 31.0 32.4 33.2 33.7 
21 27.7 28.2 29.0 30.4 31.9 33.4 34.7 35.6 36.1 
22 30.2 30.7 31.5 32.8 34.3 35.7 37.1 37.9 38.4 
23 32.6 33.1 33.8 35.2 36.6 38.1 39.4 40.2 40.7 
24 34.8 35.3 36.1 37.4 38.9 40.3 41.6 42.4 42.9 
25 37.0 37.5 38.3 39.6 41.1 42.5 43.8 44.6 45.1 
26 39.1 39.6 40.4 41.7 43.2 44.6 46.0 46.8 47.3 
27 41.1 41.6 42.4 43.8 45.3 46.7 48.1 48.9 49.4 
28 43.0 43.5 44.4 45.8 47.3 48.8 50.1 51.0 51.5 
29 44.8 45.4 46.2 47.6 49.2 50.8 52.2 53.0 53.6 
30 46.6 47.1 48.0 49.5 51.1 52.7 54.1 55.0 55.6 
31 48.2 48.7 49.7 51.2 52.9 54.6 56.1 57.0 57.6 
32 49.7 50.3 51.3 52.9 54.6 56.4 58.0 58.9 59.5 
33 51.1 51.8 52.8 54.5 56.3 58.1 59.8 60.8 61.5 
34 52.5 53.1 54.2 56.0 57.9 59.9 61.6 62.7 63.4 
35 53.7 54.4 55.5 57.4 59.5 61.5 63.4 64.5 65.2 
36 54.8 55.6 56.8 58.8 60.9 63.1 65.1 66.3 67.0 
37 55.9 56.7 58.0 60.1 62.4 64.7 66.8 68.0 68.8 
38 56.9 57.7 59.0 61.3 63.7 66.2 68.4 69.7 70.6 
39 57.7 58.6 60.0 62.4 65.0 67.6 70.0 71.4 72.3 
40 58.5 59.4 61.0 63.5 66.2 69.0 71.5 73.0 74.0 
41 59.2 60.2 61.8 64.5 67.4 70.3 73.0 74.6 75.6 
42 59.7 60.8 62.5 65.4 68.5 71.6 74.4 76.2 77.2 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

342 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.6 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: humerus length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 20.1 20.6 21.3 22.6 23.9 25.2 26.5 27.2 27.7 
18 22.6 23.1 23.8 25.0 26.3 27.7 28.8 29.6 30.0 
19 25.1 25.5 26.2 27.4 28.7 30.0 31.2 31.9 32.4 
20 27.4 27.9 28.6 29.7 31.0 32.3 33.5 34.2 34.6 
21 29.7 30.1 30.8 32.0 33.3 34.6 35.7 36.5 36.9 
22 31.9 32.3 33.0 34.2 35.5 36.8 37.9 38.7 39.1 
23 34.0 34.4 35.1 36.3 37.6 38.9 40.1 40.8 41.3 
24 36.0 36.4 37.2 38.4 39.7 41.0 42.2 42.9 43.4 
25 37.9 38.4 39.1 40.3 41.7 43.0 44.2 45.0 45.4 
26 39.7 40.2 40.9 42.2 43.6 45.0 46.2 47.0 47.4 
27 41.4 41.9 42.7 44.0 45.4 46.8 48.1 48.9 49.4 
28 43.1 43.6 44.4 45.7 47.2 48.6 50.0 50.8 51.3 
29 44.6 45.1 45.9 47.3 48.8 50.4 51.7 52.6 53.1 
30 46.0 46.5 47.4 48.8 50.4 52.0 53.4 54.3 54.9 
31 47.3 47.9 48.8 50.3 51.9 53.6 55.1 56.0 56.5 
32 48.5 49.1 50.0 51.6 53.3 55.0 56.6 57.6 58.2 
33 49.6 50.2 51.2 52.8 54.6 56.4 58.1 59.1 59.7 
34 50.5 51.2 52.2 53.9 55.8 57.7 59.5 60.5 61.1 
35 51.3 52.0 53.1 54.9 56.9 58.9 60.7 61.8 62.5 
36 52.1 52.8 53.9 55.8 57.9 60.0 61.9 63.1 63.8 
37 52.6 53.4 54.6 56.6 58.8 61.0 63.0 64.3 65.0 
38 53.1 53.9 55.2 57.3 59.6 61.9 64.0 65.3 66.1 
39 53.4 54.2 55.6 57.8 60.3 62.7 64.9 66.3 67.1 
40 53.6 54.5 55.9 58.2 60.8 63.4 65.8 67.2 68.1 
41 53.6 54.5 56.1 58.5 61.2 64.0 66.4 67.9 68.9 
42 53.5 54.5 56.1 58.7 61.6 64.4 67.0 68.6 69.6 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 343 
Table A.7 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: ulna length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 19.9 20.3 20.9 21.9 22.9 24.0 25.0 25.6 26.0 
18 21.9 22.3 23.0 24.0 25.2 26.4 27.5 28.1 28.5 
19 23.9 24.3 25.0 26.2 27.4 28.7 29.8 30.5 31.0 
20 25.8 26.3 27.0 28.3 29.6 30.9 32.2 32.9 33.4 
21 27.7 28.2 29.0 30.3 31.7 33.1 34.4 35.2 35.7 
22 29.6 30.1 30.9 32.3 33.8 35.3 36.6 37.4 38.0 
23 31.4 32.0 32.8 34.2 35.8 37.3 38.8 39.6 40.2 
24 33.2 33.7 34.6 36.1 37.7 39.4 40.9 41.7 42.3 
25 34.9 35.5 36.4 38.0 39.7 41.3 42.9 43.8 44.4 
26 36.6 37.2 38.2 39.8 41.5 43.3 44.8 45.8 46.4 
27 38.2 38.8 39.8 41.5 43.3 45.1 46.8 47.8 48.4 
28 39.8 40.5 41.5 43.2 45.0 46.9 48.6 49.6 50.3 
29 41.4 42.0 43.1 44.8 46.7 48.7 50.4 51.5 52.1 
30 42.9 43.5 44.6 46.4 48.4 50.3 52.1 53.2 53.9 
31 44.3 45.0 46.1 48.0 50.0 52.0 53.8 54.9 55.6 
32 45.7 46.4 47.6 49.4 51.5 53.6 55.4 56.6 57.3 
33 47.1 47.8 49.0 50.9 53.0 55.1 57.0 58.1 58.8 
34 48.4 49.2 50.3 52.3 54.4 56.5 58.5 59.7 60.4 
35 49.7 50.5 51.7 53.6 55.8 57.9 59.9 61.1 61.9 
36 51.0 51.7 52.9 54.9 57.1 59.3 61.3 62.5 63.3 
37 52.2 52.9 54.1 56.2 58.4 60.6 62.6 63.8 64.6 
38 53.3 54.1 55.3 57.4 59.6 61.8 63.9 65.1 65.9 
39 54.4 55.2 56.4 58.5 60.8 63.0 65.1 66.3 67.1 
40 55.5 56.3 57.5 59.6 61.9 64.2 66.2 67.5 68.3 
41 56.5 57.3 58.5 60.6 62.9 65.2 67.3 68.6 69.4 
42 57.5 58.3 59.5 61.6 63.9 66.2 68.3 69.6 70.4 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

344 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.8 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: radius length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 17.2 17.5 18.0 18.9 19.8 20.7 21.5 22.0 22.3 
18 19.2 19.5 20.1 21.0 22.0 23.1 24.0 24.6 24.9 
19 21.1 21.4 22.1 23.1 24.3 25.4 26.4 27.1 27.5 
20 22.9 23.3 24.0 25.2 26.4 27.7 28.8 29.5 29.9 
21 24.7 25.1 25.9 27.1 28.5 29.8 31.1 31.8 32.3 
22 26.4 26.9 27.7 29.0 30.5 31.9 33.3 34.1 34.6 
23 28.1 28.6 29.4 30.9 32.4 34.0 35.4 36.2 36.8 
24 29.7 30.2 31.1 32.6 34.3 35.9 37.4 38.3 38.9 
25 31.2 31.8 32.8 34.3 36.1 37.8 39.4 40.3 40.9 
26 32.7 33.3 34.3 36.0 37.8 39.6 41.3 42.3 42.9 
27 34.1 34.8 35.8 37.6 39.4 41.3 43.1 44.1 44.8 
28 35.5 36.2 37.3 39.1 41.0 43.0 44.8 45.9 46.5 
29 36.8 37.5 38.7 40.5 42.5 44.6 46.4 47.5 48.2 
30 38.1 38.8 40.0 41.9 44.0 46.1 48.0 49.1 49.9 
31 39.3 40.0 41.2 43.2 45.3 47.5 49.5 50.6 51.4 
32 40.4 41.2 42.4 44.4 46.6 48.8 50.9 52.1 52.8 
33 41.5 42.3 43.6 45.6 47.9 50.1 52.2 53.4 54.2 
34 42.6 43.4 44.6 46.7 49.0 51.3 53.4 54.7 55.5 
35 43.5 44.3 45.6 47.8 50.1 52.5 54.6 55.9 56.7 
36 44.5 45.3 46.6 48.7 51.1 53.5 55.7 57.0 57.8 
37 45.3 46.1 47.5 49.7 52.1 54.5 56.7 58.0 58.8 
38 46.1 47.0 48.3 50.5 52.9 55.4 57.6 58.9 59.8 
39 46.9 47.7 49.1 51.3 53.7 56.2 58.4 59.8 60.6 
40 47.5 48.4 49.8 52.0 54.5 57.0 59.2 60.6 61.4 
41 48.2 49.0 50.4 52.7 55.1 57.6 59.9 61.3 62.1 
42 48.8 49.6 51.0 53.2 55.7 58.2 60.5 61.9 62.7 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 345 
Table A.9 HC/AC, HC/FL, and BPD/FL ratios (centiles) for the diagnosis of microcephalya 
HC/AC HC/FL BPD/FL 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
14 1.13 1.23 1.34 4.93 5.51 6.16 1.75 1.92 2.11 
15 1.12 1.22 1.33 4.73 5.29 5.92 1.66 1.82 2.00 
16 1.11 1.21 1.32 4.57 5.11 5.71 1.58 1.74 1.91 
17 1.10 1.20 1.31 4.43 4.95 5.54 1.52 1.67 1.83 
18 1.09 1.19 1.30 4.32 4.83 5.40 1.47 1.61 1.77 
19 1.08 1.18 1.29 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.42 1.56 1.71 
20 1.07 1.17 1.28 4.16 4.65 5.20 1.39 1.52 1.67 
21 1.06 1.17 1.27 4.11 4.59 5.13 1.36 1.49 1.64 
22 1.05 1.16 1.26 4.07 4.55 5.08 1.34 1.47 1.61 
23 1.04 1.15 1.25 4.04 4.52 5.05 1.32 1.45 1.59 
24 1.03 1.14 1.24 4.03 4.50 5.03 1.30 1.43 1.57 
25 1.02 1.13 1.23 4.02 4.50 5.03 1.29 1.42 1.56 
26 1.01 1.12 1.22 4.03 4.50 5.03 1.29 1.41 1.55 
27 1.00 1.11 1.21 4.04 4.51 5.04 1.28 1.41 1.54 
28 0.99 1.10 1.20 4.05 4.53 5.06 1.28 1.40 1.54 
29 0.98 1.09 1.19 4.07 4.55 5.09 1.28 1.40 1.54 
30 0.97 1.08 1.18 4.10 4.58 5.12 1.27 1.40 1.53 
31 0.96 1.07 1.17 4.12 4.61 5.15 1.27 1.40 1.53 
32 0.95 1.06 1.16 4.15 4.64 5.18 1.27 1.39 1.53 
33 0.94 1.05 1.16 4.17 4.67 5.22 1.27 1.39 1.52 
34 0.94 1.04 1.15 4.20 4.69 5.24 1.26 1.38 1.52 
35 0.93 1.03 1.14 4.21 4.71 5.27 1.25 1.37 1.51 
36 0.92 1.02 1.13 4.23 4.73 5.28 1.24 1.36 1.50 
37 0.91 1.01 1.12 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.23 1.35 1.48 
38 0.90 1.00 1.11 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.21 1.33 1.46 
39 0.89 0.99 1.10 4.22 4.71 5.27 1.19 1.30 1.43 
40 0.88 0.98 1.09 4.19 4.69 5.24 1.16 1.28 1.40 
HC, head circumference; AC, abdominal circumference; FL, femur length; BPD, biparietal diameter. 
a Modified from: Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal biometry at 14–40 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994; 
4: 34–8. 
SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 

346 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.10 Nomograms (centiles): transverse 
cerebellar diameters (mm) for the diagnosis of 
cerebellar hypoplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 12 13 14 
15 13 14 16 
16 14 15 17 
17 15 17 18 
18 16 18 20 
19 17 19 21 
20 18 20 22 
21 20 22 24 
22 21 24 27 
23 22 24 27 
24 23 26 28 
25 25 27 30 
26 26 28 31 
27 27 30 33 
28 28 31 34 
29 30 33 36 
30 31 34 37 
31 32 35 39 
32 33 37 40 
33 35 38 42 
34 36 39 43 
35 37 41 45 
36 38 42 46 
37 39 43 47 
38 40 44 48 
39 41 45 49 
40 42 46 51 
a Modified from: Snijders RJ, Nicholaides KH. Fetal 
biometry at 14-40 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1994; 4: 34-48. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 347 
Table A.11 Nomograms (centiles) – cerebellar vermis: anteroposterior (AP) diameter, supero-inferior (SI) 
diameter, circumference, and area for the diagnosis of vermian hypoplasia, partial agenesisa 
Gestational AP diameter SI diameter Circumference Area 
age (weeks) (mm) (mm) (mm) (cm2) 
21–22 10.6 ± 1.4 11.1 ± 1.1 43.8 ± 3.3 0.9 ± 0.2 
23–24 12.9 ± 1.1 12.3 ± 1.4 47.5 ± 5.5 1.2 ± 0.2 
25–26 13.5 ± 2.1 13.6 ± 0.9 50.9 ± 4.4 1.4 ± 0.2 
27–28 16.3 ± 2.7 16.0 ± 1.6 58.9 ± 6.8 2.0 ± 0.5 
29–30 17.5 ± 2.2 17.7 ± 2.1 64.7 ± 6.5 2.3 ± 0.4 
31–32 19.0 ± 1.9 19.2 ± 1.1 70.7 ± 6.9 2.8 ± 0.4 
33–34 19.2 ± 1.9 21.2 ± 2.3 72.7 ± 8.3 3.0 ± 0.8 
35–36 21.4 ± 1.5 19.8 ± 1.0 77.6 ± 5.1 3.4 ± 0.3 
37–38 22.1 ± 3.8 23.0 ± 4.6 80.7 ± 9.9 3.9 ± 1.4 
39–40 25.7 ± 2.3 25.0 ± 2.6 86.7 ± 7.0 4.9 ± 0.7 
a Modified, from: Malinger G, Ginath S, Lerman-Sagie T, et al. The fetal cerebellar vermis: normal development as shown by 
transvaginal ultrasound. Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 687–92. 
Table A.12 Nomograms (centiles) of bisocular (BOD), interocular (IOD), and ocular (OD) diameters (mm) for 
the diagnosis of hypertelorism, hypotelorism, and microphthalmiaa 
BOD IOD OD 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
11 5 13 20 — — — — — — 
12 8 15 23 4 9 13 1 3 6 
13 10 18 25 5 9 14 2 4 7 
14 13 20 28 5 10 14 3 5 8 
15 15 22 30 6 10 14 4 6 9 
16 17 25 32 6 10 15 5 7 9 
17 19 27 34 6 11 15 5 8 10 
18 22 29 37 7 11 16 6 9 11 
19 24 31 39 7 12 16 7 9 12 
20 26 33 41 8 12 17 8 10 13 
21 28 35 43 8 13 17 8 11 13 
22 30 37 44 9 13 18 9 12 14 
23 31 39 46 9 14 18 10 12 15 
24 33 41 48 10 14 19 10 13 15 
25 35 42 50 10 15 19 11 13 16 
26 36 44 51 11 15 20 12 14 16 
27 38 45 53 11 16 20 12 14 17 
28 39 47 54 12 16 21 13 15 17 
29 41 48 56 12 17 21 13 15 18 
30 42 50 57 13 17 22 14 16 18 
31 43 51 58 13 18 22 14 16 19 
32 45 52 60 14 18 23 14 17 19 
33 46 53 61 14 19 23 15 17 19 
34 47 54 62 15 19 24 15 17 20 
35 48 55 63 15 20 24 15 18 20 
36 49 56 64 16 20 25 16 18 20 
37 50 57 65 16 21 25 16 18 21 
38 50 58 65 17 21 26 16 18 21 
a Modified from: Romero R, Pilu G, Jeanty P, et al. Prenatal Diagnosis of CongenitaI Anomalies. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & 
Lange, 1988: 83. 

348 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.13 Nomograms (centiles) for external ear 
length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
15 7 8 10 
16 8 10 12 
17 9 11 13 
18 9 12 14 
19 11 13 16 
20 11 14 17 
21 12 15 18 
22 13 17 19 
23 14 18 22 
24 15 20 22 
25 16 21 24 
26 17 21 24 
27 19 22 28 
28 18 24 32 
29 19 25 28 
30 18 25 32 
31 21 27 31 
32 25 28 33 
33 21 29 33 
34 23 29 34 
35 23 31 35 
36 24 31 34 
37 27 32 36 
38 25 32 39 
39 26 33 37 
40 28 33 38 
a Modified from: Chitkara U, Lee L, EI-Sayed YV, et al. 
Ultrasonographic ear length measurement in normal 
second- and third trimester fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2000; 183: 230–4. 
Table A.14 Nomograms (centiles) for nasal bone 
length (mm) for the diagnosis of nasal bone hypoplasia 
in Down syndromea 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 3.3 4.2 5.0 
16 3.1 5.2 7.3 
18 5.0 6.3 7.6 
20 5.7 7.6 9.5 
22 6.0 8.2 10.4 
24 6.8 9.4 12.0 
26 7.2 9.7 12.3 
28 7.8 10.7 13.6 
30 8.3 11.3 14.4 
32 8.0 11.6 15.2 
34 7.5 12.3 17.0 
a Modified from: Guis F, Ville Y, Vincent Y, et al. Ultrasound 
evaluation of the length of the fetal nasal bones throughout 
gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995; 5: 304–7. 
Table A.15 Nomograms (centiles) for thoracic 
circumference (cm) for the diagnosis of thoracic 
hypoplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
16 6.4 9.1 11.9 
17 7.3 10.0 12.8 
18 8.2 11.0 13.7 
19 9.1 11.9 14.6 
20 10.0 12.8 15.5 
21 11.0 13.7 16.4 
22 11.9 14.6 17.3 
23 12.8 15.5 18.2 
24 13.7 16.4 19.1 
25 14.6 17.3 20.0 
26 15.5 18.2 21.0 
27 16.4 19.1 21.9 
28 17.3 20.0 22.8 
29 18.2 21.0 23.7 
30 19.1 21.9 24.6 
31 20.0 22.8 25.5 
32 20.9 23.7 26.4 
33 21.8 24.6 27.3 
34 22.8 25.5 28.2 
35 23.7 26.4 29.1 
36 24.6 27.3 30.0 
37 25.5 28.2 30.9 
38 26.4 29.1 31.9 
39 27.3 30.0 32.8 
40 28.2 30.9 33.7 
a Modified from: Chitkara U, Rosenberg J, Chervenak 
FA, et al. Prenatal sonographic assessment of the fetal 
thorax: normal values. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987; 
156: 1069. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 349 
Table A.16 Nomograms (centiles) for the measurement 
of lung volume (cm3) by three-dimensional ultrasounda 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 0.3 3.9 11.6 
15 0.7 5.3 14.1 
16 1.2 6.8 16.9 
17 2.0 8.6 20.0 
18 2.9 10.6 23.3 
19 3.9 12.8 26.8 
20 5.1 15.2 30.7 
21 6.5 17.8 34.7 
22 8.1 20.7 39.0 
23 9.8 23.7 43.6 
24 11.7 26.4 48.4 
25 13.7 30.4 53.5 
26 16.0 34.0 58.9 
27 18.3 37.9 64.5 
28 20.9 42.0 70.3 
29 23.6 46.2 76.4 
30 26.5 50.7 82.7 
31 29.5 55.4 89.3 
32 32.8 60.3 96.2 
33 36.1 65.4 103.3 
34 39.7 70.7 110.7 
35 43.4 76.2 118.3 
36 47.3 82.0 126.2 
37 51.3 87.9 134.3 
38 55.5 94.0 142.7 
39 59.9 100.4 151.3 
40 64.4 107.0 160.2 
a Modified from: Lee A, Kratochwil A, Stumpflen I, et al. 
Fetal lung volume determination by three-dimensional ultrasonography. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996; 175(3Pt 1): 588–92. 
Table A.17 Nomograms (centiles) for fetal stomach diameters: anteroposterior (AP), laterolateral (LL), and 
supero-inferior (SI)a 
AP diameter (mm) LL diameter (mm) SI diameter (mm) 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
13–15 3 4 5 4 6 8 6 9 12 
16–18 4 6 8 6 8 10 9 13 17 
19–21 6 8 10 7 9 11 11 16 21 
22–24 6 9 12 15 18 21 13 19 25 
25–27 5 10 15 14 19 24 13 23 33 
28–30 9 12 15 12 16 20 18 23 28 
31–33 11 14 17 12 16 20 19 28 37 
34–36 10 14 18 12 16 20 19 28 37 
37–39 12 16 20 16 20 24 23 32 41 
a Modified from: Goldstein I, Reece A, Yarkoni S, et al. Growth of the fetal stomach in normal pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 
1987; 70: 641–4. 

350 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.18 Nomograms (centiles) for colon 
diameter (mm) for the diagnosis of bowel 
obstructiona 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
22 2 4 6 
24 3 5 7 
26 4 6 9 
28 4 7 10 
30 5 8 11 
32 6 9 12 
34 7 10 13 
36 8 12 16 
38 9 14 18 
40 10 16 20 
a Modified from: Harris RD, Nyberg DA, Mack LA, 
Weinberger E. Anorectal atresia: prenatal sonographic 
diagnosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987; 149: 395–400. 
Table A.19 Nomograms (centiles) for right liver 
lobe length (mm) for the diagnosis of 
hepatomegalya 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
13 10 13 16 
14 11 14 18 
15 13 16 19 
16 13 17 21 
17 14 19 23 
18 16 20 25 
19 18 22 28 
20 18 24 30 
21 20 26 32 
22 22 28 34 
23 23 29 36 
24 25 31 38 
25 26 33 41 
26 28 35 43 
27 29 37 45 
28 30 39 47 
29 32 40 50 
30 33 42 52 
31 34 43 53 
32 35 45 55 
33 36 46 56 
34 37 47 58 
35 38 48 60 
36 38 49 62 
37 39 50 63 
38 39 50 63 
39 40 51 64 
40 40 51 64 
a Modified from: Roberts AB, Mitchell JM, Pattison NS. 
Fetal liver length in normaI and isoimmunized pregnancies. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989; 161: 42–6. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 351 
Table A.20 Nomograms (centiles) for spleen 
length (mm) for the diagnosis of splenomegalya 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
18 7 14 21 
20 11 18 26 
22 15 22 29 
24 19 25 32 
26 20 27 34 
28 24 31 38 
30 27 34 41 
32 31 38 45 
34 35 43 50 
36 41 48 55 
38 47 54 62 
40 55 62 70 
a Modified from: Schmidt W, Yarkoni S, Jeanty P, et al. 
Sonographic measurement of the fetal spleen. Clinical 
implications. J Ultrasound Med 1985; 4: 667–9. 
Table A.21 Nomograms (centiles) for longitudinal 
diameter of the kidney (mm) for the diagnosis of 
renal hypoplasia/dysplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
20 16 21 29 
22 20 25 33 
24 24 29 36 
26 27 32 40 
28 30 35 42 
30 32 38 45 
32 34 40 47 
34 36 41 48 
36 37 42 50 
38 38 43 50 
a Modified from: Gloor JM, Breckle RJ, Gehrking WC, et 
al. Fetal renal growth evaluated by prenatal ultrasound 
examination. Mayo Clin Proc 1997; 72: 124–9. 
Table A.22 Nomograms (centiles) for kidney volume (cm3), calculated by three-dimensional ultrasound, for the 
diagnosis of renal hypoplasia/dysplasiaa 
Right Left 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
20 0.3 1.5 2.7 0.6 1.8 3.0 
21 0.8 2.2 3.6 1.2 2.6 4.0 
22 1.4 3.0 4.6 1.7 3.3 4.9 
23 1.9 3.7 5.5 2.3 4.1 5.9 
24 2.4 4.5 6.5 2.8 4.8 6.9 
25 3.0 5.2 7.4 3.4 5.6 7.8 
26 3.5 5.9 8.4 4.0 6.5 9.0 
27 4.0 6.7 9.3 4.5 7.1 9.8 
28 4.5 7.4 10.3 5.0 7.9 10.8 
29 5.1 8.2 11.2 5.6 8.7 11.7 
30 5.6 8.9 12.2 6.1 9.4 12.7 
31 6.1 9.6 13.1 6.7 10.2 13.7 
32 6.7 10.4 14.1 7.2 10.9 14.6 
33 7.2 11.1 15.0 7.8 11.7 15.6 
34 7.7 11.9 16.0 8.3 12.5 16.6 
35 8.3 12.6 16.9 8.9 13.2 17.6 
36 8.8 13.3 17.9 9.4 14.0 18.5 
37 9.3 14.1 18.9 10.0 14.7 19.5 
38 9.8 14.8 19.8 10.5 15.5 20.5 
39 10.4 15.6 20.7 11.1 16.3 21.4 
40 10.9 16.3 21.7 11.8 17.2 21.7 
a Modified from: Yu C, Chang F, Ko H, Chen H. Fetal renal volume in normal gestation: a three-dimensional ultrasound 
study. Ultrasound Med Biol 2000; 26: 1253–6. 

3rd trimester examination 3–5 
abdominal acoustic windows, midtrimester anomaly scan 5 
abdominal anatomy 
12–14 wks examination 3 
cranial/abdominal views 207–8 
abdominal circumference, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 339 
abdominal cystic masses, differential diagnosis 212 
achondrogenesis 203, 271, 272, 275, 276, 283–4 
diagnosis/prognosis 283–4 
achondroplasia 271, 284–6 
diagnosis/prognosis 284–6 
acoustic window impairment, midtrimester anomaly scan, 
medicolegal implications 4–5 
acrania 52–3, 53 
acrocephalosyndactyly (Apert syndrome) 82, 270, 312–14 
acrocephaly 270 
acroturricephaly 14 
adenomatoid cystic malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
age for diagnosis of common anomalies 4 
agenesis of corpus callosum 26–31 
associated syndromes 30 
association with other malformations 28 
chromosomal anomalies 28–30 
definition 26 
complete 12 
diagnosis 11–12, 13, 26–8, 27, 28, 29 
differential diagnosis 28 
direct/indirect signs 27, 28 
interhemispheric cysts 29 
Edwards syndrome 305 
etiology and pathogenesis 26 
magnetic resonance image 30 
non-chromosomal syndromes 30 
obstetric management 30 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 30–1 
agyria (lissencephaly) 43–5, 44–5 
Aicardi syndrome 34 
algorithms 
bladder non-visualization 235 
calicopelvic dilatation 234 
differential diagnosis of CHD 122–3 
hyperechic kidneys 234 
alkaline phosphatase, hypophosphatasia 
271, 272, 291–2 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
anatomy and gestational age 1–10, 1 
3D ultrasound 5–8 
12–14 wks examination 1–3 
midtrimester anomaly scan 3–5 
anencephaly 52–3, 53, 52–3, 53 
12–14 wks examination 2 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
anophthalmia 78–80, 79 
anorectal anomalies 220–1 
aortic arch, longitudinal view 126, 126 
aortic arch anomalies 120–1, 120, 157–61 
coarctation 120–1, 120, 156–7 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
double arch 159 
interrupted arch 157–9 
long axis of left ventricle 121, 124 
right arch 159 
vascular ring 159–61 
aortic stenosis 154–5 
critical 121 
Apert syndrome 82, 270, 312–14 
aplasia radii 296–7, 333 
arachnoid cyst 51, 52 
retrocerebellar 37, 37 
arteries, transposition of great arteries 171–3 
arthrogryposis see joint contractures 
artifacts, lips and orbits 73 
asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome) 
203, 271, 272, 276, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 286–7 
atrioventricular septal defect, Down 
syndrome 302 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD: 
Potter type III) 246–8 
diagnosis 247, 247 
differential diagnosis 241, 247, 247 
non-chromosomal anomalies risk 241, 247 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD: 
Potter type I) 242–4 
association with other malformations 243, 243 
diagnosis 242–4, 243 
differential diagnosis 241, 242, 243 
non-chromosomal syndrome risk 241, 243–4 
Index 
353 
Index Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables 

Bardet–Biedl syndrome 247 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome 191, 222, 227, 247, 
260–1, 315–16 
etiology/diagnosis 315–16 
bilateral myocardial hypertrophy, 4-chamber 
view 120 
biometry see fetal biometry 
biparietal diameter, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 337 
bladder 
non-visualization 235 
posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
see also urinary tract 
bladder dilatation (megacystis) 2, 3, 254–6 
diagnosis 253, 254–6, 254–5 
differential diagnosis 256, 256 
megacystic microcolon intestinal hyperperistalsis (MMIH) 
syndrome 256 
prognosis 256–7 
prune belly syndrome 254, 255 
bladder/cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
diagnosis 258–9, 258–9 
Blake’s pouch cyst 34, 34 
bone defects, nomenclature 270–1 
bowel, diameter, fetal biometry 350 
brachio-otorenal syndrome 245 
brachycephaly 270 
brain anatomy views 11–18 
axial transcerebellar view 12–16, 15, 16 
ventricular anomalies evident 15, 16 
axial transthalamic view 12, 13 
ventricular anomalies evident 14 
axial transventricular view 11–12, 12 
ventricular anomalies evident 13 
midcoronal view 18, 18 
midsagittal view 16–17 
multiplanar analysis 17 
right and left parasagittal views 18 
three-dimensional US navigation 16 
timing and scanning planes 11–18 
brain insult, destructive lesions 47–51 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
intracranial hemorrhage 49–51, 51 
porencephaly 48–9, 49 
brain space-occupying lesions 51–2, 52 
aneurysm of vein of Galen 5, 5, 6, 13, 51, 201 
arachnoid cysts 51 
cerebral tumors 51 
calvaria, hypomineralization 273, 274 
camptomelic dysplasia 252, 276, 279 
diagnosis/prognosis 287–8 
cardiac, see also heart anomalies/CHD 
cardiac tumors 177–9 
cardiomegaly 187, 201–2 
atrioventricular valve insufficiency 187 
cardiomyopathies 179–81 
cardiothoracic ratio, cardiomegaly 187, 201–3 
Carpenter syndrome 313 
cat-eye syndrome 316–17 
cataract 79, 80–1, 81 
caudal regression syndrome 221, 238, 240, 333 
see also VA(C)TER(L) association 
cavo-atrial junction 
3-vessel view 120, 120 
absence of inferior vena cava 125, 126 
scanning planes 125, 125 
central and peripheral nervous system anomalies 11–61 
cephalocele 54–6, 54 
cerebellar malformations 31–40 
cystic posterior fossa 31–4 
Dandy–Walker malformation 2, 14, 15, 32–4 
Dandy–Walker variant 19, 35–6 
hypoplasia 
fetal biometry 346 
see also Neu–Laxova syndrome 
megacisterna magna 35, 35 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
vermis 14–15, 15–17 
cerebral diameter 272 
cerebral tumors 51, 51 
cerebral ventriculomegaly 18–22 
association with other malformations 21 
definition 18 
diagnosis 19–21 
differential diagnosis 21 
etiology and pathogenesis 18–19 
associated with cerebral destruction 19–20 
Chiari II malformation 19, 39 
chromosomal anomalies 21 
CNS malformations 19 
cytomegalovirus infection 19, 20 
isolated ventriculomegaly 20, 20 
non-chromosomal syndromes 21 
severe ventriculomegaly 20–1, 20 
exclusion of diagnosis 11 
hydrocephalus classification 21 
obstetric/postnatal management 22 
prognosis 22 
cerebro-oculofacioskeletal syndrome 79, 81, 238, 279, 
319, 321 
cerebrorenodigital syndrome 245, 248 
CHAOS (congenital high airway obstruction syndrome, 
laryngeal atresia) 97–8, 185–6 
Chiari II malformation, diagnosis 19, 19, 39 
chondrodysplasia punctata 81 
chondroectodermal dysplasia 141, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 288–90 
choroid plexus 12 
chromosomal syndromes 301–35 
cisterna magna 
megacisterna magna 15 
views 12, 15 
cleft lip/palate 73, 75–7, 76, 87–92, 88–92 
artifacts of lips 73 
associated syndromes 91 
diagnosis 92 
Goldenhar syndrome 323–4, 21, 79, 91, 96, 323–4 
median facial cleft syndrome 82 
cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
354 INDEX 

clubfoot 271, 278, 298–9 
differential diagnosis 279 
colon, diameter, fetal biometry 350 
colpocephaly see agenesis of corpus callosum 
congenital heart disease 131–81 
see also heart anomalies 
conotruncal anomaly syndrome 311 
contractures 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 202, 203, 
209, 211 
see also joint contractures 
corpus callosum see agenesis of corpus callosum 
cranial sutures 100–1, 100–1 
3D ultrasound 277 
related abnormalities 76 
cranial synostoses 313 
craniofacial abnormalities and 3D ultrasound 74–8 
cranial sutures and related abnormalities 76 
ear, surface rendering 75–6, 78 
fetal face, surface rendering 76–8 
lips and palate 74–5 
see also face and neck 
craniofacial anomalies by scanning view 67–73 
artifacts, lips and orbits 73 
assessment of splanchnocranium 65–6 
base of orbits/upper maxilla 68, 68 
craniofacial profile 69–70, 71, 72 
ear 70, 72 
face (coronal) 64, 66, 70, 72 
lips (oblique) 70, 73 
lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge 68, 68 
mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone 68–9, 69 
orbits (lateral approach) 65, 67, 67 
orbits (ventral approach) 67–8, 67 
palate (coronal) 70, 72 
palate (oblique) 70, 73 
summary of most important 71 
thyroid 69, 70 
tongue/pharynx 68, 69 
craniofacial anomalies (major) 78–100 
anophthalmia/microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
cataract 79, 80–1, 81 
cleft lip/palate 73, 75–7, 76, 87–92, 88–92 
congenital high-airway obstruction syndrome 97–8, 98 
cranial sutures 100–1, 100–1 
external ear 72, 78, 95–7, 96–7 
hypertelorism 81–2, 82 
hypotelorism 82–3, 83 
micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
nose 84–7 
other tumours of neck 99–100, 99 
craniopharyngioma 52, 52 
cranium, scanning views 268–9 
Crouzon syndrome 21, 313 
cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
cystic brain malformations see cystic posterior fossa 
cystic hygroma 103–6, 104–6 
12–14 wks examination 2–3, 2 
cystic masses, abdominal, differential diagnosis 212 
cystic posterior fossa 31–4 
anatomic features compared 32 
Dandy–Walker malformation 19, 32–4 
other cystic malformations 34–7 
Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
megacisterna magna 35, 35 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
see also posterior cranial fossa 
cytomegalovirus infection 
cerebral ventriculomegaly 19, 20 
hepatomegaly 223 
Dandy–Walker malformation 
association with other malformations 33 
chromosomal abnormalities 33 
definition 32–3 
diagnosis 14, 15, 19, 33, 33 
differential diagnosis 33 
false diagnosis 2 
etiology and pathogenesis 33 
non-chromosomal syndromes 34 
obstetric management 34 
postnatal treatment 34 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 34 
Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
cystic posterior fossa 35–6 
diagnosis 19, 32, 36, 36 
prognosis 36 
Denis–Drash syndrome 260, 263 
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) 185–6, 187–92 
differential diagnosis 190 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
diastrophic dysplasia 271, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 290 
DiGeorge syndrome 310–12 
double-inlet single ventricle, 4-chamber view 119, 119 
Down syndrome 301–4 
differential diagnosis 302 
duodenal atresia 215–16 
Down syndrome 302 
ear see external ear 
Ebstein’s anomaly 128, 145–6 
ectrodactyly, syndromic indicators 279–80, 282 
ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia syndrome 91, 280 
Edwards syndrome 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
Elejade syndrome 247 
Ellis–van Creveld syndrome (chondroectodermal dysplasia) 
141, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 288–90 
esophageal atresia 213–14 
Down syndrome 302 
EUROCAT definitions, limb reduction defects 296 
exencephaly/anencephaly 52–3, 53 
EXIT procedure, in CHAOS 98 
exomphalos, Down syndrome 302 
external ear 72, 78, 95–7, 96–7 
anomalies 
cat-eye syndrome 317 
Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
INDEX 355 

anomalies by scanning view 70, 72 
normal (17-42 wks) fetal biometry 348 
surface rendering 75–6, 78 
eyes, anophthalmia/microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
face and neck, see also craniofacial anomalies 
face and neck, normal anatomy 63–6 
surface rendering 76–8 
timing of examination 63, 63–4 
US approach and scanning planes (views) 63–6 
axial views 64, 65, 67–70 
coronal views 64, 66, 70, 72 
oblique views 64, 73 
sagittal views 64, 72 
falx, holoprosencephaly 2 
feet 
anomalies 298–9 
clubfoot 271, 278–9, 298–9 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
femoral hypoplasia–unusual facies syndrome 279, 297, 
317–18 
femur length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 340 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 94, 202, 203, 
209, 211, 276, 279, 318–22 
definition 319 
fetal biometry 337–51 
cerebellar hypoplasia 346 
diameters 
bowel 350 
stomach 349 
hyper/hypotelorism 347 
liver, right lobe length 350 
lung volume 349 
microcephaly 345 
microphthalmia 347 
nasal bone hypoplasia 348 
normal (17-42 wks) 
abdominal circumference 339 
biparietal diameter 337 
external ear 348 
femur length 340 
head circumference 338 
humerus length 342 
radius length 344 
thoracic circumference 348 
tibia length 341 
ulna length 343 
renal hypoplasia 351 
splenomegaly 351 
vermian hypoplasia 347 
fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia 
(FMAIT) 50 
Fontan operation 147 
fontanelles 100–1, 100–1 
fractures, skeletal dysplasias 272 
Fraser syndrome 80, 91, 96, 238, 322–3 
frontonasal dysplasia 82, 91 
Fryns syndrome 91, 191 
fusion anomalies 239–40 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
gastric bubble 
double bubble 213, 215 
non-visualization 208–11, 213, 213 
flow chart 208–11, 211 
gastrointestinal tract 
anatomy, cranial/abdominal views 207–8 
anomalies 208–29 
anorectal anomalies 220–1 
by scanning view 208–12 
duodenal atresia 215–16 
esophageal atresia 213–14 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 202, 203, 
209, 211 
gastroschisis 210, 227–9 
hepatomegaly/splenomegaly 222–4 
meconium ileus 218–20 
non-visualization of gastric bubble 208–11, 211, 213 
omphalocele 209, 224–7 
small-bowel atresia 216–18 
tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
gastroschisis 210, 227–9 
genitalia, ambiguous 261–4, 263 
gestational age 1–10, 1 
midtrimester anomaly scan 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
age for diagnosis 4 
evolving (late onset) malformations 5, 5, 6 
three-dimensional US 5–8 
Glenn operation 147 
Goldenhar syndrome 21, 79, 91, 96, 323–4 
Gorlin syndrome 21 
Grote syndrome 25 
hands see limbs 
head, biparietal diameter, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 337 
head circumference, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 338 
heart 3D/4D fetal echocardiography–cardio-STIC 126–30 
4D echocardiography in diagnosis 127–8 
acquisition 126 
B-flow imaging 130 
glassbody mode 127, 128, 137 
inversion mode 127, 129 
modes of analysis 126–7, 127–30 
spatiotemporal image correlation (STIC) 126 
surface mode 127, 129 
tomographic US imaging (TUI) 8, 9, 17, 127 
uses 128–30 
heart anatomy investigation sequence 113–14 
atrioventricular connections 113–14 
atrioventricular valves 114 
situs 113 
timing of examination 114 
ventriculo-arterial connections 114 
ventriculo-arterial valves 114 
heart anomalies/CHD 131–81 
anomalous pulmonary venous connection 119, 119, 
131–2, 131 
aortic arch anomalies 120–1, 120, 124, 157–61 
aortic coarctation 5, 5, 6, 120–1, 120, 156–7 
aortic stenosis 121, 154–5 
356 INDEX 

atrial anomalies 117–18 
atrial septal defect 132–5 
atrial septal defect-type II 132–5, 133–4 
atrioventricular discordance 113 
atrioventricular septal defect 117–18, 140–3 
bilateral myocardial hypertrophy 120, 179–81 
cardiac tumors 177–9 
cardiomyopathies 179–81 
cavo-atrial junction 120, 120 
absence of inferior vena cava 125, 126 
persistence of left superior vena cava 120, 120 
common arterial trunk 121, 167–9 
corrected transposition of great arteries 173–4 
crossover anomalies 121, 122, 124 
differential diagnosis, algorithms 122, 123 
double atrioventricular inlet 113–14 
double ventriculoarterial outlet 114 
double-inlet single ventricle 119, 119 
double-outlet right ventricle 165–7 
Ebstein’s anomaly 128, 145–6 
heterotaxy syndromes 175–7 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 119, 152–4 
impaired contractility, unilateral and bilateral 119–20 
malalignment VSD 139–40 
pulmonary artery anomalies 121 
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum 
(PAIVS) 149–52 
pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect 
(PAVSD) 169–71 
pulmonary stenosis 148–9 
pulmonary trunk anomalies 125, 125 
pulmonary valve, absence 163–4 
septal anomalies 118, 118, 121, 123, 124 
single atrioventricular inlet 114, 118–19, 119 
single ventriculoarterial outlet 114 
tetralogy of Fallot 161–3 
thymus anomalies 121, 121 
transposition of great arteries 171–3 
tricuspid atresia 146–8 
tricuspid dysplasia 143–4 
ventricular disproportion 119, 119 
ventricular septal defect 117–18, 123, 135–40 
ventriculoarterial discordance 114 
heart scanning planes 114–26 
3-vessel view 
normal 3-vessel view 120, 120 
related malformations 120–1 
4-chamber view 
normal 4-chamber view 115–17, 115–19 
related malformations 115–20 
cavo-atrial junction 
normal view 125, 125 
related malformations 125–6 
long axis of left ventricle 
normal view 121, 122, 124 
related malformations 121–4 
long/short axis of right ventricle 
normal 124, 124, 125 
related malformations 124–5 
longitudinal view of aortic arch 126, 126 
hemifacial microsomia, Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
hemimegalencephaly 42, 42 
hemispondylus 269 
hemorrhage 
intracranial 49–51, 51 
intraventricular 13 
Hensen’s node, neoplasms of 59 
hepatitis A 223 
hepatomegaly 222–4 
fetal biometry 350 
hermaphroditism 261–4 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
mixed gonadal dysgenesis 262 
pseudohermaphroditism 262 
high definition (HD) flow 8, 9 
high-airway obstruction syndrome 97–8, 98 
Hirschsprung’s disease 217 
holoprosencephaly 2, 22–6 
alobar 11, 23–5, 24 
associated anomalies 25, 82–6 
chromosomal anomalies 25 
definition/classification 22–3, 23 
diagnosis 23–5 
differential diagnosis 24–5 
etiology and pathogenesis 23, 25 
non-chromosomal syndromes 25–6 
obstetric management 26 
postnatal therapy 26 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 26 
syndromes 25–6 
holoprosencephaly–fetal akinesia syndrome 25 
Holt–Oram syndrome 297, 324–5 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
humerus length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 342 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
hydro-ureteronephrosis 252–3, 256–7 
diagnosis 252–3, 252–3 
differential diagnosis 253, 253 
prognosis 256–7 
hydrocephalus 18–22 
biventricular/triventricular 13 
classification 21 
associated with bony dysplasia 21 
functionally impaired CSF resorption 21 
hypersecretion 21 
etiology and pathogenesis 18–19 
hydronephrosis 249–52 
definition 250, 250 
diagnosis 251, 251 
prognosis 256–7 
hydrops fetalis 
non-immune 107–11, 108–10 
monosomy-X (Turner syndrome) 107–8, 308 
virus infections 109 
skeletal dysplasias 272, 276 
differential diagnosis 276 
hydrothorax 185, 199–200 
unilateral/bilateral 200 
hyper/hypotelorism 81–3, 82–3 
fetal biometry 347 
INDEX 357 

hypomineralization 14 
skeletal dysplasias 272 
differential diagnosis 275 
hypophosphatasia 271, 272 
diagnosis/prognosis 291–2 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 119, 152–4 
intracranial hemorrhage 49–51, 51 
intraventricular hemorrhage 13 
Jaw Index, micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
jejunal atresia, evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
Jeune syndrome 203, 271, 272, 276, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 286–7 
joint contractures 269 
differential diagnosis 279–82 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 94, 202, 203, 
209, 211, 276, 279, 318–22 
Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
Joubert syndrome 37–8, 38 
jugular lymphatic obstructive sequence (JLOS) 103, 104 
Kartagener syndrome 21 
kidney 
abnormal echogenicity and size 233, 234 
bright kidneys 241 
absent/agenesis 3, 233, 236–8 
ectopia, pelvic kidney 238–9 
fetal biometry, (renal hypo/dysplasia) 351 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
normal anatomy 231–2, 232 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
autosomal dominant (ADPKD: Potter type III) 246–8 
autosomal recessive (ARPKD: Potter type I) 242–4 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter 
type II) 244–6 
obstructive cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) 248–9 
postnatal therapy 256–7 
renal hypo/dysplasia biometry 351 
tumors 260, 261 
see also renal-; urinary tract anomalies 
Klinefelter syndrome 262 
Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome 325–7 
laryngeal atresia 185–6 
Fraser syndrome 322–3 
late-onset malformations, diagnosis 5 
limb contractures see joint contractures 
limb–body wall complex 228–9 
limbs 
3D ultrasound 267 
anomalies 298–9 
clubfoot 271, 278–9, 298–9 
ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia syndrome 91, 280 
polydactyly 
differential diagnosis 280, 281 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 327–9 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 
276, 293–4 
syndromic indicators 279–80, 281 
reduction defects 
EUROCAT definitions 296 
ultrasound diagnosis 296–9 
see also skeletal dysplasias 
scanning views 267 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
terminal transvse reduction defects 297–8 
lips 
artifacts 
by scanning view 73 
scanning view 73 
lips (oblique) 70, 73 
lips and palate 74–5 
multiplanar imaging 74, 74, 75 
surface rendering 74–5, 75, 76, 77 
lissencephaly 43–5, 44–5 
liver 
hepatomegaly 222–4 
right lobe length, fetal biometry 350 
lung volume, fetal biometry 349 
macrocrania 14 
magnetic resonance imaging, HASTE, agenesis of corpus callosum 
30 
mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone 68–9, 69 
maternal obesity, acoustic window impairment 4 
maxilla/upper alveolar ridge 68, 68 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 21, 26, 34, 40, 80, 247, 
280, 327–9 
meconium ileus 218–20 
megacolon (Hirschsprung’s disease) 217 
megacystis 2, 3 
microcephaly 40–1 
associated anomalies 40 
chromosomal anomalies 40 
definition 40 
diagnosis 40, 41 
differential diagnosis 40 
etiology and pathogenesis 40 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
fetal biometry 345 
in Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
non-chromosomal syndromes 40–1 
obstetric management 41 
postnatal treatment 41 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 41 
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome 331–2 
views 12, 14 
microdeletion 22q11.2 (DiGeorge syndrome) 310–12 
micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
differential diagnosis 276 
Jaw Index 93–5, 93–4 
in Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
skeletal dysplasias 272 
micromelia 271, 273 
differential diagnosis 273 
microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
fetal biometry 347 
in Fraser syndrome 322–3 
in Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
358 INDEX 

midtrimester anomaly scan 3–5 
abdominal acoustic windows 5 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
age for diagnosis of common anomalies 4 
evolving (late onset) malformations 5, 5, 6 
impaired acoustic window, fetal/maternal causes 4–5 
pretest information 4 
Miller–Dieker syndrome 21, 41, 45 
mineralization defects, hypophosphatasia 203 
molar tooth sign, Joubert syndrome 38 
monosomy-X (Turner syndrome) 308–9 
non-immune hydrops fetalis 107–8, 308 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter type II) 244–6 
diagnosis 244–5, 245 
multiplanar imaging, 3D ultrasound 6, 7 
multiple pterygium syndrome 104, 279, 319, 321, 329–30 
musculoskeletal system 267–9 
2D ultrasound 267–9 
timing of examination 267 
myeloceles 56 
myelomeningoceles 56 
Nager syndrome 96, 280, 297 
nasal bone hypoplasia 
Down syndrome 302 
fetal biometry 348 
neck, see also face and neck 
neck tumors 99–100 
neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (NAITP) 50 
nephroblastoma 261 
nervous system anomalies 11–61 
Neu–Laxova syndrome 21, 34, 45, 81, 82, 279, 319, 
321, 330–1 
neural tube defects 52–60, 279 
acrania/exencephaly/anencephaly 52–3, 53 
cephalocele 54–6, 54 
Edwards syndrome 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
sacrococcygeal teratoma 58–60, 59 
spina bifida 15, 56–8, 57 
spinal dysraphism 56 
neuroblast proliferation 39–40 
neuronal proliferation and migration anomalies 39–47 
hemimegalencephaly 42, 42 
lissencephaly 43–5, 44–5 
microcephaly 40–1 
schizencephaly 46–7, 46 
nomograms see fetal biometry 
non-immune hydrops fetalis 107–11, 108–10 
Noonan syndrome 104, 180 
Noonan-like phenotype 3 
nose 84–7 
abnormal nose 86–7 
nasal bone hypoplasia 
Down syndrome 302 
fetal biometry 348 
proboscis, arhinia, single nostril 71, 84–5, 84–6 
nuchal translucency 3, 105 
differential diagnosis 106 
Down syndrome 302 
obstructive cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) 248–9 
diagnosis 248, 249 
differential diagnosis 241, 248 
oculo-auriculo-vertebral syndrome (Goldenhar syndrome ) 21, 
79, 91, 96, 323–4 
oligohydramnios 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
investigations 257 
PROM causation 208 
omphalocele 209, 224–7, 258, 259 
12–14 wks examination 2 
Opitz syndrome 263 
orbits 
artifacts 
by scanning view 73 
scanning view 73 
lateral approach 65, 67, 67 
ventral approach 67–8, 67 
orbits/upper maxilla, by scanning view 68, 68 
orocraniodigital syndrome 240 
osteogenesis imperfecta 271, 275, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 292–3 
otocephaly 238, 240 
ovarian cyst 264–5 
diagnosis 264–5, 265 
palate (coronal) 70, 72 
Pallister–Killian syndrome 191 
Patau syndrome 280, 306–7 
pelvic kidney ectopia 238–9 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome 203, 319 
pentalogy of Cantrell 227 
peripheral (and central) nervous system anomalies 11–61 
Perlman syndrome 247, 315–16 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
Pfeiffer syndrome 313 
plagiocephaly 270 
pleural effusion see hydrothorax 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
autosomal dominant (ADPKD: Potter type III) 246–8 
autosomal recessive (ARPKD: Potter type I) 242–4 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter 
type II) 244–6 
see also kidney 
polydactyly 
differential diagnosis 280, 281 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 327–9 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 
276, 293–4 
syndromic indicators 279–80, 281 
polyhydramnios, acoustic window impairment 4–5 
porencephaly 48–9, 49 
posterior cranial fossa 
cystic malformations 31–40 
see also cystic posterior fossa 
non-cystic malformations 37–9 
Chiari II malformation 19, 19, 39, 39 
Joubert syndrome 37–8, 38 
rhombencephalosynapsis 38, 38 
sagittal scans 16 
INDEX 359 

posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
pouch sign, tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
prune belly syndrome 254, 255 
pulmonary artery anomalies 121 
pulmonary atresia 
with intact ventricular septum (PAIVS) 149–52 
lung volume, fetal biometry 349 
with ventricular septal defect (PAVSD) 169–71 
pulmonary sequestration 195–9 
pulmonary stenosis 148–9 
pulmonary trunk anomalies 125, 125 
long/short axis of right ventricle 125, 125 
pulmonary valve, absence 163–4 
pulmonary venous connection, (total) anomalous 119, 119, 
131–2, 131 
radii 
aplasia 296–7, 333 
normal length (17-42 wks gestation) 344 
renal agenesis 3, 236–8 
artifacts 236, 237 
definition 236 
diagnosis 236–7, 236–7 
differential diagnosis 237–8 
etiology and pathogenesis 236 
Fraser syndrome 322–3 
renal ectopia 238–9, 239 
pelvic kidney 238–9, 239 
renal hypoplasia, fetal biometry 351 
renal tumors 260–1 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
rhizomelia 271 
rhombencephalosynapsis 38, 38 
ribs, 3D ultrasound 277–8 
Roberts syndrome 280, 297, 325 
Robinow syndrome 263 
rockerbottom foot 299 
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome 331–2 
sacrococcygeal teratoma 58–60, 59 
scaphocephaly 14, 270 
Schinzel–Giedion syndrome 252 
schizencephaly 46–7, 46 
Schprintzen syndrome 25, 311 
Seckel syndrome 41 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 293–4 
sirenomelia see VA(C)TER(L) association 
skeletal dysplasias 267–99 
3D ultrasound 277–8 
maximum mode rendering 277–8 
VCI-C mode 277–8 
differential diagnosis 271–6 
fractures 272 
hydrops 272 
hypomineralization 272, 14 
differential diagnosis 275 
major 283–99 
micromelia 271, 273 
and NIHF 108 
thoracic hypoplasia 187, 202–3, 271–2 
see also micrognathia 
skull defects, nomenclature 270–1 
small-bowel atresia 216–18 
Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome 41, 263 
spina bifida 56–8, 57 
axial transcerebellar view 15 
spine 
3D ultrasound 277–8 
dysraphism 56 
scanning views 267–8 
splenomegaly 222–4 
fetal biometry 351 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
Steinfield syndrome 25 
stomach, diameters, fetal biometry 349 
Takao (conotruncal anomaly) syndrome 311 
talipes (clubfoot) 271, 278, 298–9 
differential diagnosis 279 
talus (rockerbottom foot) 299 
TAR syndrome 297 
teratomas, neck 99–100 
terminal transvse reduction defects 297–8 
tetralogy of Fallot 161–3 
thanatophoric dysplasias 203, 270–2, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 294–6 
thoracic anatomy 183–5 
normal fetal biometry 348 
timing and approach 
axial 4-chamber view 183 
axial mediastinal view 184 
right parasagittal view 184–5 
thoracic anomalies 183–205 
absent pulmonary valve syndrome 186–7 
adenomatoid cystic malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
diagnosis, differential diagnosis 185–7 
diaphragmatic hernia 185–6, 187–92 
dysplasia, asphyxiating (Jeune syndrome) 203, 271, 272, 
276, 280, 286–7 
hydrothorax 185–6, 199–201 
hypoplasia 187, 202–3, 271–2 
differential diagnosis 272, 274 
fetal biometry 348 
increased cardiothoracic ratio 202–3 
laryngeal atresia 185 
pulmonary sequestration 185–6, 195–9 
thymus hypoplasia/aplasia 203–4 
three-dimensional ultrasound 5–8 
B-flow 5–8 
inversion mode 8, 8 
multiplanar imaging 6, 7 
surface and maximum modes 6–7, 7 
volume acquisition procedure 6 
volume contrast imaging 7, 8 
volume quality 6, 7 
thymus anomalies 121, 121 
hypoplasia/aplasia 203–4 
thyroid, scanning view 69, 70 
tibia length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 341 
360 INDEX 

tomographic US imaging (TUI) 8, 9, 17, 127 
tongue/pharynx, by scanning view 68, 69 
Toriello–Carey syndrome 180 
total-body US 267 
tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
pouch sign 213–14 
transposition of great arteries 171–3 
corrected 173–4 
Treacher Collins syndrome 96 
tricuspid atresia 146–8 
tricuspid dysplasia 143–4 
trigonocephaly 270 
triploidy 309–10 
trisomy-13 (Patau syndrome) 280, 306–7 
trisomy-18 (Edwards syndrome) 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
trisomy-21 (Down syndrome) 301–4 
trunk and abdomen, 12–14 wks examination 3 
tuberous sclerosis 178, 248 
tumors 
brain 13, 51 
cardiac 177–9 
neck 99–100 
Turner syndrome 262, 308–9 
turricephaly 270, 312 
ulna length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 343 
ulnar deviation, syndromic indicators 279 
urinary tract 
anomalies 236–65 
12–14 wks examination, megacystis 2, 3 
abnormal renal echogenicity 233–5, 234 
absent kidney 233 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
bladder dilatation 254–6 
bladder non-visualization 235 
bladder/cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
fusion anomalies 239–40 
hydro-ureteronephrosis 252–3, 256–7 
hydronephrosis 249–52, 256–7 
obstetric management 256–7 
ovarian cyst 264–5 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
renal agenesis 236–8 
renal ectopia 238–9, 239 
renal tumors 260–1 
normal anatomy 231–3 
bladder 232, 233 
development 231, 232–3 
differential diagnosis 233–5 
kidney 231–2, 232 
scanning planes 231–3 
timing of examination 231 
ureters and urethra 232, 233 
VA(C)TER(L) association 214, 221, 238, 245, 248, 252, 297 
definition 333 
pathogenesis 333–5 
sirenomelia 221, 238 
vein of Galen aneurysm 51, 201 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
diagnosis 13 
velocardiofacial syndrome 25, 311 
ventricular septal defect, Down syndrome 302 
ventriculomegaly see cerebral ventriculomegaly 
vermian hypoplasia, fetal biometry 347 
vermis 14–15, 15 
absence, false-positive image 14–15, 15 
anatomical landmarks 16 
anomalies 17 
cystic posterior fossa, Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
volume acquisition procedure 6 
volume contrast imaging (VCI-C) 7, 8, 208, 209, 278 
Walker–Warburg syndrome 21, 34, 41, 45, 80, 81 
Wilms tumor 260 
Zellweger syndrome 222, 247, 315–16 
INDEX 361 

