an update in 

obstetrics and 

gynecology 

precis 
ReproductiveEndocrinologySecond Edition 

Precis: An Update in Obstetrics & Gynecology represents the knowledge and experience 
of experts in the field and does not necessarily reflect College policy. Methods and techniques 
of clinical practice that are currently acceptable and used by recognized authorities 
are described in this publication. The recommendations do not dictate an exclusive course 
of treatment or of practice. Variations taking into account the needs of the individual 
patient, resources, and limitations unique to the institution or type of practice may be 
appropriate. 

Medicine is an ever-changing field. As new research and clinical experience emerge, 
changes in treatment and drug therapy are required. Every effort has been made to ensure 
that the drug dosage schedules contained herein are accurate and in accordance with standards 
accepted at the time of publication. Readers are advised, however, to check the product 
information literature of each drug they plan to administer to be certain that there have 
been no changes in the dosage recommended or in the contraindications for administration. 
This is of particular importance for new or infrequently used drugs. 

The assistance of Roger Smith, MD, in reviewing and assembling material for this 
CD-ROM of Precis: Reproductive Endocrinology, Second Edition is greatly appreciated. 

Copyright © 2002 by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and its 
licensors. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this publication 
may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher. Requests for photocopies should be directed to the 
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. 

The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists 
409 12th Street, SW 
PO Box 96920 
Washington, DC 20090-6920 

12345/65432 


CONTRIBUTORS v 

PREFACE vii 

Introduction 1 

Basic Principles 3 
Hormone Action 3 
Endocrine Assays: Their Appropriate Use and 

Interpretation 8 
Genetic Principles 18 


Sexual Development and Puberty 32 
Sexual Differentiation in the Fetus 33 
Ambiguous Genitalia 35 
Pubertal Development 38 
Abnormalities of Puberty 42 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 51 
The Mature Ovary 51 
Hypothalamic Secretion of Gonadotropin-

Releasing Hormone 54 
Gonadotropin Regulation of the Menstrual 
Cycle 57 
Steroid Hormone Effects on the Female 
Reproductive Tract 60 
Premenstrual Syndrome 61 

Disorders of Ovulation and 
Menstruation 67 
The Approach to the Patient with Abnormal 

Menstruation 67 
Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 73 
Hyperprolactinemia and Other Pituitary 

Disorders 79 

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and 
Other Androgen Excess Disorders 83 
Premature Ovarian Failure 93 

Contents 

Other Endocrine Problems 100 
Thyroid Diseases 100 
Adrenal Gland Disorders 105 
Prostaglandins and Dysmenorrhea 113 
Endometriosis 116 

Infertility 124 
Evaluation of Infertility 124 
Overview of Management 132 
Ovulation Induction 136 
Assisted Reproductive Technologies 141 
Future Directions in Infertility Treatment 148 
Ethical Issues 149 

Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 156 
Definition of Pregnancy Loss 156 
Recurrence Risk 156 
Etiology of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 156 
Evaluation for Pregnancy Loss 159 
Follow-up 160 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 162 
Combination Oral Contraceptives 162 
Progestin-Only Pills 164 
Depot Medroxyprogesterone Acetate 165 
Monthly Injectable Combination Contraceptives 

165 
Hormone-Releasing Intrauterine Devices 165 
Transdermal Contraceptive Patch 166 
Contraceptive Vaginal Ring 166 
Levonorgestrel Implants 166 
Emergency Contraception with Oral 

Contraceptives 167 

Menopause 169 
Physiology 169 
Approach to Therapy 174 
Alternative Therapies for Menopause 184 


CONTENTS 

Audiovisual Aids 
VIDEO 1. Endometrial dating 
VIDEO 2. Endometrial ablation 
VIDEO 3. Complications of operative laparoscopy 
VIDEO 4. Laparoscopic surgery of adhesions 
VIDEO 5. Surgery for endometriosis 
VIDEO 6. Office hysteroscopy 

Images 
IMAGE 1. Clitoromegaly in a patient with 

45,X/46,XY karyotype 

IMAGE 2. Young child with true hermaphroditism 

IMAGE 3. Streak gonad 

IMAGE 4. Complete androgen insensitivity 

IMAGE 5. Endometrial dating: early menstruation 

IMAGE 6. Endometrial dating: early menstruation 

IMAGE 7. Endometrial dating: early–mid


menstruation 
IMAGE 8. Endometrial dating: early–mid


menstruation 

IMAGE 9. Endometrial dating: mid-menstruation 

IMAGE 10. Endometrial dating: late menstruation– 

early proliferation 
IMAGE 11. Endometrial dating: later proliferative 
phase 
IMAGE 12. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days 
IMAGE 13. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days 
IMAGE 14. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase 
IMAGE 15. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
18 days 
IMAGE 16. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
19 days 
IMAGE 17. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
19 days 
IMAGE 18. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
20 days 
IMAGE 19. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
20 days 
IMAGE 20. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 

IMAGE 21. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 
IMAGE 22. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
21 days 
IMAGE 23. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
22 days 
IMAGE 24. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
23 days 
IMAGE 25. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
24 days 
IMAGE 26. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
24 days 
IMAGE 27. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
25 days 
IMAGE 28. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26 days 
IMAGE 29. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26–27 days 
IMAGE 30. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 
26 days 
IMAGE 31. Arias-Stella reaction (ectopic pregnancy) 
IMAGE 32. Acanthosis nigricans 
IMAGE 33. Clinical features of a woman with 
Cushing’s disease 
IMAGE 34. Endometrioma, or “chocolate cyst” 
IMAGE 35. Endometriosis 
IMAGE 36. Diagnosis of endometriosis 
IMAGE 37. Filling defect, fibroid 
IMAGE 38. Filling defect, synechiae 
IMAGE 39. Involuted fibroid 
IMAGE 40. Salpingitis isthmica nodosa 
IMAGE 41. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 42. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 43. Septate uterus 
IMAGE 44. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 45. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 46. Didelphic uterus 
IMAGE 47. Bicornuate uterus 
IMAGE 48. T-shaped uterus 
IMAGE 49. Asherman’s syndrome, uterine factors 

INDEX 

LINKING INSTRUCTIONS 


EDITORIAL COMMITTEE 

Robert W. Rebar, MD, Chair 
Ricardo Azziz, MD 
Edward E. Wallach, MD 
Abbey B. Berenson, MD 
William J. Butler, MD 
Rogerio A. Lobo, MD 
James H. Liu, MD 

ADVISORY COMMITTEE 

Donald R. Coustan, MD 
Leo J. Dunn, MD 
Roger P. Smith, MD 

AUTHORS 

Robert L. Barbieri, MD 

Adrenal Gland Disorders 

Sarah L. Berga, MD 

Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 

Richard E. Blackwell, MD 

Hyperprolactinemia and Other Pituitary Disorders 

Contributors 



CONTRIBUTORS 

William J. Butler, MD 

Sexual Differentiation in the Fetus 

Bruce R. Carr, MD 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 

David S. Cooper, MD 

Thyroid Diseases 

Ann J. Davis, MD 

Pubertal Development 

Owen K. Davis, MD 

Future Directions in Infertility Treatment 

William C. Dodson, MD 

Ovulation Induction 

Marc A. Fritz, MD 

Evaluation of Infertility; Overview of Management 

William H. Kutteh, MD 

Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 

Paul W. Ladenson, MD 

Thyroid Diseases 

Lawrence C. Layman, MD 

Genetic Principles 

Richard S. Legro, MD 

Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other 
Androgen Excess Disorders 

James H. Liu, MD 

Effects of Hormone Replacement Therapy 

Rogerio A. Lobo, MD 

Approach to Therapy (Menopause) 

Lorna A. Marshall, MD 

Ethical Issues (Infertility) 

David Meldrum, MD 

Assisted Reproductive Technologies 

Lawrence M. Nelson, MD 

Premature Ovarian Failure 

Robert W. Rebar, MD 

Introduction; The Approach to the Patient with 
Abnormal Menstruation 

Richard Reindollar, MD 

Abnormalities of Puberty 

Robert S. Schenken, MD 

Endometriosis; Prostaglandins and Dysmenorrhea 

Samuel Smith, MD 

Premenstrual Syndrome 

Steven J. Sondheimer, MD 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 

Leon Speroff, MD 

Physiology (Menopause) 

Maida Taylor, MD 

Alternative Therapies for Menopause 

Laurence C. Udoff, MD 

Hormone Action 

Bradley J. Van Voorhis, MD 

Endocrine Assays: Their Appropriate Use and 
Interpretation 

STAFF 

Sterling B. Williams, MD 

Vice President of Education 

Rebecca D. Rinehart 

Director of Publications 

Joyce Leinberger Mitchell 

Senior Editor 


Preface 


E
E
ducation is a lifelong process. In no other field than medicine is this 
process more important. As scientific advances unfold, new techniques 
and technologies emerge, knowledge expands, and the art and science of 
medicine undergo dynamic change. Progress in medicine is ongoing, and so 
too must be the continuing medical education of those who practice it. 
Precis: An Update in Obstetrics and Gynecology is intended to meet the 
continuing education needs of obstetricians and gynecologists. It is a broad, 
yet concise, overview of information relevant to the specialty. As in earlier 
editions, the emphasis is on innovations in clinical practice, presented within 
the context of traditional approaches that retain their applicability to 
patient care. 
Precis is an educational resource for preparation of the cognitive assessment 
of clinical knowledge, regardless of the form of the assessment—formal 
or informal, structured or independent. It is one of the recognized 
vehicles useful in preparing for certification and accreditation processes, 
and it is designed to complement those evaluations while serving as a general 
review of the field. 
Each year, one volume of this five-volume set is revised. This process 
provides continual updates that are critical to the practice of obstetrics and 
gynecology and that echo the dynamic nature of the field. The focus is on 
new and emerging techniques, presented from a balanced perspective of 
clinical value and cost-effectiveness in practice. Hence, discussion of traditional 
medical practice is limited. The information has been organized to 
unify coverage of topics into a single volume so that each volume can stand 
on its own merit. 
This second edition of Precis: Reproductive Endocrinology reflects current 
thinking on optimal practice. The information is intended to be a useful 
tool to assist practicing obstetrician–gynecologists in maintaining current 
knowledge in a rapidly changing field and to better prepare them for the role 
of primary care provider for women. 


viii PREFACE 

Some information from the previous edition continues to be of value and 
thus has been retained and woven into the new structure. The efforts of 
authors contributing to previous editions, as well as the work of those 
authors providing new material, must be recognized with gratitude. 
Collectively, they represent the expertise of the specialty. With such a 
breadth of representation, differences of opinion are inevitable and have 
been respected. 

Other Precis volumes are Primary and Preventive Care, Second Edition; 
Obstetrics, Second Edition; Gynecology, Second Edition; and Oncology. 
Each is an educational tool for review, reference, and evaluation. Precis 
establishes a broad scientific basis for the delivery of quality health care for 
women. Rather than being a statement of ACOG policy, Precis serves as an 
intellectual approach to education. An effort has been made, however, to 
achieve consistency both within Precis and with other ACOG recommendations. 
Variations in patient care, based on individual needs and resources, are 
encouraged as an integral part of the practice of medicine. 

—THE EDITORS 


precis 


an update in obstetrics and gynecology 

Reproductive Endocrinology 


second edition 


Introduction 


M
M
olecular biology and molecular genetics are changing our knowledge 
of all physiologic processes and diseases. Perhaps nowhere is 

this more apparent than in the field of reproductive endocrinology. This 

volume of Precis updates important clinically relevant information in this 

field and places the information in its appropriate context. As is true for past 

volumes, there has been no attempt to be comprehensive, but rather to high


light advances in the field that are clinically relevant. 

This edition has been completely reorganized in recognition of the impact 

of advances in practice. The section discussing basic principles is both for


ward looking and historically grounded. To help keep the explosion in med


ical information in perspective, the appropriate use and interpretation of 

endocrine assays is emphasized in a section that might well have appeared 

in a text written two or three decades ago. In contrast, the details of hormone 

action and of molecular genetics, genomics, and proteomics continue to be 

elucidated even as this summary is published. 

In the remainder of the text, the reproductive abnormalities of women are 

considered in the natural progression of life events. The section on infertility 

has been expanded in recognition of the tremendous advances in the ability 

to offer couples the opportunity to bear children. Appearing in this text for 

the first time is a section on hormonal contraception. New approaches to 

contraception have been approved for use in the United States for the first 

time in decades. The expanded section on menopause is timely because of 

the aging of our population and the increasing interest in problems related 

to the postmenopausal period as well as their prevention and treatment. 

This CD-ROM contains the complete text of the printed volume, plus 

enhancements to the text. The CD-ROM permits links to abstracts of refer


enced journal articles through MEDLINE by clicking on the icon at the end 

of the references. Short videos of some diagnostic and surgical techniques 

and images of endocrinologic problems, fibroids, and uterine anomalies 

broaden the educational value of the information. The CD features a multi


media presentation by Edward E. Wallach, MD, depicting histologic images 


of the endometrium and clinical aspects of endometrial dating. Clicking on 
highlighted in-text citations to tables, figures, boxes, slides, and videos will 
take you to the cited material. Use the search function of your computer to 
take you quickly to the text you’re seeking. 

Reproductive endocrinology remains at the heart of obstetrics and gynecology. 
Clinicians with knowledge grounded in the basic principles of 
reproductive physiology can practice the art of obstetrics and gynecology 
at its most rewarding level. It is hoped that this volume will help practitioners 
in our field to remain abreast of the advances that are occurring so 
rapidly. 

—ROBERT W. REBAR,MD 


Basic Principles 


HORMONE ACTION 

Hormones exert their effects through interactions with 
specific cellular receptors. Activation of a hormone 
receptor causes profound changes in cellular function and 
leads to the end hormonal effect. The postreceptor binding 
events that culminate in a cellular response are 
referred to as the signal transduction pathways. These 
pathways vary, depending on whether the ligand is a protein 
or a steroid hormone and is acting in one of the following 
ways: 

• 
Through a classical endocrine pathway, in which 
bloodborne protein or steroid circulates through 
the bloodstream to distant sites, affecting those 
cells that possess the correct hormone-specific 
receptor 
• 
As an autocrine factor, in which a regulatory substance 
is secreted by a cell that acts on receptors 
on or within the same cell 
• 
As a paracrine factor, in which a regulatory substance 
is secreted by a cell that acts on neighboring 
cells 
• 
As an intracrine factor, in which an unsecreted 
regulatory substance acts on intracellular receptors 
within the same cell 
Signal transduction mechanisms for the same hormone 
may vary among different tissues. Additionally, a 
cell can adjust its sensitivity to a hormone by altering the 
number or affinity of the receptors available, a process 
known as up-regulation or down-regulation. 

A better understanding of receptor physiology can 
lead to significant improvements in the treatment of 
many obstetric and gynecologic problems. For example, 
synthetic steroids may be produced that stimulate the 
beneficial effects of estrogen on targets such as bone 
and cardiovascular and genitourinary systems without 
stimulating endometrial or breast tissue. The action of 
these steroids, the selective estrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs), could potentially result in a hormone 
replacement regimen that would offer the benefits of 
estrogen without increasing the risks of endometrial or 
breast cancer. 

Mechanism of Protein Hormone Action 

Protein and peptide hormones that are released by the 
hypothalamus and anterior pituitary include 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH), follicle-stimulating 
hormone (FSH), luteinizing hormone (LH), and 
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). Other peptides, such 

as human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), are secreted 
primarily by the trophoblast. These substances exert their 
effects by binding to specific cell surface receptors. The 
expression of the receptors is highly regulated and determines 
when and which cells are responsive to a specific 
hormone. Many of the receptors have been isolated and 
sequenced, and their primary structures have been determined. 
Mutations in the genes encoding for these hormone 
receptors also have been described and are 
associated with specific disease states. 

A classic example of the broad clinical impact of 
receptor abnormalities is the androgen insensitivity syndrome. 
Another example is mutations in the FSH receptor 
gene that cause premature ovarian failure. There are 
also reports of inactivating mutations in the LH receptor 
gene that result in amenorrhea and infertility. These 
receptors belong to a large superfamily of hormone 
receptors characterized by hydrophilic sequences on each 
end flanking seven hydrophobic regions, presumed to be 
membrane-spanning areas. The N-terminus is located 
extracellularly and comprises the hormone-binding site. 
The C-terminus is located intracellularly and is coupled 
to a specialized membrane-associated guanine nucleotidebinding 
protein (G protein; see Fig. 1). The G protein is 
believed to act as a mediator of signal transduction. 
Abnormalities in the G protein have been linked to disease 
states. For example, McCune-Albright syndrome 
(isosexual precocious puberty, polyostotic fibrous dysplasia) 
results from activating somatic mutations of the alpha 
subunit’s GS protein and increased cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP) concentrations (Fig. 1). 

The putative signal pathway for FSH, LH, and TSH 
involves activation of the cell surface receptor via hormone 
and receptor interactions that result in conformational 
and structural changes in the receptor (1). Note that 
LH and hCG use the same receptor. This provides the 
physiologic basis for the use of exogenous hCG to trigger 
ovulation (mimic an LH surge) in ovulation induction 
protocols. This interaction leads to a change in the subunits 
of the G protein, which results in the activation of 
the enzyme adenylate cyclase (Fig. 1). Activated adenylate 
cyclase converts adenosine triphosphate into a second 
messenger, cAMP, which binds and activates a 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase (protein kinase A). 
Protein kinase A acts to phosphorylate a number of yetto-
be-determined enzymes and DNA-binding proteins 
that can cause a wide spectrum of changes in cell physiology 
and gene expression. Amplification of the signal 
occurs at each step along the pathway. For example, each 
cyclase molecule produces many molecules of cAMP, 
and each protein kinase molecule may activate numerous 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Unoccupied 
Hormone 
Receptor activation 
Activation of 
receptor binding 
signal 
generation 
adenylate 
cyclase 


NN 
N 


CinactCinactRCactcAMP-dependentprotein kinasecAMPcAMPRcAMPP-lipaseCDiacyl-
glycerolProteinkinaseCCa++
IP3cAMP-responsiveelementbindingproteins 
a
bg
agb
?
CCCNC+
hG
n FIG. 1. Schematics of hypothetical luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptor activation, signal generation, and 
signal pathways. Initial hormone binding leads to changes in the interaction of the hormone and receptors that result in changes 
in the structures of the receptor and the hormone, as well as the dissociation of protein Ga from the protein Gbg complex. The 
dissociated Ga interacts with and activates adenylate cyclase. Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) produced by activated 
adenylate cyclase interacts with the regulatory subunits (R) of cAMP-dependent protein kinase, which results in the release 
and activation of the catalytic subunit (C). The activated catalytic subunit phosphorylates proteins, some of which lead to activation 
of cAMP-responsive element binding proteins. These proteins are capable of regulating gene expression. In addition to this 
cAMP-dependent signal pathway, activated luteinizing hormone/chorionic gonadotropin receptors are thought to activate phospholipase 
C (P-lipase C), which hydrolyzes phosphatidyl inositol, a phospholipid, to produce diacylglycerol and inositol triphosphate 
(IP3). Both of these compounds are known to serve as second messengers to activate protein kinase C and to enhance the 
cytoplasmic calcium ion concentrations, respectively. Abbreviations: N indicates N-terminus; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin; 
Cinact, catalytic subunit inactivated; Cact, catalytic subunit activated. (Ji TH, Ji I, Kim SJ. Gonadotropin receptors. In: Adashi EY, Rock 
JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:735) 
downstream enzymes. This action allows for a minute cir-GnRH analogues for clinical use. In general, excess conculating 
concentration of hormone to produce wide-rang-centrations of tropic hormones like GnRH stimulate 
ing effects. internalization of cell surface receptors, leading to a loss 

Not all protein hormones use G protein or cAMP-cou-of receptors in the cell membrane and decreased biologic 
pled signal transduction pathways. For example, activa-responses. It is now clear that hormones, including 
tion of the LH/hCG receptor has been shown to cause an GnRH, are secreted in a pulsatile manner to avoid downincrease 
in phospholipase C activity, resulting in the for-regulation. Pulse frequency is a key factor in regulating 
mation of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate and diacylglycerol receptor number. 
from phosphatidyl inositol. Inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate Native GnRH has an extremely short half-life of 2–4 
increases the cytoplasmic calcium ion concentration, and minutes. By altering amino acids in the decapeptide (ie, 
diacylglycerol activates protein kinase C (Fig. 1). D-amino acid at position 6), thousands of analogues of 

The concept of up-regulation and down-regulation, GnRH with longer half-lives have been produced. 
which is positive or negative modulation of receptors by Available agonists can be administered intramuscularly, 
homologous hormones, has been exploited in developing subcutaneously, or intranasally. Initially the agonists 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

stimulate increased secretion of LH and FSH (the socalled 
flare effect). However, 1–3 weeks of sustained 
action of the agonist leads to down-regulation, decreased 
secretion of LH and FSH, and an effective “medical castration.” 


GnRH antagonists can be synthesized by substituting 
for several amino acids in the decapeptide. These antagonists 
bind to GnRH receptors and competitively inhibit 
binding by GnRH. Thus, the presence of GnRH antagonists 
results in immediate declines in gonadotropin levels 
and has immediate therapeutic effects. Use of early 
GnRH antagonists was limited by adverse effects (particularly 
histamine release) and lack of potency. Newer 
agents that have overcome these drawbacks have been 
marketed only recently. Both GnRH agonists and antagonists 
also prevent premature LH surges when used with 
gonadotropins for controlled ovarian hyperstimulation. 

Mechanism of Steroid Hormone Action 

In circulation, steroids are bound to several classes of 
serum proteins, predominantly sex hormone–binding 
protein and albumin. Sex hormone–binding protein is 
believed to act as a regulator of the concentration of free, 
or biologically active, hormone. Specific cell surface 
receptors for sex hormone–binding protein have been 

identified, and the activation of these receptors by sex 
hormone–binding protein or the sex hormone–binding 
protein–ligand complex results in the stimulation of 
cAMP production, implying the activation of a signal 
transduction pathway. The physiologic significance of 
these events remains to be elucidated. 

In the classic model of steroid hormone action, the 
unbound steroid is presumed to be freely transported into 
the cell by simple diffusion (2). Steroid hormone action is 
initiated by the binding of the hormone to a specific 
receptor located within the cell nucleus (except for androgens, 
mineralocorticoids, and corticosteroids, which bind 
to receptors in the cytoplasm and then are transported to 
the nucleus). This binding promotes the dissociation of 
heat shock proteins from the nascent receptor, resulting in 
dimerization and allosteric changes in the receptor, which 
are necessary before binding to DNA can occur (steroid 
response element; see Fig. 2). After several phosphorylation 
steps, the transcriptionally active receptor–DNA 
complex activates recruitment and stabilization of transcriptional 
factors at the target gene promoter, which 
initiates new messenger RNA (mRNA) synthesis. 
Translation of mRNA then occurs, resulting in protein 
synthesis, which is required for the specific hormone 
effect. This process is thought to require 30 minutes or 
more to complete. The biologic response of the target 

SSSSSSSSSRRSSSSRSSAlteredcellularfunctionSerumbindingprotein(s) 
Binding 
BindingNuclearmembraneCellmembraneRNApolymeraseAUGUAATranscriptionProcessingTranslationExportmRNA5¢3¢
SRRETATASSRRNewprotein
n FIG. 2. Schematic model for the mechanism of steroid hormone action. Steroid hormones (S) carried in the bloodstream enter 
the cell by diffusion, a process that may in some circumstances be modulated by interaction between serum steroid “carrier” proteins 
and the cell membrane. Within the cell, the steroids bind to receptors (R) located primarily in the cell nucleus. Binding alters 
the conformational state and protein–protein interactions of the receptor complex. Interaction of the steroid–receptor complex 
with specific response elements on the DNA activates transcription of specific hormone-sensitive genes, resulting in changes in 
RNA and protein synthesis that lead to altered cellular function. Abbreviations: SRE indicates steroid response elements; TATA, 
TATA box complex; mRNA, messenger RNA; AUG and UAA, codon sequences. (O’Malley BW. Molecular pathways of steroid 
receptor action. Biol Reprod 1992;46:163–167) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tissue continues until the hormone–receptor complex dissociates. 
The half-life of different hormone–receptor 
complexes varies, adding to other factors such as receptor 
affinity in determining the potency of a hormone. For 
example, estradiol is a more potent hormone than estriol, 
in part because of the length of time the estradiol–receptor 
complex occupies the DNA binding site. 

This principle of hormone action is also important in 
understanding that regarding biologic effect, the duration 
of exposure to a hormone (eg, by continuous exogenous 
administration or a long half-life of the receptor complex 
or both) is as important as dose. This principle has been 
put into clinical practice in combined estrogen/progestin 
hormone replacement regimens for postmenopausal 
women with a uterus. When the concept of continuous 
(ie, daily) progestin administration was introduced, it was 
reasoned that the dose of progestin could be significantly 
lowered, in comparison to sequential (ie, 10–14 days per 
month) regimens, without diminishing the overall biologic 
effect. In practice, this principle has held true; progestins, 
provided continuously in doses less than half 
those of sequential regimens, have been shown in numerous 
clinical trials to offer adequate endometrial protection 
against estrogen’s proliferative effects. 

Although seemingly detailed and complete, the above 
model of steroid hormone action does not adequately 
explain all observed clinical phenomena. For example, 
this model does not explain how the same hormone can 
produce different biologic responses in different cells. 
This mechanism is of particular importance in understanding 
the potential and observed biologic effects of 
SERMs such as tamoxifen and raloxifene (Fig. 3). For 
example, clinical studies have documented that raloxifene, 
acting through the estrogen receptor, stimulates 
estrogen action in the bone but has an antiestrogen effect 
in the endometrium. Alternatively, tamoxifen stimulates 
estrogen receptors in the endometrium but acts like an 
antiestrogen in the breast. 

A new model of steroid hormone action has emerged. 
This model is based on findings from research produced 
by recent technologic advances in the field of molecular 
biology (3, 4)—mainly information accumulated from 
the study of the estrogen receptor. Data suggest that the 
physiologically diverse effects of estrogens and SERMs 
are due, at least in part, to the existence of two distinct 
estrogen receptors (ER-a 1 and ER-b ) with different 
ligand affinities, tissue distributions, and ligand-stimulated 
effects. Additionally, the essential role of intracellular 
coregulatory proteins (coactivators and corepressors) 
that interact with the receptor–ligand complex via the 
regulatory domain of the receptor (transcription activation 
function areas TAF-1 and TAF-2) is either to stimulate 
or inhibit transcription of DNA. 

This new information is incorporated in the model of 
estrogen hormone action illustrated in Figure 4. This 
model emphasizes the conformational changes that occur 

n FIG. 3. Structure of selective estrogen receptor modula-
tors. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
with hormone binding. Once the hormone is bound to the 
estrogen response element on the target DNA, the conformational 
shape of the hormone–receptor complex is a 
major factor in determining the net effect of coactivator 
and corepressor activity on gene transcription. Hormones 
such as estradiol, tamoxifen, and raloxifene, which all 
produce a biologic effect through the estrogen receptor, 
therefore can have unique biologic actions in different tissues 
by inducing different conformational shapes in the 
estrogen receptor (leading to diverse interactions with 
coactivator and corepressor proteins) and by having varying 
affinities for different estrogen receptor subtypes 
(which in turn are differentially distributed in tissues 
throughout the body). 

Steroid hormones may act by other nongenomic pathways 
(5). This idea is supported by the observation of 
rapid steroid hormone effects (ie, effects occurring in 
seconds to minutes versus 30 minutes or longer) that were 
not blocked by protein synthesis inhibitors or by blocking 
the entrance of the hormone into the cells. Theories on 
the nonclassical mechanisms of steroid hormone action 
include 1) a nonspecific effect on membrane fluidity, 2) 
binding to specific steroid hormone receptors on the cell 
membrane (which may involve activation of a second 
messenger or ionic channel activation), and 3) binding to, 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Cytoplasm 
Nucleus 
strogen Estrogen 
TAF-2 
coactivators 
corepressors 
TAF-2 
coactivators 
corepressors 
TAF-1 
coactivators 
corepressors 
ERE 
Dimerization 
DNA binding 
TAF-1 
coactivators 
corepressors 
n FIG. 4. An updated model of steroid hormone action. In this model, it is the conformational shape of the hormone–receptor 
complex that is the major factor in determining the net effect of coactivator and corepressor activity on gene transcription. 
Abbreviations: ERE indicates estrogen response element; TAF, transcription activation function; hsp, heatshock protein; A/B, reg-
ulatory domain; C, DNA-binding domain; E, hormone-binding domain. (Speroff L, Glass R, Kase N, eds. Clinical gynecologic 
endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1999:60) 
and modulation of, neurotransmitter membrane receptors 
(eg, g -aminobutyric acid type A, or GABAA; see Fig. 5). 
Examples of steroid hormone actions that are thought to 
be mediated by nongenomic pathways include the inhibition 
of uterine smooth muscle contractility by progesterone 
and alterations in the smooth muscle tone of 
coronary vessels by estrogen. Interactions between the 
nongenomic and genomic pathways may occur and have 
been suggested as an explanation for the wide range of 
observed cellular effects initiated by steroid hormones. 

Mutations in the estrogen receptor have now been 
reported in a few phenotypic males with normal male 
sexual development (6). Incomplete epiphyseal closure 
led to tall stature. Endogenous serum gonadotropin and 
estrogen levels were elevated, and neither level decreased 
after exogenous estrogen administration. These mutations 
indicate that estrogen has an important role in 
pubertal maturation in both females and males. 

Growth Factors in Reproductive Cycles 

The classic models of gonadotropin and steroid-controlled 
cellular growth and differentiation are inadequate 
in explaining the intricacies of the ovarian and endometrial 
cycles. To better explain observed phenomena such 
as recruitment and selection of the dominant follicle in 
the ovary, the concept of autocrine and paracrine regula


tors has been proposed. The carefully timed and regionalized 
expression of these putative principles may allow 
for the great diversity in cellular response noted in tissues 
that are apparently afforded equitable gonadotropic or 
steroidal hormone exposure. Currently, a broad family of 
proteins, designated as growth factors, are being investigated. 
Some growth factors currently under investigation 
include basic fibroblast growth factor, vascular endothelial 
growth factor, transforming growth factor b (TGFb ), 
epidermal growth factor, and the insulinlike growth factor 
(IGF) system. The IGF system comprises ligands (IGF-I 
and IGF-II), which are small polypeptides with structural 
homology to proinsulin-binding proteins. These binding 
proteins are thought to suppress IGF function in most cases. 

Recent evidence suggests that growth factors exert 
their effects through multistep, complex signaling pathways, 
with cross-talk between the pathways, allowing for 
many sites of regulation. The final common pathway 
involves a change in gene expression and protein synthesis 
leading to a specific biologic response. Impeding 
progress in understanding these mechanisms is the fact 
that signal transduction pathways may be tissue specific. 
For example, pathways that use cells of renal origin may 
not be physiologically significant in the ovary. 

Although no known unifying model has been developed 
in the reproductive tract, it is believed that the signal 
transduction pathway of some growth factors begins with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Activatesintracellular steroidreceptor 
ActivatessecondmessengersProtein 
synthesisDNALigandinsertion613245Steroidreceptor 
eand/or EGF/IGFSteroidreceptor 
GABAAreceptor 
Ca++
Ca++Cl–
Cl–
n FIG. 5. Classical and nonclassical modes of action of steroid hormones. Abbreviations: EGF indicates epidermal growth factor; 
IGF, insulinlike growth factor; GABAA, g -aminobutyric acid type A. (Reprinted from Journal of Steroid Biochemical and 
Molecular Biology, Vol. 52, Brann DW, Hendry LEB, Mahesh VB. Emerging diversities in the mechanism of action of steroid hormones. 
Pages 113–133, Copyright 1995, with permission from Elsevier Science) 
ligand binding to a cell surface receptor, followed by activation 
of a protein kinase (eg, tyrosine kinase for IGF-I 
receptors). After this step, many intracellular processes 
have been proposed. Recently, the core TGFb pathway 
was described, and the steps in signal transduction from 
ligand to transcription were detailed. An integral part of 
this system are the Smads (coined from the developmental 
roots of the Caenorhabditis elegans sma genes and the 
Drosophila mad genes, homologues to the genes encoding 
the family of proteins mediating TGFb action). The 
Smad family of proteins are classified as 1) receptor-specific 
Smads that interact with, and are directly phosphorylated 
by, a particular type I receptor; 2) Smads that 
act as common mediators of TGFb signaling, interacting 
with all receptor-activated Smads; and 3) inhibitory 
Smads, which competitively inhibit Smad signaling (7, 
8). In this model, TGFb activates the cell surface receptor, 
the activated receptors phosphorylate and assemble 
cytoplasmic Smad proteins, and Smad complexes move to 
the nucleus as transcription regulators (Fig. 6). 
Elucidation of this pathway is expected to have far-reaching 
clinical implications, as mutations in the TGFb signaling 
pathway have been implicated in human 
malignancies. For example, missense mutations in Smad4 
have been associated with ovarian cancer. 

ENDOCRINE ASSAYS: 
THEIR APPROPRIATE USE AND 
INTERPRETATION 

Measurements of steroid hormones and of pituitary peptides 
are commonly obtained by obstetrician–gynecologists 
caring for women with reproductive disorders. The 
clinician always must interpret test results in the context 
of clinical findings, keeping in mind that no assay has 
perfect sensitivity or specificity for a given condition. In 
addition, false results may occur through laboratory error 
or through errors inherent in a given assay system. 
Although most clinically important assays are now very 
accurate, there can be significant differences in measurements 
among laboratories. Therefore, clinicians should 
become familiar with test results of one laboratory and 
send all patient specimens to that laboratory, if possible. 
This protocol is particularly important when a clinician is 
following levels of a given hormone over time. 

Steroid Hormones 

Most laboratories now measure steroid hormone levels by 
immunometric assays. These assays use two antibodies to 
the hormone of interest. The first antibody is coated on 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

P 
P 
P 
P 
P 
n FIG. 6. Smad signaling downstream of transforming growth factor b (TGFb ) superfamily members. TGFb ligands bind two 
cell surface receptors, the type I and type II receptors, each with serine/threonine kinase activity. Upon ligand binding, the 
type I receptor is phosphorylated at the GS domain by the constitutively active type II receptor and thus is activated. A receptorspecific 
Smad (R-Smad) is recruited to the phosphorylated type I receptor and in turn is phosphorylated. In TGFb signaling, SARA 
(for Smad anchor for receptor activation) localizes the R-Smad, Smad2, to the cell membrane to allow rapid association with the 
type I receptor after ligand binding. Once phosphorylated, R-Smad is released from the receptor complex. In the cytoplasm, 
R-Smad binds a common mediator of TGFb signaling (Co-Smad), and this complex translocates to the nucleus. Inside the nucleus, 
the Smad complex, alone or in combination with other molecules, regulates transcription. Inhibitory Smads (I-Smads) inhibit 
TGFb signaling by preventing R-Smad and Co-Smad interaction. Although depicted as a monomer, the Smads are thought to exist 
as homotrimers. (Rooke HM, Crosier KE. The Smad proteins and TGFb signalling: uncovering a pathway critical in cancer. 
Pathology 2001;33:73–84. With permission of Taylor and Francis Ltd. Web site: http://www.tandf.co.uk/journals) 
the surface of the test tube and “captures” the hormone Because immunometric assays use two antibodies, 
being measured. A second antibody, labeled by an most commercially available assays are very accurate, 
enzyme or chemiluminescent agent, is then added to the with a high sensitivity and specificity. However, errors 
test tube. The second antibody (the tracer antibody) can occur, and unexpected values that do not fit the clinattaches 
to a different site on the hormone than the first ical picture should be investigated by repeating the assay 
antibody and marks the previously captured hormone. on the same sample or a by testing a new sample. 
Thus, a “sandwich” of antibody–hormone–antibody is Discrepant results between two assays may require even 
formed, and the amount of hormone present in a sample a third assay for confirmation of the “true” result. 
is proportional to the amount of labeled or tracer antibody Usually, steroid hormones in blood are measured 
present in the test tube after removing the unattached or for clinical purposes. Recently, salivary steroid assays 
free antibody. The amount of tracer antibody present can have been developed for experimental use (9–11). 
be detected by measuring chemiluminescence. Measurement of steroids in saliva has several advantages 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

over measurement in serum. Multiple samples can be 
obtained easily and painlessly. In addition, salivary 
steroids may correlate with the free, or biologically 
active, hormone, because steroids bound to proteins do 
not diffuse into saliva. Steroid hormone concentrations in 
saliva are approximately 0.5–2% of concentrations found 
in serum, but individual variation is high, making the correlation 
between salivary and serum measurements less 
than ideal. Little clinical experience with salivary measurements 
is available to guide the physician in interpreting 
results. At this time, salivary hormone determinations 
have not been proven to be clinically useful. 

ESTRADIOL 

Estradiol is secreted into the circulation by the developing 
ovarian follicle, the corpus luteum, and the placenta 
during pregnancy. The estradiol level is most useful for 
assessing ovarian function and for monitoring ovarian 
follicular development in patients undergoing assisted 
fertility procedures. 

In the female, estradiol levels are very low prior to 
puberty. During the reproductive years, estradiol is produced 
at a rate of 100–300 m g/d, with typical estradiol 
levels fluctuating between approximately 40 pg/mL and 
400 pg/mL. The absolute concentrations of estradiol are 
extremely low when compared with many other steroid hormones 
commonly present at much higher concentrations, 
measured in nanograms per milliliter. After menopause, 
estradiol levels are typically in the range of 10–20 pg/mL. 
During pregnancy, estradiol levels are as much as 100-fold 
higher than they are in a typical menstrual cycle (12). 

Approximately 1–3% of estradiol in blood is not protein 
bound, 40% is bound to sex hormone–binding globulin 
(SHBG), and the remainder is bound to albumin. All 
currently available immunoassays use reagents that 
release estradiol from serum-binding proteins and therefore 
measure total estradiol present in the specimen. 
Estradiol levels are measured by immunoassay kits, 
which are highly sensitive and specific for estradiol 
because monoclonal antibodies are used. Nevertheless, 
there is some cross-reactivity with other estrogens. 

The major clinical use of estradiol measurement is in 
monitoring follicular development during ovulation 
induction procedures in infertile women (13). Estradiol 
measurements help the clinician gauge the degree to 
which follicles are developing in response to gonadotropin 
injections. Estradiol levels typically more than 
double every 2 days while women are receiving gonadotropin 
injections. Very low levels of estradiol after 
gonadotropin injection suggest poor ovarian follicular 
development, often resulting in cancellation of the cycle. 
In contrast, extremely high levels of estradiol suggest 
that multiple follicles are developing and the woman is at 
risk for multiple birth, as well as ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. One mature ovarian follicle typically 
results in serum levels of estradiol ranging from 
250 pg/mL to 350 pg/mL. Most often, estradiol levels 

are measured in conjunction with transvaginal ultrasonography 
to determine the responsiveness of the ovary 
to gonadotropins. 

Other rare uses of estradiol assessment include the 
evaluation of patients with precocious puberty, assessment 
of menopausal status, and evaluation of patients 
with suspected granulosa cell tumors. Menopause is 
associated with low estradiol levels, whereas patients 
with precocious puberty and granulosa cell tumors have 
inappropriately high estradiol levels compared with the 
reference range. Measurements of FSH generally are 
more clinically useful for the evaluation of menopausal 
status than are estradiol measurements. Estradiol levels 
are not useful for monitoring hormone replacement therapy 
in menopausal women. A variety of estrogenic compounds 
are administered as replacement therapy, many of 
which are measured only incompletely by specific assays 
for estradiol. 

ESTRIOL 

The major indication for measuring serum estriol is as 
one component of the “triple screen” of maternal serum 
testing for certain birth defects (14). Midtrimester pregnancy 
screening with plasma unconjugated serum estriol 
and hCG augments the screening efficiency and validity 
of gestational age–adjusted alpha-fetoprotein levels as a 
biochemical marker to identify pregnant women who are 
at increased risk for fetal aneuploidy. Estriol assays are 
performed by immunoassays, and several commercial 
kits are available and approved by the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration for clinical use. 

Historically, serial plasma or urinary estriol determinations 
were widely used as biochemical markers for 
fetal placental well-being. Estriol is the principal circulating 
estrogen in late pregnancy. The basis of monitoring 
the fetus with serial estriol determinations is that if either 
the fetus or the placenta becomes compromised, production 
of the hormone will be expected to decrease. 
Unfortunately, however, by the time estriol concentrations 
are reduced, the fetus is often severely compromised. 
The initial test monitored 24-hour urinary estriol 
levels, but this test was supplanted by radioimmunoassays 
of plasma estriol. Several groups of investigators 
have demonstrated the close association of abnormal 
estriol profiles and poor perinatal outcome. Estriol determinations 
have largely been replaced by biophysical testing, 
including nonstress tests, contraction stress tests, and 
biophysical profiles performed via ultrasonography. 
Therefore, estriol assays seldom are used clinically today 
to determine fetal well-being. 

PROGESTERONE 

Progesterone is produced in the corpus luteum and in the 
placenta during pregnancy. Therefore, the two main reasons 
for measuring serum progesterone are to determine 
whether a woman has ovulated and whether an early 
pregnancy is normal (13). 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Of circulating progesterone, 80% is bound to albumin, 
18% is bound to corticosteroid-binding globulin, less 
than 1% is bound to SHBG, and 2% is free. All currently 
available progesterone immunoassays use releasing 
agents to release progesterone from serum-binding proteins 
and measure the total progesterone present in the 
specimen. 

Progesterone levels fluctuate depending on the time of 
the cycle. In the follicular phase, serum progesterone levels 
typically are less than 1 ng/mL. Following ovulation, 
the corpus luteum produces progesterone at a rate of 
20–30 mg/d, and serum progesterone levels range from 3 
ng/mL to 20 ng/mL. Therefore, in most laboratories, progesterone 
levels of less than 3 ng/mL indicate that ovulation 
has not occurred, and progesterone levels higher than 
3 ng/mL indicate ovulation. In pregnancy, about 100 mg 
of progesterone is produced daily during the first 
trimester. Progesterone is synthesized predominantly by 
the corpus luteum until 7 weeks of gestation, when placental 
production becomes predominant. 

Some clinicians have used serum progesterone levels 
to determine whether a woman with infertility or recurrent 
pregnancy loss has a luteal phase defect (12). 
However, the consensus is that a single midluteal-phase 
progesterone measurement is insufficient evidence upon 
which to judge the adequacy of the luteal phase. The reason 
is that progesterone levels are subject to great variation 
during the luteal phase because of pulsatile secretion. 
In addition, there is a poor correlation between serum 
progesterone levels and histologic changes in the 
endometrium determined by biopsy. Most physicians still 
view the endometrial biopsy as being the standard for 
diagnosing luteal phase defect. The definition of luteal 
phase defect is controversial, however, and endometrial 
biopsy is very uncomfortable and expensive. Therefore, 
many clinicians use the serum progesterone level, despite 
its limitations, to evaluate a possible hormone deficiency 
in progesterone that may be contributing to infertility or 
recurrent pregnancy loss. 

Serum progesterone levels can aid in the differentiation 
of normal and abnormal pregnancies. This measurement 
can be used as an adjunct to hCG levels and 
ultrasonography. A serum progesterone level of 25 ng/mL 
nearly always is associated with a normal intrauterine 
pregnancy. Conversely, a serum progesterone level of 25 
ng/mL is rarely associated with an ectopic pregnancy 
(1–2% of cases). Values of less than 5 ng/mL are nearly 
always associated with nonviable pregnancies, including 
ectopic pregnancies and pregnancies destined for miscarriage. 
Viable pregnancies are found in only 0.16% of 
cases when the progesterone level is less than 5 ng/mL 
(15). Serum progesterone levels are usually between 
these extremes and are not useful in determining whether 
or not a pregnancy is viable. Thus, the serum progesterone 
level may be used as one indicator of the viability 
of a pregnancy in the first trimester, although most test 
results fall between the extremes. 

TESTOSTERONE 

The primary reason for measuring the testosterone level 
in women is in the evaluation of hirsutism and virilization 
(see “Polycystic Ovary Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other 
Androgen Excess Disorders”) (16). The primary goal in 
determining the testosterone level is to rule out androgensecreting 
tumors, which typically are associated with 
very high levels of testosterone (>200 ng/dL). 

In women, testosterone is produced by the ovaries, to 
a small extent by the adrenal cortex, and by peripheral tissues 
through conversion of androstenedione to testosterone. 
Approximately half of the circulating testosterone 
is derived from peripheral conversion of androstenedione. 
Prepubertal testosterone levels are very low, and there is 
a significant increase in testosterone levels in women 
around the time of puberty. Of course, this increase is 
much smaller than is found in males. There is a recognized 
circadian rhythm of total serum testosterone levels, 
with highest concentrations found in early morning and 
lowest concentrations in late evening. Slightly higher 
testosterone levels also are found at midcycle. However, 
these minor variations are not clinically important in the 
evaluation of a patient with hirsutism. Several years after 
menopause, testosterone levels are reduced by as much as 
15%, primarily as a result of a decrease in the production 
of androstenedione and peripheral conversion to testosterone. 
Ovarian testosterone production is near normal 
during the first 5 years after menopause, but it declines 
thereafter. 

Testosterone circulates in blood bound to three proteins. 
In women, approximately 60% of testosterone is 
bound tightly to SHBG. Most of the remaining testosterone 
is bound to albumin, and a very small amount is 
bound to cortisol-binding globulin. Only approximately 
1% of the total circulating testosterone in women 
remains unbound, or free. There is controversy as to 
whether protein-bound testosterone molecules are biologically 
active. However, most investigators feel that 
unbound, or free, testosterone is likely to be the most 
biologically active. 

Testosterone can be measured as either total testosterone 
or free testosterone (16). Total testosterone measurements 
include all testosterone, both free and protein 
bound, whereas free testosterone measurements attempt 
to better estimate the biologically active, or free, testosterone. 
A variety of methods are used for determining 
free testosterone levels. Traditionally, the level of free 
testosterone is calculated indirectly by first measuring 
total testosterone and then determining the percentage of 
testosterone that is free in blood. The free testosterone 
level is then determined by multiplying the percentage of 
free testosterone by the total testosterone. The methods 
for determining the percentage of free testosterone, however, 
are time-consuming and expensive. 

More recently, researchers have directly measured free 
testosterone through radioimmunoassay techniques using 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

antibody-coated tubes. Other researchers have devised 
mathematical models for estimating free testosterone levels. 
The androgen index is the ratio of total testosterone 
to SHBG in the blood ´ 100; it is an indicator of free 
testosterone. Another measure, derived free testosterone, 
also relies on the measurement of total testosterone and 
SHBG. These measures are then used in a mathematical 
formula derived to calculate free testosterone. In comparisons 
of the different methods of determining free testosterone 
levels, the differences in diagnostic discrimination 
between the assays are usually small. No one method for 
measuring free testosterone has been shown to be superior. 

There is controversy as to whether total or free testosterone 
should be measured when evaluating women with 
hirsutism. The normal range of total plasma testosterone 
levels is typically between 20 ng/dL and 80 ng/dL. Total 
testosterone levels will be elevated in approximately 
50–70% of women with anovulation and hirsutism. Even 
in very hirsute women, testosterone levels are typically 
2-fold to 10-fold lower than they are in normal men. 
Many investigators have shown that a greater proportion 
of hirsute patients have an abnormal androgen status 
when free testosterone, rather than total testosterone, is 
measured. This is true whether the free testosterone is 
measured directly by assay or determined by mathematical 
derivation. However, measuring free testosterone is 
more expensive than measuring total testosterone. Most 
clinicians feel that the purpose of measuring testosterone 
is to exclude an androgen-secreting tumor. This purpose 
is fulfilled by using the total testosterone assay. If the 
total testosterone level exceeds 200 ng/dL, the presence 
of an androgen-producing tumor must be suspected and 
further evaluation done (17). Because this level is well 
above the normal range for testosterone, fine discrimination 
of the free testosterone levels is unnecessary. It 
should be noted that the rare patient who has an acute 
rapid course of virilizing symptoms must also have an 
androgen-producing tumor ruled out even if the testosterone 
level is below the cutoff value of 200 ng/dL. 
Furthermore, the increased sensitivity of the free testosterone 
assay in patients with hirsutism is unlikely to be 
clinically relevant, because patients are typically treated 
with the same medications for their hirsutism regardless 
of the results of the testosterone assay. 

In general, pregnant women should not undergo 
testosterone testing. Testosterone levels are significantly 
elevated during normal pregnancy. Levels are greater than 
100 ng/dL in the first trimester and reach up to 500–800 
ng/dL by term. This is thought to be mainly due to 
increases in SHBG as a result of the stimulatory effect of 
increased estrogen production during pregnancy. 

A recent Committee Opinion from ACOG has concluded 
that measurement of free or total testosterone levels 
for diagnosis in women with sexual dysfunction or for 
monitoring of androgen therapy is not clinically useful 
(18). Sexual dysfunction—and decreased libido in particular—
is a complex disorder with multiple etiologies. A 

relationship between libido and hormonal changes has 
been suspected for many years, particularly with 
decreased libido in menopause in light of declining ovarian 
function. However, in an observational study of 201 
women who had undergone natural menopause, serum 
testosterone concentrations did not correlate with libido 
or any other aspect of sexual function (19). Furthermore, 
despite the steady decline in serum testosterone concentrations 
that occur with age, survey data indicate a greater 
incidence of sexual dysfunction among younger women. 
Therefore, reduced testosterone levels have not been 
clearly associated with reduced libido, and measurements 
are not clinically useful. 

Androgens do consistently increase libido in women 
when prescribed at doses that produce supraphysiologic 
blood levels (20, 21). However, physiologic levels of 
androgen replacement therapy have not been shown to 
affect libido consistently. Formulations currently available 
in the United States generally achieve superphysiologic 
serum levels that are at least two times the 
premenopausal range of values. Androgen therapy has 
been prescribed for sexual dysfunction for many years, 
but data regarding its long-term safety and efficacy are 
lacking. Patients most likely to benefit from androgen 
therapy are young women who have had bilateral 
oophorectomy. Although other women may benefit from 
a trial of androgen therapy, the lack of long-term and 
definitive data should lead to a cautious approach. 

17a -HYDROXYPROGESTERONE 

The primary indication for measuring the 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is to evaluate a patient with hirsutism. 
Approximately 1–5% of women who report hirsutism 
have nonclassic or late-onset adrenal hyperplasia (12). 
This condition is due to a mild deficiency in the 21hydroxylase 
enzyme. Patients present with relatively 
severe hirsutism that begins at a young age, typically at 
the time of puberty. These patients are very difficult to 
distinguish from patients with the more common polycystic 
ovary syndrome (PCOS). Because patients with 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia may be treated differently 
than those with PCOS, determination of the 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
level is recommended for the evaluation 
of patients with severe hirsutism. 

Screening for 21-hydroxylase–deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia is best performed by measuring 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
levels basally (without stimulation). 
If a patient is not ovulating at all, the blood sample 
can be drawn at any time, or after a withdrawal bleed is 
induced with a progestogen. If the basal 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is less than 2 ng/mL, the patient most 
likely does not have adrenal hyperplasia. Alternatively, if 
the 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is greater than 2 
ng/mL and it is certain that the patient was not studied 
during the luteal phase of the cycle, a corticotropin stimulation 
test should be performed. This test consists of the 


administration of 0.25 mg of synthetic corticotropin 
(adrenocorticotropic hormone, or ACTH [cosyntropin]) 
as an intravenous bolus. Blood samples for 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
should be obtained before and 30–60 minutes 
after the administration of corticotropin. The 
stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is normally as 
high as 4 ng/mL. Stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
levels in excess of 10–12 ng/mL are considered diagnostic 
of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. 

Blood levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone are also 
used to diagnose congenital adrenal hyperplasia in infants 
with ambiguous genitalia. These patients would typically 
have much higher levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
than do women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, 
because the 21-hydroxylase deficiency is more severe in 
these patients. Levels of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone also 
are measured by endocrinologists treating patients with 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia. The 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
level is used as an indicator of the adequacy of corticosteroid 
hormone replacement. 

DEHYDROEPIANDROSTERONE SULFATE 

The primary indication for determining a dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate (DHEAS) level is for evaluating 
women with hirsutism (22). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 
is the most abundant product of the adrenal gland, 
and in a healthy woman it is synthesized exclusively in 
the adrenal cortex. In men, approximately 5% of DHEAS 
is secreted by the testes. The upper limit of normal in 
most laboratories is 350 m g/dL, but because of variation 
among laboratories, attention must be given to the normal 
values of the laboratory. 

The half-life of DHEAS is long, at 10–20 hours, and it 
is strongly bound to albumin in the bloodstream. Because 
of the long half-life, diurnal variation is very limited, and 
DHEAS levels can be obtained at any time of the day and 
at any time during the menstrual cycle. 

Plasma concentrations of DHEAS are age dependent. 
In women, DHEAS levels reach their maximum between 
ages 20 years and 40 years. Concentrations decline after 
age 40 years. By the time women are in their 70s, 
DHEAS levels are only 20–30% of the peak concentrations 
that are achieved in young adulthood. The exact 
physiologic role of DHEAS is unknown. 

Levels of DHEAS typically are determined in the evaluation 
of women with hirsutism. Because this hormone is 
synthesized exclusively in the adrenal gland, it is thought 
to be a good marker for adrenal androgen production. 
Classically, DHEAS levels greater than 700 m g/dL suggest 
an adrenal tumor, and thus imaging of the adrenal 
gland is required. Levels of DHEAS are sometimes modestly 
elevated in patients with PCOS. When DHEAS levels 
are normal, adrenal disease is unlikely. The exception 
to this rule is late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
Patients with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia often have 
normal levels of DHEAS, so the measurement of 17a 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

hydroxyprogesterone is essential in evaluating the patient 
with hirsutism. Recently, some reproductive endocrinologists 
have advised against obtaining DHEAS levels in the 
routine evaluation of hirsutism, given that very high levels 
are extremely uncommon. The rare adrenal tumors 
that would produce high levels of DHEAS often are associated 
with elevations in testosterone levels and so would 
be detected by an assay of testosterone. 

ANDROSTENEDIONE 

The primary reason for the measurement of androstenedione 
is the evaluation of hirsutism. Androstenedione is 
an androgenic hormone produced in both the adrenal 
gland and the gonads. Because it responds to both stimulation 
by corticotropin in the adrenal gland and stimulation 
by LH in the ovary, androstenedione is characterized 
by both diurnal and menstrual cycle variation. It is highest 
in the morning and shows a midcycle or ovulatory 
peak in women of reproductive age. In women, essentially 
equivalent amounts of androstenedione are produced 
by the ovary and the adrenal gland throughout the reproductive 
years, although levels decline with advancing age 
in both sexes. Elevated androstenedione levels often are 
found in women with hirsutism and virilization caused by 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, PCOS, ovarian stromal 
hyperthecosis, and adrenal and ovarian virilizing tumors. 
Androstenedione can serve as a prehormone for the production 
of both testosterone and estrogens. Because 
androstenedione is produced in both the adrenal gland 
and the ovary, determination of androstenedione levels by 
immunoassay does not aid greatly in the differential diagnosis 
of the causes of hirsutism. Therefore, measurements 
of androstenedione are of less clinical utility than 
determination of either 17a -hydroxyprogesterone or 
testosterone levels in the evaluation of hirsutism and virilization. 


5a -ANDROSTANE-3a , 17b -DIOL GLUCURONIDE 
The measurement of 5a -androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide 
has no clinical use, but it has been used in studies 
evaluating the causes of hirsutism. Testosterone is 
converted to the highly potent androgen dihydrotestosterone 
by the enzyme 5a -reductase at the level of the hair 
follicle (12). Dihydrotestosterone binds to androgen 
receptors, stimulating growth in the hair follicle. 
Dihydrotestosterone is then metabolized, and 5a androstane-
3a ,17b -diol glucuronide is a stable metabolite 
of dihydrotestosterone. Therefore, 5a -androstane-3a , 
17b -diol glucuronide may reflect the paracrine activity of 
the hormone dihydrotestosterone and serve as a marker of 
5a -reductase activity. Some investigators have found elevated 
levels of 5a -androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide, 
and normal levels of other serum androgens in women 
with idiopathic hirsutism. This finding suggests that some 
hirsutism is secondary to high 5a -reductase activity in 
the skin. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

This assay should not be used clinically, because values 
in hirsute women overlap the normal range by about 
20%. In addition, the results of this test do not affect the 
ultimate diagnosis of, and therapy for, hirsutism. 

CORTISOL 

Gynecologists most often order cortisol measurements to 
rule out Cushing’s syndrome (23). Cortisol is the primary 
corticosteroid secreted by the adrenal gland. It regulates 
carbohydrate, lipid, and protein metabolism; 
indirectly affects blood pressure; has antiinflammatory 
effects; and has a generalized excitatory effect on the nervous 
system. It is under the control of corticotropin and is 
normally suppressed when exogenous corticosteroids 
such as dexamethasone or prednisone are administered. 
Cortisol secretion has a marked diurnal variation in normal 
people, with peak levels of cortisol at about 8:00 AM 
and the nadir of cortisol secretion at about midnight. 
Patients with endogenous hypercortisolism of any cause 
have a disrupted diurnal rhythm of cortisol secretion. In 
fact, one can consider Cushing’s syndrome as a failure to 
suppress cortisol in the evening, because there is considerable 
overlap of the 8:00 AM cortisol level with that of 
normal subjects. 

The clinical suspicion of endogenous hypercortisolism 
must be confirmed biochemically by measuring 24-hour 
urinary free cortisol (UFC). The reference range of UFC 
depends on the type of assay employed. Traditionally, 
laboratories have used a solvent extraction of cortisol 
from the urine followed by either radioimmunoassay or 
competitive protein binding. The upper range of normal 
in these types of assays is usually 80–100 g every 24 
hours. Recently, the introduction of high-performance 
liquid chromatography has provided a more specific 
means of measuring UFC. Normal subjects have a UFC 
of less than 50 g every 24 hours by this method. 

Determinations of UFC have been shown to have a 
diagnostic sensitivity and specificity of 95–100% and 
94–98%, respectively (24). However, elevated 24-hour 
UFC can be observed in patients with depression, so the 
specificity of UFC may not be optimal in all clinical circumstances. 
If UFC is measured by high-performance 
liquid chromatography, a metabolite of carbamazepine 
reacts with cortisol and causes spuriously high readings 
for cortisol. Another potential confounding problem in 
the assessment of UFC is urine volume. If patients have 
extremely high fluid intake and urine output, UFC values 
can be falsely elevated. (Also see “Adrenal Gland 
Disorders.”) 

The overnight 1-mg dexamethasone suppression test 
also is used as a screening test for Cushing’s syndrome. 
In this test, 1 mg of dexamethasone is administered orally 
between 11:00 PM and midnight, and blood is drawn at 

8:00 AM the next morning to determine a plasma cortisol 
level. A value of less than 5 g/dL rules out Cushing’s syndrome. 
Cushing’s syndrome is unlikely with intermediate 
values between 5 g/dL and 10 g/dL; however, a value 
higher than 10 g/dL is virtually diagnostic of adrenal 
hyperfunction. The false-positive rate may be higher than 
10% in obese individuals and patients who are depressed. 
Some researchers have reported that patients with mild 
corticotropin-dependent Cushing’s syndrome demonstrate 
unusual sensitivity to dexamethasone suppression, 
leading to false-negative results. Therefore, the 24-hour 
UFC test appears to be the screening test of choice among 
medical endocrinologists. 

Cortisol concentrations in saliva are highly correlated 
with levels found in blood, and the results are independent 
of the rate of salivary flow. Salivary concentrations 
are much lower than those found in urine or serum. 
Cortisol in the saliva is stable for at least 1 week, making 
home collection possible. Despite the convincing demonstration 
of the correlation between salivary cortisol and 
urine and plasma cortisol, use of salivary cortisol measurement 
is not yet clinically widespread. 

If biochemical hypercortisolism is confirmed by one 
of these screening tests, referral to a medical endocrinologist 
is warranted for the establishment of the etiology of 
Cushing’s syndrome. Cushing’s syndrome may originate 
by a variety of mechanisms. The condition may result 
from pituitary overproduction of corticotropin (Cushing’s 
disease), by ectopic corticotropin production from 
tumors, by autonomous cortisol secretion from the 
adrenal gland and ovarian tumors, or by secretion of corticotropin-
releasing hormone by a tumor. These causes 
are differentiated by use of the high-dose dexamethasone 
suppression test for cortisol (the classic Liddle test), corticotropin 
measurements, and imaging studies. These 
tests are probably best performed by practitioners who 
are familiar with the differential diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome. 

Protein Hormones 

PROLACTIN 

The indications for measuring serum prolactin include 
amenorrhea; oligomenorrhea; galactorrhea; and infertility, 
particularly if caused by a luteal phase defect (25). 
Hyperprolactinemia reduces GnRH pulsatility, resulting 
in anovulation, estrogen deficiency, and inadequate luteal 
phase progesterone production if ovulation does occur. 
The primary objective in measuring the serum prolactin 
level is to rule out a prolactin-secreting tumor of the pituitary 
gland, ie, a prolactinoma. 

From a practical standpoint, blood for determining 
prolactin levels can be drawn at any time of the day and 
at any time in the menstrual cycle to establish whether a 
patient has hyperprolactinemia. However, prolactin is 
secreted episodically, so some prolactin levels may be 
slightly above the upper limit of normal established for a 
given laboratory. Prolactin is commonly increased in 
response to sleep and to the ingestion of food. Thus, the 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

finding of a minimally elevated level of prolactin in the 
blood requires confirmation in a second sample. 

A normal level of serum prolactin (<25 ng/mL in 
most laboratories) essentially rules out a prolactinoma 
as a cause of a patient’s amenorrhea or galactorrhea. 
Elevated levels of prolactin first require the clinician to 
rule out primary hypothyroidism, which is accomplished 
most easily by simultaneously measuring basal 
TSH. A prolactinoma or other hypothalamic or pituitary 
tumor then must be eliminated as a cause of the 
disorder. The frequency with which one finds a prolactinoma 
will increase with increasing basal levels of 
prolactin. 

If hyperprolactinemia not due to hypothyroidism is 
established, radiologic imaging of the hypothalamus and 
pituitary is indicated. The exact imaging modality to be 
used is debated, but most radiologists prefer magnetic 
resonance imaging. This modality, with gadolinium 
enhancement, generally provides the best anatomic detail 
to diagnose both small prolactinomas and non–prolactinsecreting 
tumors that may be the cause of hyperprolactinemia. 


Although one must rule out a prolactinoma as the 
cause of hyperprolactinemia, a wide variety of other conditions 
in addition to hypothyroidism may lead to hyperprolactinemia. 
Medications, including antidepressants 
and antihypertensive agents, can lead to mild increases in 
prolactin levels. Thus, a careful history of medication 
intake is required when evaluating patients with hyperprolactinemia. 


Another cause of hyperprolactinemia is pregnancy. 
Obviously, pregnancy also can be a cause of amenorrhea 
and thus should be ruled out before determining a prolactin 
level. Because of the physiologic increase of prolactin 
during pregnancy, periodic checking of prolactin 
levels during pregnancy to monitor potential growth of a 
prolactinoma is of no benefit; therefore, there is no role for 
the measurement of prolactin levels during pregnancy. 

A variety of stimulation and suppression tests have 
been evaluated to try to differentiate between prolactinomas 
and other causes of hyperprolactinemia. These tests 
have been found to yield nonspecific results and have 
been largely abandoned in attempting to determine the 
cause of hyperprolactinemia. Instead, basal prolactin levels 
are measured, followed by radiologic imaging of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary axis if hyperprolactinemia is 
found. 

There are limitations to the prolactin assay kits commonly 
used because of heterogeneity in this peptide hormone. 
Prolactin circulates in various forms with 
structural modifications. The various forms are associated 
with varying bioactivity and immunoreactivity. 
Therefore, prolactin levels determined by immunoassay 
may not correlate with symptoms (eg, galactorrhea) in all 
cases. When following prolactin levels over time, it is 
important that assays be performed in the same laborato


ry, because there can be significant interlaboratory variability. 


FOLLICLE-STIMULATING HORMONE 

Measurements of FSH are widely used by gynecologists 
for the assessment of ovarian function, as well as the evaluation 
of primary amenorrhea and disorders of pubertal 
development (26). Before physicians can use FSH measurements 
for these clinical purposes, they must understand 
the natural variations in FSH levels that are seen 
throughout a woman’s lifetime. At birth, FSH levels are 
very low in response to the high steroid hormone levels of 
pregnancy. Following delivery, FSH levels rise rapidly 
over the first few weeks of life before declining to very 
low levels at about 4 years of age. At the onset of puberty, 
FSH levels begin to rise in response to pulsatile GnRH 
stimulation. Initially, GnRH stimulation occurs only during 
sleep. As puberty progresses, the pulsatile GnRH 
secretion becomes more regular and a pulsatile pattern of 
FSH secretion becomes established throughout the day. 
Although the mean plasma FSH concentrations rise progressively 
during puberty, the absolute changes are not 
large, and the overall increase is only about twofold in 
comparison with prepubertal values. 

During the reproductive life of a woman, plasma FSH 
levels undergo well-defined changes during the menstrual 
cycle. The FSH levels rise during the late luteal and 
early follicular phases and are followed by a decline that 
is interrupted at midcycle by a small surge that coincides 
with the preovulatory LH peak. Following menopause, 
FSH values increase 10-fold to 20-fold compared with 
premenopausal values, with the maximal levels found 
1–3 years after menopause. The years of the menopause 
transition are characterized by wide fluctuations in FSH 
values, and occasionally FSH values in the menopausal 
range are seen. 

Follicle-stimulating hormone can be measured by a 
variety of means, including bioassays and immunoassays. 
Bioassays are assays designed to measure the biologic 
activity of FSH in the blood. In general, they are cumbersome 
and insensitive, and they are not used clinically. 
Immunoassays are used for the clinical determination of 
FSH for diagnosis and in physiologic studies because 
they are rapid, readily available, inexpensive, and sensitive. 
Newer assays are based on monoclonal antibody 
technology. Most commercially available assays are 
“sandwich” assays using combinations of monoclonal or 
monoclonal–polyclonal antibodies. Because these sandwich 
assays rely on the detection of two different antigens 
on the FSH molecule, they are generally more 
specific and precise than one-site assays. 

Although assays of apparently high specificity are 
available, there is still considerable variability among the 
results of different assays for FSH. The reasons for such 
variations have been ascribed to differences in calibration 
in assay kits, cross-reactivity between gonadotropin sub



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

units, and nonlinearity between kit standards and internationally 
available standards for FSH. 

In an effort to standardize the results from various 
immunoassays, a number of standards for FSH measurement 
have been devised. The first preparation was found 
to be toxic in some bioassays. Subsequently, a second 
preparation was evaluated and became the Second 
International Reference Preparation. International standards 
for FSH were also established by the World Health 
Organization and were calibrated in terms of the Second 
International Reference Preparation. 

There is, at present, no single reference standard for 
the determination of FSH levels. The FSH values measured 
in different laboratories, using different assays and 
perhaps different standards, can vary. Therefore, clinicians 
should know the type of assay used for their 
patients and understand that there may be significant 
interlaboratory variability in FSH measurements. 

The primary use of FSH measurements is for assessment 
of gonadal function. Through classic endocrine 
feedback pathways, an elevated level of FSH indicates 
reduced gonadal function or gonadal failure; a normal 
serum concentration of FSH suggests normal gonadal 
function. A low serum FSH concentration may indicate a 
problem at the level of the hypothalamus or pituitary, or 
it may indicate a prepubertal state when evaluating a 
patient with delayed puberty. 

Persistently elevated FSH values above the 
menopausal range (>20 IU/L in most laboratories) pro-
vide conclusive evidence of ovarian failure. In the 
menopausal transition, it is common to see elevated FSH 
values on one occasion followed by FSH values in the 
normal range on a different day. In other words, there is 
typically great fluctuation in FSH values during this period. 
FSH levels are valuable in diagnosing menopause but 
cannot be used to predict the onset of menopause or to 
monitor the adequacy of hormone replacement therapy. 
In menopausal women, hormone replacement therapy 
lowers FSH values by only 10–20%, because FSH is regulated 
not only by steroids but also by inhibin, which of 
course is not replaced in menopausal women. 

Another use of FSH is to assess ovarian reserve in the 
evaluation of infertile couples (27). In most studies, FSH 
values have been measured on cycle day 3, although one 
investigator has found no statistical difference in FSH 
values if measured on cycle days 2, 3, 4, or 5. Most studies 
have demonstrated that women with relatively high 
day 3 FSH values will have reduced responsiveness to 
simulation of the ovaries for an in vitro fertilization cycle. 
High basal FSH values are much better at predicting ovarian 
response to gonadotropin medications than they are at 
predicting pregnancy. Therefore, women with high FSH 
values are at increased risk for having their in vitro fertilization 
cycles canceled because of poor stimulation and 
are likely to have fewer oocytes retrieved, a lower peak 
estradiol level, and probably a lower overall pregnancy 
rate than women with normal day 3 FSH values. 

Studies have used different cutoff levels for normal FSH 
when assessing ovarian reserve. These differences are logical, 
given laboratory differences in measuring the FSH. 
The upper limit of normal for a day 3 FSH has been reported 
anywhere from 9 IU/L up to 12 IU/L. Basal FSH values 
demonstrate great intercycle variation. However, there 
appears to be no difference in response to stimulation 
between cycles with a high or a low FSH in the same 
patient. Once a patient has one elevated FSH level, ovarian 
response is likely to be poor even in subsequent cycles that 
have a normal day 3 basal FSH value. The upper limit of 
normal for FSH should be determined for every laboratory. 

Newer tests of ovarian reserve also rely on FSH 
assays. The clomiphene citrate challenge test, a test of 
ovarian reserve, is performed by measuring FSH on cycle 
day 3, followed by the administration of 100 mg of 
clomiphene citrate on days 5–9 of the cycle. An FSH 
value is then determined on day 10. If either FSH value is 
high (>12 IU/L), ovarian reserve is considered to be 
diminished. This test is thought to be more sensitive than 
the basal FSH determination alone in detecting women 
with abnormal ovarian reserve. 

LUTEINIZING HORMONE 

Luteinizing hormone is a gonadotropin secreted by the 
anterior pituitary gland. It is a glycoprotein consisting of 
two subunits, the alpha and beta subunits. The assays for 
LH rely on antibodies specific to the beta subunit, which 
is unique to the LH molecule. The predominant reason 
for measuring LH is to detect ovulation. In a woman with 
regular 28-day menstrual cycles, the LH surge typically 
occurs around day 14. The onset of the LH surge is a reliable 
predictor of ovulation. Follicular rupture typically 
occurs 34–36 hours after the onset of the LH surge. 
Ovulation is estimated to occur 10–12 hours after the LH 
surge peak. The entire midcycle LH surge lasts for 48–50 
hours. 

The ovulation-predictor kits used at home by patients 
with infertility detect the LH surge. Many brands of urine 
ovulation-detection kits use semiquantitative two-site 
enzyme-linked immunoassays. Most of these assays have 
an alpha subunit–specific antibody fixed to a plastic dipstick. 
The LH in a urine specimen binds to the antibody. 
Subsequently, a beta subunit–specific antibody that has 
been linked to alkaline phosphatase is exposed to the 
urine dipstick. If LH is present in significant quantities in 
the urine, it will bind to the dipstick; and in turn, the beta 
subunit–specific antibody linked to an enzyme will bind 
to the LH molecule. The enzyme (alkaline phosphatase) 
can now react with the substrate solution, causing the 
stick to turn a different color. Women can reliably detect 
the onset of the LH surge for purposes of timing natural 
intercourse or inseminations to improve the chances for 
pregnancy. Most kits instruct women with regular menstrual 
cycles to begin testing urine once a day starting on 
day 11 or 12. 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

Medications that have been shown to interfere with the 
ovulation predictor kit include injections of either hCG or 
LH used for ovulation induction. If a woman is pregnant, 
hCG will cross-react in most ovulation predictor kits used 
at home. If women are using clomiphene citrate, they 
should wait at least 3 days after the medication has been 
stopped before performing urine LH testing. The 
clomiphene citrate induces higher-than-normal levels of 
LH early in the cycle, leading to false-positive readings 
on the test. 

Another possible indication for measuring LH is 
anovulation. Patients with persistent anovulation have a 
higher mean concentration of LH and a low to normal 
concentration of FSH. Thus, an LH-to-FSH ratio of 3 to 
1 has been thought to be indicative of PCOS. However, 
many patients with PCOS do not have this reversal of the 
LH-to-FSH ratio, so the ratio is not a sensitive or specific 
criterion for diagnosing PCOS (12). Therefore, few 
experts recommend measurements of LH in evaluating 
patients with anovulation. There is little need to measure 
LH in anovulatory or amenorrheic women; measurement 
of FSH is much more helpful. 

HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPIN 

Human chorionic gonadotropin is a glycoprotein hormone 
that is produced almost exclusively during pregnancy and 
has a long half-life of 24 hours. The primary indications 
for obtaining an hCG assay are to diagnose pregnancy 
and to diagnose “problem pregnancies” such as ectopic 
pregnancies, miscarriages, and gestational trophoblastic 
disease, an uncommon sequela of pregnancy. 

Human chorionic gonadotropin consists of alpha and 
beta subunits, which are linked by disulfide bonds. The 
alpha subunit of hCG is identical to that of other 
gonadotropins. The unique biologic activity of hCG is 
attributed to the differences found in the beta subunit of 
hCG compared with other gonadotropins. Human chorionic 
gonadotropin is produced by the syncytiotrophoblast 
of the placenta, and its function is support of the corpus 
luteum in producing progesterone. The maternal circulating 
hCG concentration is approximately 100 IU/L at the 
time of the expected menses. A maximal level of about 
100,000 IU/L is reached at 8–10 weeks of gestational 
age. Thereafter, hCG levels typically decrease to about 
10,000–20,000 IU/L at 18–20 weeks and remain at that 
level until term. Levels are higher in multiple gestations. 

The modern assay for hCG measures serum levels of 
the hCG beta subunit. This unique part of the hCG structure 
allows the production of highly specific antibodies 
used for immunologic assays. In most laboratories, the 
lower limit of the assay is 5 IU/L. 

In normal intrauterine pregnancies, hCG levels rise in a 
curvilinear fashion until they plateau at 100,000 IU/L (28). 
However, because the increase is essentially linear early in 
pregnancy, the rate of increase can be used to assess the via


bility of pregnancy. Early in pregnancy, hCG levels approximately 
double every 2 days in viable, singleton, intrauterine 
pregnancies. With ectopic pregnancies or miscarriages, 
levels typically increase at much slower rates. Studies of 
doubling times show that 85% of viable pregnancies are 
associated with a rise in hCG levels of at least 66% every 
48 hours during the first 40 days of gestation. Note that 
15% of viable pregnancies will have less than a 66% rise. 
With advancing gestational age, the doubling time progressively 
increases, so following hCG levels to determine 
viability is less useful at later gestational ages. Although an 
increase in hCG of 100% is normal for gestations of less 
than 41 days, this value falls to 33% for gestations of 41–56 
days and to 5% for gestations of 57–65 days (29). 
Fortunately, transvaginal ultrasonography should be able to 
detect all viable intrauterine pregnancies by 41 days of 
gestation. Likewise, among women with hCG levels of at 
least 2,000 mIU/mL, transvaginal ultrasonography should 
be able to identify all viable intrauterine pregnancies. 
Therefore, at later gestational ages and at higher hCG 
levels, ultrasonography becomes the test of choice to determine 
the location and viability of the pregnancy. 

A subnormal rise in hCG concentration early in pregnancy 
often is associated with an abnormal pregnancy, 
although the location (ectopic or intrauterine) cannot be 
determined from this test. An increase of 50% or less in 
a 48-hour period usually is associated with a nonviable 
pregnancy. However, appropriately rising levels of hCG 
do not eliminate the possibility of an ectopic pregnancy. 

Concentrations of hCG can be used not only to diagnose 
an ectopic pregnancy but also to determine the best 
treatment approach. With hCG levels higher than 15,000 
IU/L, medical therapy with methotrexate of an ectopic 
pregnancy has a failure rate of nearly 32% (28). With values 
of hCG between 10,000 and 15,000 IU/L, medical 
therapy has a failure rate of 18%. At lower hCG levels, 
increasing success rates with methotrexate are seen. 
Thus, in ectopic pregnancies with hCG levels higher than 
10,000 IU/L, methotrexate is relatively contraindicated, 
and surgical therapy may be preferable. 

Levels of hCG also are monitored following medical 
and surgical treatment of ectopic pregnancies to ensure 
complete resolution. With the commonly used singledose 
methotrexate protocol, serum hCG levels are 
obtained on days 1, 4, and 7 following the injection. If the 
hCG level declines less than 15% between days 4 and 7, 
the protocol is repeated with an additional injection of 
methotrexate. If the level declines by 15% or more 
between days 4 and 7, hCG levels are measured on a 
weekly basis until resolution of the ectopic pregnancy is 
confirmed by a negative test. Approximately 20% of 
women require a second dose of methotrexate (28). After 
salpingostomy for an ectopic pregnancy, hCG levels need 
to be followed for complete resolution to ensure that no 
residual proliferating trophoblastic tissue remains. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Concentrations of hCG are very helpful in evaluating 
trophoblastic disease. In the United States, molar pregnancies 
occur in approximately 1 in 600 induced abortions 
and approximately 1 in 1,000 pregnancies. 
Approximately 20% of patients with molar pregnancies 
develop malignant complications or persistent trophoblastic 
disease. Trophoblastic disease often is characterized 
by very high levels of the beta subunit of hCG 
(b -hCG), which are often between 3 and 100 times higher 
than the levels found in normal pregnancy. Following 
the evacuation of a molar pregnancy, hCG levels should 
fall to the nondetectable range by 16 weeks in patients 
who do not have persistent disease or malignant sequelae. 
A diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic disease is made 
when serial hCG levels plateau or rise during a 2-week 
period or when a continued elevation is present 16 weeks 
after evacuation of the abnormal pregnancy. Thus, the 
hCG assay is useful in assessing patients after a molar 
pregnancy for the development of malignant trophoblastic 
disease. The assay is also useful in detecting the recurrence 
of trophoblastic disease following treatment. 
Typically, hCG levels are measured monthly for at least a 
year following treatment for trophoblastic disease. 

Heterophilic antibodies (large human antibodies that 
bind to animal antibodies) have recently been identified 
as a cause of false-positive hCG test results (30). The 
mechanism by which heterophilic antibodies cause falsepositive 
results relates to the nature of commercial 
immunometric assays. Most hCG tests use two animal 
antibodies against hCG. The first antibody, commonly 
a mouse monoclonal immunoglobulin G (IgG), captures 
and immobilizes the hCG molecule. The second antibody, 
labeled with an enzyme or chemiluminescent 
agent, marks the immobilized hCG by binding to a distant 
site on the hCG molecule (tracer antibody). This 
antibody is commonly a polyclonal IgG of mouse, 
sheep, rabbit, or goat origin. The amount of hCG in the 
antibody–hCG–tracer complex is proportional to the 
amount of tracer. Heterophilic antibodies usually bind to 
the assay IgG. Because they are bivalent, they can link the 
capture and tracer antibodies, thereby mimicking hCG 
immunoreactivity (Fig. 7). The incidence of false-positive 
hCG assay results is unknown, although heterophilic 
antibodies have been detected in 3–4% of healthy individuals. 
There have been several case reports of women 
who were thought to have persistent trophoblastic neoplasms 
and who had unnecessary surgical procedures 
based on false-positive hCG assay results. 

Two criteria have been established for identifying 
false-positive hCG test results. The first is finding hCG 
immunoreactivity in the serum but no detectable hCG in 
the urine of a sample taken concurrently. The reasoning 
behind this criteria is that heterophilic antibodies are 
large glycoproteins that are not excreted in the urine. The 
second criterion is finding more than a fourfold difference 
between the serum hCG concentration determined 
by the commercial immunoassay and the hCG concentra


n FIG. 7. Mechanism of false-positive human chorionic 
gonadotropin (hCG) assays caused by heterophilic antibodies. 
Abbreviation: IgG indicates immunoglobulin G. 
(Rotmensch S, Cole LA. False diagnosis and needless therapy 
of presumed malignant disease in women with false-positive 
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations. Reprinted 
with permission from Elsevier Science [The Lancet 2000; 
355:712–715]) 
tion obtained by a radioimmunoassay. Heterophilic antibodies 
affect hCG tests differently and produce wide variations 
in results (30). 

Detection of hCG has profound diagnostic and therapeutic 
implications. The clinician must be aware of the 
possibility of false-positive results. Any results suspected 
of being false positive should prompt the testing of both 
urine and serum, and samples should be sent to a reference 
laboratory capable of performing a radioimmunoassay. 

GENETIC PRINCIPLES 

Management of genetic disease in the molecular genetics 
era requires the clinician to understand DNA characteristics 
and gene structure. Double-stranded DNA consists of 
a sugar–phosphate backbone with inwardly projecting 
nitrogenous bases held together by hydrogen bonds. The 
nitrogenous bases of DNA include adenine (A), cytosine 
(C), guanine (G), and thymine (T); single-stranded RNA 
has identical nitrogenous bases except that uracil (U) 
replaces thymine. Complementary pairing of the nitrogenous 
bases is specific, with C joining with G by three 
hydrogen bonds and T binding to A with two hydrogen 
bonds. Genes are DNA sequences that encode mRNA, 
which is usually translated into protein (Fig. 8). Genes 
consist of exons, which encode RNA, and introns, which 
separate the exons. Within the nucleus, gene sequences 
are copied into RNA by the enzyme RNA polymerase II, 
the introns are removed, and a series of adenines is added 
to the 3' end (poly-A tail). The mRNA then exits the 
nucleus and moves to the ribosomes, where it is translat



BASIC PRINCIPLES 

1 2 3 


DNA5'3'
Transcription 


(Nucleus)
mRNAAAAA
Splicing 


AAAAA 
mRNA

mRNA
Translation 



Protein 


(Ribosomes) 


n FIG. 8. Structure of a gene containing three exons (dark + hatched regions) and two introns (white) is shown (top). Exons are 
numbered 1–3 above the exons. The average human gene is 14–27 kb with 7–9 exons. When transcription occurs, the entire 
sequence is copied into ribonucleic acid (RNA), and a poly-A tail is added to the 3’ end. Then the introns are spliced out (bottom) 
so that only the exons remain in the messenger RNA (mRNA). Note that the 5’-most end of exon 1 and the 3’ end of exon 
3 are untranslated regions (hatched regions). Even though the entire exons encode mRNA, the mRNA goes out of the nucleus to 
the ribosomes and is translated into protein. Appropriate start and stop codons dictate where the beginning and end of the translation 
will be. 
ed into protein. Genetic diseases occur from mutations in Mechanisms 
the approximately 30,000 human genes on 3 billion base 
pairs of genomic DNA. MITOSIS 

Humans possess 23 pairs of chromosomes in all nucle-

Mitosis is the process in which somatic cells, which conated 
cells, which include one pair of sex chromosomes 

tain the diploid (2n) number of chromosomes, replicate 
(X,Y in males and X,X in females) and 22 pairs of auto


their DNA to the tetraploid (4n) complement, and then 
somes (numbered 1–22). Chromosomes are composed of 

divide into two identical daughter cells, each containing 
a long arm (q) and a short arm (p), which are joined by a 

the diploid number of chromosomes. Prior to enteringcentromere. The standard metaphase karyotype results in 

mitosis, the nuclear genome first replicates its DNA. In 
approximately 400 bands, but at the prometaphase stage, 

mitosis, the cell then passes through five stages: 
550–850 bands may be produced (extended banding 
karyotype). • Prophase, the stage with formation of a centriole, 
Euploidy is defined as the normal haploid number of which then divides into two centrioles that 
chromosomes (23) in germ cells or an exact multiple of migrate to opposite poles of the cell 
the haploid number of chromosomes (46, 69, etc). The • Prometaphase, when the nuclear membrane is disdiploid 
number of chromosomes (46) is observed in nor-rupted so that chromosomes become attached to 
mal individuals. Although triploidy (3n) and tetraploidy the mitotic spindle 
(4n) are classified as euploid numbers, they do cause phe


• Metaphase, when duplicated chromosomes,
notypic abnormalities, usually ending in spontaneous 

appearing as a pair of sister chromatids, line up on 

abortions, and rarely in liveborns. A karyotype will aid in 

the spindle formed by the joining of the centrioles

the diagnosis of aneuploidy (an abnormal number of 

• Anaphase, which includes loss of the spindle and 
chromosomes that is not an exact multiple of the haploid 
migration of chromosomes to opposite poles

number) and structural abnormalities, such as deletions, 
translocations, and inversions. Trisomy (three of a partic-• Telophase, which encompasses cytokinesis and 
ular chromosome) and monosomy (one chromosome) separation into two daughter cells. Each daughter 
constitute the most common forms of aneuploidy. cell is an exact copy of the parent cell. 



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

MEIOSIS 

Germ cells contain the haploid (1n) number of chromosomes, 
and to proliferate they must retain their haploid 
number. Meiosis is comprised of two different divisions; 
in meiosis I (the reduction division), the diploid number 
of chromosomes is reduced to the haploid number, and 
then meiosis II follows without intervening DNA replication. 
Similar to mitosis, DNA replication occurs prior to 
the initiation of meiosis, and stages include prophase, 
metaphase, anaphase, and telophase. However, prophase 
in meiosis is much more complicated than in mitosis, and 
it has a number of stages (leptotene, zygotene, pachytene, 
diplotene, and diakinesis). It is in prophase I that crossing 
over (recombination) of genetic material between homologous 
chromosomes occurs, permitting genetic diversity. 
Meiosis II is similar to mitosis, except that the haploid 
number of chromosomes is present upon entry into meiosis 
II, and each daughter cell has the haploid number of 
chromosomes. In addition, daughter cells are not identical, 
because recombination has taken place. 

There are some very sex specific differences in meiosis 
in male versus female gametes. Primary oocytes in the 
fetus are arrested in a suspended dictyotene stage of 
prophase I of meiosis I at midgestation, and they do not 
resume meiosis I until the dominant follicle is stimulated 
by gonadotropins. With the LH surge, meiosis I is completed, 
and the oocyte begins meiosis II, which is not 
completed until fertilization occurs. In meiosis I in the 
female, one primary oocyte results in a secondary oocyte 
and the first polar body. Then in meiosis II, the secondary 
oocyte produces an ovum and the second polar body. In 
contrast, in the male, spermatozoa do not form until after 
puberty, and each primary spermatocyte in meiosis I 
results in two secondary spermatocytes, which, in meiosis 
II, each form two spermatids. The spermatids later differentiate 
into spermatozoa. 

MEIOTIC/MITOTIC ERRORS AND MATERNAL AGING 

Meiotic errors result in aneuploidy. If nondisjunction 
(failure of homologous chromosomes to separate) occurs, 
one daughter cell will have 24 chromosomes, which if 
fertilized will cause trisomy; the other daughter cell will 
have 22 chromosomes, causing monosomy in the zygote. 
If one chromosome is not released from the spindle 
(anaphase lag) and is lost, monosomy may occur with fertilization. 
Nondisjunction increases with advancing 
maternal age, thereby increasing the probability of trisomies 
(see a later discussion). In general, meiosis I 
errors in the female account for most of the trisomies that 
are seen clinically. If nondisjunction occurs in mitosis, 
two different cell lines (mosaicism) will be present. This 
may occur in individuals with gonadal dysgenesis, in 
which nondisjunction in the 46,XY zygote will produce a 
45,X/47,XY cell line (all three cell lines could persist, 
depending on how early in mitosis nondisjunction 
occurred). If anaphase lag occurred in a 46,XY individual, 
a 45,X/46,XY cell line could result. 

As has been said, the probability of having a fetus with 
a chromosome disorder increases with increasing maternal 
age. The most common abnormalities with advanced 
maternal age are trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18, 
and trisomy 13, in decreasing frequency. Trisomy of the 
sex chromosomes also may occur, with 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter’s syndrome) and 47,XXX being the most common. 
In general, autosomal trisomies result in more severe 
phenotypic abnormalities than trisomies of sex chromosomes. 
An increased risk in trisomy does not appear to 
occur with increased paternal age, although autosomaldominant 
and X-linked recessive disorders increase with 
paternal age because of new mutations. In general, if a couple 
has a child with a trisomy, the risk of trisomy recurrence 
in a subsequent pregnancy is approximately 1%. 

OTHER FACTORS 

Radiation, chemotherapy, and chemicals may induce 
mutations in DNA, either by causing infertility (interrupting 
gamete function) or by affecting zygotes (resulting in 
miscarriage of abnormal offspring). Doses of radiation to 
the ovaries greater than 20 Gy (1 Gy = 100 rad) generally 
cause irreversible ovarian failure in females of any age, 
but lower doses may spare ovarian function in children 
and adolescents. Radiation doses less than 7 Gy do not 
affect ovarian function in children, but doses of 10–20 Gy 
may result in ovarian failure in some children and young 
women, and doses of 8 Gy will result in ovarian failure in 
most adult women. Similarly, chemotherapy, such as the 
alkylating agents (chlorambucil, cyclophosphamide, 
busulfan, and nitrogen mustard), affects gonadal function 
to a greater degree in adults than in children. If 
chemotherapy is administered before puberty, ovarian 
function and fertility usually are not impaired, but approximately 
50% of adult women will have ovarian failure. In 
general, men appear to be affected more by chemotherapy 
and radiation than women, as radiation and chemotherapy 
affect gamete and steroid function. 

In early pregnancy, if radiation exposure occurs prior 
to organogenesis (5–10 weeks of gestation), the effect on 
the fetus is generally believed to be an all-or-none situation. 
If no pregnancy loss occurs, it is unlikely that the 
fetus will be affected. However, if irradiation involves a 
dose of 10 rad (0.1 Gy) during organogenesis, multiple 
anomalies may occur. After organogenesis, irradiation 
could affect growth and development; because the brain 
and gonads are developing continually during gestation, 
these could be affected. Drugs taken during pregnancy 
are classified according to their presumed safety. Class A 
drugs are proven to be safe in pregnancy in humans; class 
B medicines (eg, dicyclomine) are safe in humans or 
have been shown to be safe in animals without human 
studies; class C medications (eg, promethazine) are 
unsafe in animals, but human studies are lacking, so the 
benefits and risks must be weighed; class D drugs are 
known teratogens in humans, but benefits may outweigh 
risks in certain situations (eg, phenytoin); and class X 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

drugs are contraindicated because risks outweigh benefits 
(eg, thalidomide). It is important to remember that a 
patient should never be told that she will not have a child 
with a birth defect when taking a certain medication, but 
rather that taking the medication does not increase her 
risk above the 2–4% risk all pregnant women have. 

Reproductive Consequences of 
Chromosomal Disorders 

In addition to aneuploidy, structural abnormalities such as 
chromosomal deletions, insertions, and inversions also 
may be diagnosed using a karyotype. Deletions must be 
sufficiently large (three megabases) to be detectable by a 
karyotype, so single gene deletions are not usually 
detectable by cytogenetics. Often when a deletion is identified 
on a karyotype, more than one gene is deleted, producing 
a contiguous gene deletion sequence. 

PREGNANCY LOSS 

More than half of all first-trimester spontaneous abortions 
demonstrate a chromosomal abnormality, and 
although the incidence decreases with advancing gestation, 
risk is still significant in the second and third 
trimesters. Trisomies are the most common group of 
abnormalities, and 45,X is the most common single 
abnormality. Karyotype studies should be considered 
from both members of couples with two or more spontaneous 
abortions or one spontaneous abortion and one 
malformed fetus, because there is a 10-fold increase in 
the detection of parental chromosomal rearrangements 
(an absolute risk of 3–4%). Most chromosomal rearrangements 
are translocations, either robertsonian or 
reciprocal translocations. Translocations may be balanced, 
producing a normal phenotype and thus indicating 
that little or no chromosomal material was lost. An unbalanced 
translocation results in phenotypic abnormalities, 
which usually include mental deficiency and multiple 
somatic anomalies. 

Robertsonian translocations involve chromosomes 
13–15, 21, or 22 and result when p arms from both chromosomes 
are lost, and the q arms unite. With a balanced 
robertsonian translocation, the total chromosomal number 
is 45. If there are 46 chromosomes, a partial trisomy 
is present, which results in an unbalanced translocation. 
If the robertsonian translocation is present in the mother, 
a 10–15% recurrence risk for a child born alive with 
Down syndrome exists; if the robertsonian translocation 
is in the father, the risk is less (0–2%). Reciprocal 
translocations occur when two different chromosomes 
break and exchange material. With a balanced reciprocal 
translocation, the total number of chromosomes is 46, 
whereas in an unbalanced translocation, deletions and 
duplications can occur. With a reciprocal translocation, 
the recurrence risks of having an affected live birth are 
similar whether it is carried by the mother or the father; 
the risks approximate 10–15%. 

CHROMOSOMAL CAUSES OF HYPOGONADISM 

Cytogenetic analysis should be considered in patients with 
multiple somatic anomalies and mental deficiency, hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism, and extremely short stature. 
In females with primary amenorrhea and elevated 
gonadotropins, a 46,XY cell line must be excluded 
because of the increased risk of gonadoblastomas with a 
46,XY karyotype (Swyer syndrome) and a 45,X/46,XY 
karyotype (mixed gonadal dysgenesis, a form of Turner’s 
syndrome). Although sexual ambiguity may be present in 
patients with a 45,X/46,XY karyotype, this feature is not 
constant. A 45,X cell line also must be excluded in women 
with primary or secondary amenorrhea because cardiac 
anomalies (40–50%) and renal anomalies (30%) commonly 
occur in these patients. (Note that the karyotype for 
Turner’s syndrome is written 45,X; 45,XO is incorrect.) 

The most consistent feature of 45,X individuals is 
short stature (usually approximately 4 ft 9 in.); other 
somatic anomalies (eg, shieldlike chest, widely spaced 
nipples, and webbed neck) are highly variable. 
Approximately half of women with primary amenorrhea 
with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism have X chromosome 
abnormalities. Although this abnormality is less 
likely in women with secondary amenorrhea (1–2%), it is 
still wise to consider karyotype studies in women of short 
stature. Other potential abnormal karyotypes in women 
with ovarian failure include Xp or Xq deletions, which 
often are associated with short stature (under 5 ft 3 in.) 
and primary or secondary amenorrhea, depending on the 
location of the deletion. 

Males with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism should 
be counseled about chromosomal abnormalities, because 
approximately 5–15% will have either 47,XXY 
(Klinefelter’s syndrome, which is more common) or 
46,XX (sex-reversed males). The most consistent finding 
in men with Klinefelter’s syndrome is testicular fibrosis 
and infertility; mental deficiency and behavioral disorders 
are less common. Because men with Klinefelter’s 
syndrome have an increased risk of testicular tumors, 
lymphoma, and diabetes, careful surveillance is important. 
It also has been suggested that men with severe 
oligospermia should be offered a karyotype analysis, 
because 1–2% may have balanced translocations. 

Mendelian Inheritance of Disease 

Inherited diseases are classified as being autosomal or X 
linked (Y-linked inheritance is less important, except for 
sex-determining genes and spermatogenesis genes). If 
two copies of a mutant gene (one copy inherited from 
each parent) are required to produce the phenotype, the 
disorder is recessive; if only one copy results in a disorder, 
the inheritance is dominant (31, 32). 

AUTOSOMAL DISORDERS 

In autosomal recessive disorders, affected individuals are 
homozygous, and parents are heterozygous. Characteristics 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

include horizontal transmission (siblings are affected), a 

50:50 male-to-female ratio, and a 25% recurrence risk for 
heterozygotes with each subsequent pregnancy. 
Examples of autosomal recessive disorders include most 
enzyme defects (such as 21-hydroxylase deficiency), cystic 
fibrosis, sickle cell anemia, thalassemias, and Tay-
Sachs disease. In consanguineous families, there is an 
increased probability for rare autosomal recessive diseases 
because of more frequent allele sharing. 
In autosomal dominant disorders, only a single copy of 
the mutant gene (the patient is heterozygous) is required to 
produce the phenotype. Features include vertical transmission 
(parents to offspring), a 50:50 male-to-female 
ratio, and a 50% recurrence risk with each subsequent 
pregnancy. Examples are neurofibromatosis, myotonic 
dystrophy, some forms of osteogenesis imperfecta, achondroplasia, 
and Huntington’s disease. 

Autosomal dominant disease may be complicated by 
penetrance, variable expressivity, and anticipation. 
Penetrance is an all-or-none phenomenon that refers to 
whether the affected person has any manifestation of the 
disease. If incomplete penetrance occurs for a particular 
disease (eg, retinoblastoma or split-hand deformity), then 
not all of those who possess the mutation actually manifest 
the disease. Variable expressivity describes the variability 
in the severity of the disease, even within the same 
family (examples are neurofibromatosis type and Marfan 
syndrome). Some autosomal dominant diseases increase 
in severity in successive generations, a phenomenon 
called anticipation, as in myotonic dystrophy. Most diseases 
with anticipation have expansion of triplet repeats 
within the causative gene (discussed later). 

X-LINKED DISEASES 

X-linked recessive diseases occur in hemizygous males 
with mutations arising on the single X chromosome. 
Characteristics include disease almost exclusively in 
males that is transmitted through carrier females to half 
of her sons and that gives carrier status to half of her 
daughters. Disease is never passed from an affected male 
to his son, but carrier status is passed to all of his daughters. 
Examples include Duchenne muscular dystrophy, 
androgen insensitivity syndrome, Kallmann’s syndrome, 
and hemophilia A and B. 

X-linked dominant diseases are rare and may be difficult 
to characterize because they possess characteristics 
of both autosomal dominant and X-linked recessive diseases. 
In X-linked dominant disease, both males and 
females are affected (on one allele); but for some rare diseases, 
affected females are approximately twice as common 
as affected males. Affected males with normal 
partners produce no affected sons (they give a Y) and 
100% affected daughters. Females or males born to a carrier 
female have a 50:50 chance of being affected with 
each pregnancy. Examples include vitamin D–resistant 
(hypophosphatemic) rickets, Rett syndrome, and fragile 

X syndrome. Fragile X syndrome displays incomplete 
penetrance; males with the mutation usually are affected, 
but approximately one third do not manifest the disease. 
Important for reproductive endocrinologists is the realization 
that female carriers have an increased risk of 
developing premature ovarian failure (2–3% for patients 
with sporadic premature ovarian failure and 12–15% for 
patients with familial premature ovarian failure). 

COMPLEX (POLYGENIC/MULTIFACTORIAL) DISORDERS 

Most common diseases probably result from the effects 
of a number of genes and environmental factors. The 
pedigree may contain only one or two affected individuals, 
or even none. Examples include hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus (both types 1 and 2), heart disease, cleft 
palate, neural tube defects, schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
and congenital heart anomalies. The recurrence risk 
is usually in the range of 1–4%, depending on the type of 
disease, its prevalence, male-to-female sex ratios, and the 
number of affected family members. 

NONCLASSIC PATTERNS OF INHERITANCE 

In addition to the classic modes of inheritance, other 
modes of transmission have been recognized. In mitochondrial 
inheritance, affected females pass the trait to all 
offspring, whereas males transmit the disease to none of 
their offspring. This pattern probably occurs because 
oocytes have several hundred thousand units of mitochondrial 
DNA, but sperm contain only several hundred. 
Therefore, essentially all mitochondrial DNA is maternal, 
explaining the inheritance. Mitochondrial DNA mutations 
affect organs that expend high rates of energy 
(heart, kidney, muscle, brain, and endocrine organs such 
as the pancreas). Some examples of mitochondrial inheritance 
include Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy 
(LHON), a form of adult-onset central blindness; 
MELAS (mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis, and strokelike symptoms); and MERRF 
(myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red fibers). 

Uniparental disomy (UPD) refers to a situation in 
which both chromosomes of a chromosome pair (for 
example, chromosome 7) are inherited from the same 
parent, rather than one chromosome from each parent. 
Examples of UPD include Prader-Willi syndrome (two of 
maternal chromosome 15), Angelman syndrome (two of 
paternal chromosome 15), and some cases of intrauterine 
growth retardation (chromosome 16). 

Genomic imprinting is another term for an unequal 
expression of paternal and maternal alleles. Notable 
examples are Prader-Willi syndrome and Angelman syndrome, 
both of which are due to deletions of chromosome 
15 q11q13. Prader-Willi syndrome (hypotonia, poor 
sucking, developmental delay, characteristic facies with 
almond-shaped eyes, hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 
and hyperphagia) occurs with a paternal chromosome 
15 deletion, whereas Angelman syndrome (severe mental 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

deficiency, seizures, and inappropriate paroxysms of 
laughter and movement) occurs with a maternal chromosome 
15 deletion. Imprinting and UPD underscore the 
importance of inheriting a maternal and a paternal chromosome 
for each chromosome pair. These diseases are 
usually sporadic, so the recurrence risk is very small. 

Germline mosaicism is defined as the presence of two 
different cell lines within the gametes of a phenotypically 
normal individual. In this condition, someone unaffected 
may pass a mutant allele from the germ cells, resulting in 
offspring with a genetic disease such as achondroplasia. 
Recurrence risks for these disorders with normal parents 
is usually 1–7%. Somatic cell mosaicism also may occur 
when mutations arise in some cells, but not all cells, of an 
organ. Examples are benign neoplasms, such as fibroids 
and endometrial polyps, as well as cancers. 

GENETIC BASIS OF CANCER 

Cancer results from gene mutations, which usually occur 
in somatic cells and are only occasionally (5%) germline 
(and therefore familial). Currently, at least three types of 
cancer-causing genes are known: proto-oncogenes, tumor 
suppresser genes, and DNA repair genes. Protein products 
of proto-oncogenes control normal cellular growth, 
but when they acquire mutations in one allele, the protooncogene 
is converted to an oncogene, which results in 
uninhibited cell growth. Proto-oncogenes that account for 
cancer in somatic cells include ras, fos, and jun, whereas 
germline tumors are uncommon (RET proto-oncogene is 
unique in that it causes an autosomal dominant cancer in 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2). Tumor suppresser 
genes inhibit cell growth when both copies of each gene 
are functional on a pair of chromosomes (eg, BRCA1, 
BRCA2, retinoblastoma, adenoma polyposis coli, and Li-
Fraumeni syndrome) (35). However, if both copies 
acquire mutations, uncontrolled tumor growth results. 
This occurs when an individual inherits a germline mutation 
so that one copy is nonfunctional from birth. If a second 
mutation occurs in somatic cells, such as the breast 
or ovary, both copies are nonfunctional and cancer develops. 
In these situations, cancer occurs earlier in life (often 
in the 30s), is often bilateral, and is transmitted in an 
autosomal-dominant fashion. Because it is germline, 
there is a 50:50 chance of passing the mutant gene to an 
offspring, but it also requires that a second allele acquire 
a mutation in somatic cells. In the absence of a germline 
mutation in a tumor suppresser gene, the probability of 
“two hits” is much less likely, so the cancer is sporadic, 
has a later age of onset, and is usually unilateral. 

Mutations in DNA repair genes produce cancer in a 
manner similar to that of tumor suppresser genes. Both 
copies need to be inactivated, and the probability is 
increased when a germline mutation exists. Normally, 
mutations continually occur in genomic DNA, but certain 
enzymes correct (or proofread) the mutant bases to their 
original sequences. Mutations in these genes (such as 
MSH2, MLH1, and others) interfere with this proofread


ing activity, so mutations remain. An important example 
is hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer, which may also 
include endometrial and breast cancer in affected pedigrees. 


Gene Mutations in Human Genetic 
Disease 

TYPES OF GENE MUTATIONS 

The types of mutations present for genetic diseases 
depend on the specific disease and the ethnic background. 
Deletions and insertions may be large, easily detectable 
by Southern blot analysis, or as small as a single base. 
These point mutations make up the largest proportion of 
mutations identified in human disease. If the point mutation 
changes an amino acid, it is termed a missense mutation, 
although it may or may not affect the protein (in 
vitro analysis can be used to determine whether or not it 
does). Nonsense mutations are point mutations that cause 
a termination (stop) codon for translation (TAA, TAG, 
TGA) so that encoded protein is truncated and usually 
nonfunctional. Frameshift mutations are deletions or 
insertions that are not exact multiples of three, so the 
genetic code is altered. Amino acids downstream may be 
changed completely, and commonly a premature stop 
codon is produced. Commonly, ethnic background affects 
the incidence of certain mutations. For example, in Tay-
Sachs disease, three mutations make up more than 90% 
of all identified hexosaminidase A gene mutations in the 
Ashkenazi Jews, but these three mutations represent only 
approximately 20% in non-Jewish populations. 

Another, more recently recognized type of mutation is 
triplet repeat expansion. Some genes normally have a certain 
number of copies of 3 bp, which are repeated. 
However, when these repeats increase in number, presumably 
by expansion in germ cells or early postmitotic 
events, a disease phenotype results. The classic example 
is fragile X syndrome, an X-linked dominant disease with 
reduced penetrance, which consists of mental deficiency, 
macroorchidism, and often subtle facial features 
(enlarged jaw and ears). The wild-type FMR1 gene located 
at a fragile site on Xq27 contains 5–50 repeats of a 
CGG triplet repeat sequence. The disease is transmitted 
by carrier females, who possess an increased number of 
triplet repeats, called a premutation (50–200 repeats). 
These carrier females are more likely to have an expansion 
of the triplet repeat (>200, and often >1,000, repeats) 
in meiosis; when this occurs, fragile X syndrome may 
occur in offspring. A number of other diseases are caused 
by the expansion of triplet repeat sequences, including 
Huntington’s disease, Friedreich’s ataxia, myotonic dystrophy, 
and spinobulbar muscular atrophy. It is of interest 
that all these disorders are neurologic diseases, and 
most—except fragile X syndrome (X-linked dominant) 
and Friedreich’s ataxia (autosomal recessive)—are autosomal-
dominant diseases. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Another notable feature of diseases caused by triplet 
repeat expansion explains the phenomenon of anticipation. 
The classic example is myotonic dystrophy, in 
which a mildly affected female may have an infant with 
myotonia congenita (severe cardiac disease and myotonia). 
In general, the greater the number of triplet repeats, 
the more severe the phenotype. 

CYSTIC FIBROSIS 

Cystic fibrosis is an autosomal recessive disease that has 
particular significance because of the current recommendations 
by the American College of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology and the American College of Medical 
Genetics for universal preconceptional and prenatal counseling 
(34). Tests using DNA diagnostic methods are recommended 
to detect carriers of the disease. Testing for a 
panel of specific mutations has been suggested to identify 
most carriers. Current techniques include polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR) and allele-specific hybridization 
probes. The important concept is that if patients are 
screened for the carrier state for 25 mutations and have 
negative results, they have a reduced likelihood of being 
carriers. It does not make the chances of being a carrier 
zero, because a patient could have 1 of nearly 900 additional 
mutations that are not detected by this test. 

Molecular Genetic Tools 

Several concepts are important in understanding molecular 
genetics techniques. Denaturation is the separation of 
double-stranded DNA into single strands, accomplished 
by alkali (in Southern blots) or by heat (in PCR). When 
single strands of DNA join together, it is termed 
hybridization in Southern blot analysis or annealing in 
PCR. Finally, DNA will anneal or hybridize according to 
specific pairing of the nitrogenous bases. All molecular 
biology techniques rely on these features of nucleic acids. 

Because the human genome is large (3 billion base 
pairs) and individual genes are small, it becomes necessary 
to cut DNA into smaller pieces by restriction 
enzymes (restriction endonucleases) that are normally 
present in bacteria. Restriction enzymes recognize certain 
specific bases and cut every time these sequences are 
identified in the genome. These enzymes enable cloning 
of DNA fragments and also constitute an important step 
in the generation of Southern blots. 

Innumerable DNA techniques have now been described, 
but only the techniques used more commonly in 
clinical diagnostics will be detailed. Most diagnoses today 
are performed using PCR, but DNA chip technology is 
likely to augment and replace this technique. 

SOUTHERN BLOT ANALYSIS 

Southern blot analysis was the first molecular tool used 
for DNA diagnosis, but it has been replaced largely by 
PCR methods, except in a few instances. A Southern blot 
test involves a nylon membrane containing immobilized 

single-stranded genomic DNA from a patient. Patient 
DNA is extracted from leukocytes (usually), digested 
with a restriction enzyme, electrophoresed on an agarose 
gel, and then rendered single stranded by alkali. The 
DNA sequences from the gel are then transferred onto the 
nylon membrane. A DNA probe for the gene of interest is 
then labeled, denatured, and hybridized with the membrane 
(Fig. 9). After nonspecific binding has been washed 
off, the blot undergoes autoradiography (if a radioactive 
probe was used) and is then photographed. The presence 
or absence of bands and their sizes (indicating deletions 
or insertions) can be determined and compared with normal 
controls. 

Major uses of the Southern blot test in obstetrics and 
gynecology are for the detection of a -globin gene deletions 
in a-thalassemia, dystrophin gene deletions in Duchenne 
muscular dystrophy, and fragile X syndrome. Polymorphisms 
were first detected by Southern blot analysis, but 
they are now detected by more rapid methods, such as 
DNA sequencing. Southern blot analysis is more time-consuming, 
requires more DNA, and cannot usually detect single 
base changes or small deletions and insertions. 

POLYMERASE CHAIN REACTIONS 

In Southern blot analysis, it is necessary to use a DNA 
probe to find a gene among the billions of bases of the 
genome; however, with PCR, the fragment of DNA to be 
analyzed is copied many times, so DNA probes are not 
necessary. 

The PCR technique consists of three steps per cycle, 
which are repeated for approximately 30–35 cycles. A 
cycle of PCR includes a denaturation step to render DNA 
single stranded; an annealing step so that primers can 
anneal to the template; and finally an extension step, in 
which a Taq polymerase enzyme initiates the synthesis of 
a new strand (Fig. 10). Through 30–35 cycles, the DNA 
target is copied so many times that an aliquot can be analyzed 
on an agarose gel. Many different PCR fragments 
may be analyzed simultaneously (multiplex PCR), which 
increases the efficiency of diagnosis (eg, Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy). 

As noted earlier, most mutations in genetic disease are 
not deletions but rather are single base changes, or point 
mutations, that are usually detected by DNA sequencing. 
To decrease the necessity for DNA sequencing (which 
remains expensive), screening techniques such as denaturing 
gradient gel electrophoresis or single-strand conformation 
polymorphism may be performed. 

DOT BLOTS AND ALLELE-SPECIFIC OLIGONUCLEOTIDE 
HYBRIDIZATION 

Because most diseases are caused by a variety of mutations, 
it is practical to test for the most common ones. An 
important method to detect specific point mutations, 
without the requirement for sequencing, is the technique 
of dot blots, hybridized to allele-specific oligonucleotide 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 


n FIG. 9. Southern blot analysis. 
probes for each different mutation (Fig. 11). It must be 
emphasized that dot blot/allele-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization tests only for the presence or absence of a 
specific mutation. 

The specific fragment of DNA is amplified by PCR, 
denatured, and spotted onto a nylon membrane. The 
hybridization signal resembles a dot, whereas no dot is 
present when hybridization does not occur. Probes are 
specifically designed to detect a normal allele and the 
particular mutant allele. If hybridization occurs only to 
the normal allele, then the patient is homozygous for the 
normal allele. Similarly, if the hybridization is detected 
only for the mutant allele, the patient is homozygous 

mutant. The DNA from a heterozygote hybridizes to both 
the mutant and wild-type oligonucleotides. This analysis 
can be repeated for each different mutation, so a panel of 
known mutations can be tested for expeditiously. 

FLUORESCENT IN SITU HYBRIDIZATION 

Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) bridges molecular 
genetics and cytogenetics. Currently, it may be a useful 
adjunct to cytogenetics in some cases, but it does not 
replace cytogenetics. The FISH technique is performed 
by the immobilization of nucleic acids (DNA, RNA, 
chromosomes, or tissue sections) on a slide, followed by 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


A 


B 
C 
n FIG. 10. Polymerase chain reaction. (A) Denaturation. (B) Annealing. (C) Extension. Abbreviations: dATP indicates 
deoxyadenosine triphosphate; dCTP, deoxycytidine triphosphate; dGTP, 2-deoxyguanosine-5’-triphosphate; dTTP, deoxythymidine 
triphosphate. 

BASIC PRINCIPLES 

denaturation and then hybridization with a fluorescently 
labeled single-stranded DNA or RNA probe (Fig. 12). 
After washing off nonspecific hybridization, the slide is 
viewed under a fluorescence microscope. The FISH technique 
may be used to diagnose trisomy or monosomy, 
translocations, and gene deletions too small to be detected 
with cytogenetics (approximately 3 Mb). Because of 
the great sensitivity of FISH, chromosome aneuploidy 
can be detected in single interphase cells. If probes to 
chromosomes 21, 18, 13, X, and Y are used, simultaneous 
screening for the most common chromosomal aneuploidies 
can be accomplished. Single-cell FISH has been 
used in preimplantation genetic diagnosis for sexing 
embryos and for diagnosing trisomies, monosomies, and 
deletions. Multifluor FISH also has been described; using 
six different colors (fluors), it can label each chromosome 
with a different color. The clinical utility has yet to be 
determined, however. 

n FIG. 11. Allele-specific oligonucleotide probing of dot 
blots. 
Wild-type 
allele 
Mutant 
allele 
TTT 
Normal 
oligonucleotide 
Normal 
oligonucleotide 
Mutant 
oligonucleotide 
Mutant 
oligonucleotide 
AAA 
AG A 
TC T 
Dot blot 
N/N N/M M/M 
DNA or RNA 
Flourescin 
Visualize by flourescence microscopy 
Probe 
Slide 
TGCATGCATGCA 
ACGTACGTACGT 
DNA MICROARRAYS 

Through the interface of physics and biology, chip technology 
has made it possible to synthesize or attach thousands 
of different nucleotides onto a small piece of glass 
(chip). These chips then can be hybridized to patient samples 
to analyze gene expression (complementary DNA, 
or cDNA) or to test patient DNA for gene mutations 
(Fig. 13). 

Expression chips permit the simultaneous analysis of 
thousands of cDNAs, which was not possible prior to the 
advent of chip technology. Thousands of sequences for 
genes can be placed on a chip and then hybridized with 
tumor cDNA from a patient. For example, breast cancer 
tissue can be obtained from a patient, RNA extracted, and 
cDNA generated (using the enzyme reverse transcriptase) 
and then simultaneously tested for the patterns of expression 
for thousands of genes. 

Genomic DNA sequences also can be placed on the 
chips to analyze human gene mutations. Sequences of the 
oligonucleotides on the chip can be designed so that 
every variation of every possible base of genes on the 
chip can be detected. Because the genome is nearly completely 
sequenced, almost any gene sequences can be 
used. For example, sequences for diseases that typically 
occur in Ashkenazi Jewish individuals (Tay-Sachs disease, 
Canavan disease, Gaucher’s disease, and cystic 

Computer analysis 
Excitation 
Emission 
Hybridize to chip 
Ovarian tumorNormal tumor 
RNA 
cDNA 
RNA 
cDNA 
Relative Expression 
Tumor increased 
Equal 
Normal increased 
n FIG. 12. Fluorescent in situ hybridization. n FIG. 13. Expression chip (microarray). 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

fibrosis) could be placed on a single chip. In the near 
future, chips could be used in testing for a variety of conditions, 
such as lung disease, heart disease, and gynecologic 
disease. 

Currently, karyotypes are useful for the diagnosis of 
aneuploidies and structural abnormalities such as translocations 
and large (>3-Mb) deletions. Current work 
involves placing 100-kb bacterial artificial chromosome 
clones, spaced about 1 Mb apart, on a slide or slides and 
analyzing the result using FISH. If successful, these 
“cytogenetic chips” would permit the detection of deletions 
and duplications of less than 3 Mb, which is the current 
resolution of a standard karyotype, and this might 
replace the standard karyotype. 

SINGLE NUCLEOTIDE POLYMORPHISMS 

It has been known for many years that diversity of gene 
sequences occurs in all individuals. The DNA sequence 
differences that do not affect the phenotype of the organism 
are termed polymorphisms. Initial polymorphisms 
were detected by Southern blot analysis when they 
altered a restriction site (restriction fragment length polymorphisms). 
However, an extensive sequencing effort has 
yielded a large number (approximately 1.5 million to 2 
million) single base changes, called single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs, pronounced “snips”). These SNPs 
are located throughout the entire genome on all chromosomes. 
The ability to determine these SNPs in humans 
will allow a more comprehensive study of human evolution 
and will also be important in identifying human gene 
mutations and responses to medications. 

The Human Genome Mapping Project 

The nearly complete draft of the human genome was published 
in February 2001 (35, 36). As has been noted, the 
haploid human genome consists of 3.2 billion base pairs, 
and the number of genes is approximately 30,000 (estimates 
vary between 25,000 and 40,000). This number is 
only about twice the number of genes for the fruit fly 
Drosophila (14,500) and the worm C elegans (17,500– 
20,000). However, these approximately 30,000 genes can 
produce about 100,000 proteins in humans because of 
alternative splicing of the exons. Despite the large size of 
the genome, only a very small percentage of the sequences 
actually encode for genes. More than half of the sequences 
represent repeat elements, whereas the remainder includes 
introns, regulatory elements, and unknown sequences. 
The function of most of the genome is unknown and will 
fuel research efforts in the postmapping era. 

Research will reap the benefits of knowledge of the 
human genome sequence. Comparative studies with 
model organisms (fruit flies and worms, among others) 
will permit a more complete study of gene and cellular 
functions, as well as better understanding of evolution. 
Because most genes encode proteins, it will be important 

to understand protein–protein interactions (proteomics). 
The clinical applications of the genome project will be 
tremendous and are enumerated here. 

GENETIC DIAGNOSIS OF INHERITED DISEASES 

There are currently more than 10,000 genetic diseases 
listed in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man 
database, but known diseases attributed to a particular 
gene have been ascribed to only a small proportion of the 
genes. Because there are at least 30,000 genes, there will 
be at least 30,000 diseases (although it could range from 
double to triple this number because of alternative splicing 
leading to 100,000 proteins). The causative gene will 
be identified for all mendelian diseases (X linked and 
autosomal). It is highly possible during the near future 
that the entire human genome may be placed on a chip (or 
chips), and that we will be able to test for all sequence 
differences simultaneously. 

Known genetic causes of infertility are shown in Table 1. 
At the present time, gene mutations causing infertility in 
humans are relatively rare and have been identified in 
patients with absent puberty and infertility. The challenge 
will be to identify the mutations that cause more common 
types of infertility—those with normal puberty and infertility. 


GENETIC DIAGNOSIS OF COMPLEX DISEASES 

More common complex diseases, such as hypertension, 
asthma, seizure disorders, and psychiatric disorders, 
probably involve multiple genes and environmental factors. 
Therefore, it is likely that the elucidation of 
causative genes will take longer than for diseases that 
have clear patterns of inheritance. 

UNDERSTANDING THE PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF DISEASES 

Identifying human mutations will be the first step toward 
understanding the genetic basis of human disease; however, 
functional studies of the protein often are limited in 
humans. Because many model organisms possess orthologues 
(genes with similar sequences) to human genes, 
functional studies can be performed to elucidate the functional 
effects of mutations. For example, a particular gene 
could be deleted in mice, and the full spectrum of phenotypic 
characteristics could be examined. In addition, the 
study of model organisms for gene mutations could identify 
genes that could then be searched for in the human 
genome database. Humans with the appropriate phenotype 
could then be screened for mutations. 

PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS AND PREIMPLANTATION 
GENETIC DIAGNOSIS 

Prenatal diagnosis will be markedly expanded to include 
a large number of diseases. In the near future, all inherited 
diseases are likely to be characterized, but prenatal 


BASIC PRINCIPLES 

n TABLE 1. Genetic Causes of Infertility 
Cause Gene Inheritance 
Hypothalamic 
Kallmann’s syndrome KAL1 X-LR 
AHC/IHH DAX1 X-LR 
Leptin deficiency LEP AR 
Leptin resistance LEPR AR 
Pituitary 
IHH (GnRH resistance) GNRHR AR 
AHC/IHH DAX1 X-LR 
Isolated FSH deficiency FSHb AR 
Isolated LH deficiency LHb AR 
Combined pituitary deficiency PROP1 AR 
Septooptic dysplasia HESX1 AR 
Gonadal infertility 
FSH resistance FSHR AR 
LH resistance LH/hCGR AR 
APECED AIRE AR 
17-OH deficiency CYP17 AR 
Aromatase deficiency CYP19 AR 
17-HSD deficiency 17-HSD 3 AR 
Estrogen resistance ESR1 AR 
Adrenal failure/sex revers SF1 AR 
Denys-Drash syndrome and Frasier syndrome WT1 AD 
Campomelic dysplasia SOX9 AD 
Blepharophimosis, ptosis, and epicanthus inversus 
syndrome FOXL2 AD 
Gonadal 
Turner’s syndrome 45,X Sporadic 
Fragile X syndrome FMR1 X-LD 
Partial deletion of X ? X-LD 
Ovarian failure Diaph2 X-LD? 
Oligospermia/azoospermia DAZ (AZFc) Sporadic, Y 
Oligospermia/azoospermia YRBM (AZFb) Sporadic, Y 
Oligospermia/azoospermia USP9Y (AZFa) Sporadic, Y 
Outflow 
Androgen insensitivity AR X-LR 
Bilateral congenital absence of the vas deferens 
(cystic fibrosis) CFTR AR 

Abbreviations: ACH/IHH indicates adrenal cortical hromone/idiopathic hypogonadotropic hypogonadism; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; APECED, autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–candidosis–ectodermal dystrophy; 
17-OH, 17-hydroxylase; 17-HSD, 17-hydroxysteroid; X-LR, X-linked recessive; AR, autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant; X-LD, 
X-linked dominant. 

diagnosis probably will be used only for the most severe GENE THERAPY 
diseases. In addition, it should be possible to diagnose In the next decade, it is likely that some gene therapy will 
most of the deletion syndromes causing multiple congen-be successful (in some cancers, severe combined immunoital 
malformations (such as DiGeorge syndrome and deficiency, cystic fibrosis, and hemophilia). Because the 
Prader-Willi syndrome) and some complex diseases. understanding of gene regulation is in its infancy, it is not 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

surprising that gene therapy is not commonplace now, 
and it could take the first half of the 21st century to gain 
widespread use. Intrauterine therapy also may be possible 
to treat some metabolic diseases in the near future. 

DYSMORPHIC CHILDREN 

Only about 25% of children with dysmorphic features 
currently are diagnosed. As more genes are identified, 
computer algorithms will be able to list the most likely 
candidate genes, which could then be tested for correct 
diagnosis in most cases. 

CANCER 

Knowing the complete human sequence also will enable 
the discovery of more germline mutations that cause 
inherited cancers (currently there are more than 20 known 
genes), which make up approximately 5% of all cancers. 
This knowledge will permit better identification of individuals 
at risk so that appropriate counseling and surveillance 
can be administered. However, most cancers are not 
inherited but instead are of somatic cell origin. Through 
the use of expression chip analysis, those genes that are 
overexpressed can be determined, and therapy can be 
directed more logically against specific targets. 

INFECTIONS 

Many bacterial genomes have been sequenced, and probably 
most of the known bacteria and viruses will have 
their genomes sequenced. This sequencing will permit 
the diagnosis of these organisms (eg, by chip analysis); 
furthermore, the characterization of their genomes will 
lead to a better understanding about virulence, which 
should assist in the development of improved antimicrobial 
and antiviral agents. 

DRUG RESPONSE 

Knowledge of all the DNA sequence differences (polymorphisms) 
in the genome will permit the identification 
of genotypes associated with response or no response to 
certain drugs. This information will reduce the common 
trial-and-error method currently in use. The identification 
of paralogues (genes that arose from duplication of 
another gene) could result in the discovery of a related 
gene that might be a better pharmacologic target. For 
example, the paralogue of the weaker serotonin receptor 
5-HT3A, 5-HT3B, is a better target for serotonin, which is 
important in mood disorders and schizophrenia. 

DISEASE SUSCEPTIBILITY AND DISEASE PREVENTION 

The identification of all genes and all SNPs, along with 
their analysis in human diseases, will promote disease 
prevention. Everyone will be at risk for certain diseases, 
so with this information, lifestyle changes or screening 
could be instituted. 

LIMITATIONS OF GENOMIC MEDICINE 

Limitations of genomic medicine include concern about 
decision-making issues; individuals may or may not want 
to know they could get a disease. Privacy is another 
important concern, particularly the issue of insurance 
companies using genetic information to prevent enrollment. 
Patenting certain human sequences and withholding 
information from public investigators could hinder 
progress. Perhaps one of the greatest concerns is that too 
few people, including physicians, will be educated in 
genomic medicine. However, it is clear that the human 
genome sequence will produce a lasting change in the 
way medicine is practiced. 

References 

1. Ji TH, Ji I, Kim SJ. Gonadotropin receptors. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:726–746 
2. Porto CS, Lazari MF, Abreu LC, Bardin CW, Gunsalus GL. 
Receptors for androgen-binding proteins: internalization 
and intra-cellular signalling. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol 
1995;53:561–565 
( ) 
3. Brann DW, Hendry LB, Mahesh VB. Emerging diversities 
in the mechanism of action of steroid hormones. J Steroid 
Biochem Mol Biol 1995;52:113–133 
( ) 
4. MacLusky NJ. Sex steroid receptors. In: Adashi EY, Rock 
JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:627–663 
5. Wehling M. Looking beyond the dogma of genomic steroid 
action: insights and facts of the 1990s. J Mol Med 
1995;73:439–447 
( ) 
6. Korach KS, Course JF, Curtis SW, Washburn TF, Lindzey J, 
Kimbro KS, et al. Estrogen receptor gene disruption: 
molecular characterization and experimental and clinical 
phenotypes. Recent Prog Horm Res 1996;51:159–186; discussion 
186–188 
( ) 
7. Attisano L, Selvestri C, Izzi L, Labbe E. The transcriptional 
role of Smads and FAST (FoxH1) in TGF beta and 
activin signalling. Mol Cell Endocrinol 2001;180:3–11 
( ) 
8. Attisano L, Tuen Lee-Hoeflich S. The Smads. Genome Biol 
2001;2: reviews 3010 
( ) 
9. Delfs TM, Klein S, Fottrell P, Naether OG, Leidenberger 
FA, Zimmermann RC. 24-hour profiles of salivary progesterone. 
Fertil Steril 1994;62:960–906 
( ) 
10. Lu Y, Bentley GR, Gann PH, Hodges KR, Chatterton RT. 
Salivary estradiol and progesterone levels in conception and 
nonconception cycles in women: evaluation of a new assay 
for salivary estradiol. Fertil Steril 1999;71:863–868 
( ) 
11. Gann PH, 
Giovanazzi S, Van Horn L, Branning A, 
Chatterton RT Jr. Saliva as a medium for investigating intraand 
interindividual differences in sex hormone levels in 
premenopausal women. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 
2001;10:59–64 
( ) 

12. Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic 
endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams &Wilkins, 1999 
13. Oosterhuis GJ, Michgelsen HW, 
Vermes I. Laboratory 
markers of ovarian function. Adv Clin Chem 2000;35: 
295–331 
( ) 
14. Martin JN Jr, Cowan BD. Biochemical assessment and prediction 
of gestational well-being. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am 1990;17:81–93 
( ) 
15. McCord ML, Muram D, Buster JE, Arheart KL, Stovall TG, 
Carson SA. Single serum progesterone as a screen for 
ectopic pregnancy: exchanging specificity and sensitivity to 
obtain optimal test performance. Fertil Steril 1996;66: 
513–516 
( ) 
16. Wheeler MJ. The determination of bio-available testosterone. 
Ann Clin Biochem 1995;32:345–357 
( ) 
17. Friedman CI, Schmidt GE, Kim MH, Powell J. Serum 
testosterone concentrations in the evaluation of androgenproducing 
tumors. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985;153:44–53 
(button) 
18. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Androgen treatment of decreased libido. ACOG Committee 
Opinion 244. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2000:21–22 
19. Dennerstein L, Dudley EC, Hopper JL, Burger H. Sexuality, 
hormones and the menopausal transition. Maturitas 1997; 
26:83–93 
( ) 
20. Shifren JL, Braunstein GD, Simon JA, Casson PR, Buster 
JE, Redmond G, et al. Transdermal testosterone treatment 
in women with impaired sexual function after oophorectomy. 
N Engl J Med 2000;343:682–688 
( ) 
21. Casson PR, Carson SA, Buster JE. Testosterone delivery 
systems for women: present status and future promise. 
Semin Reprod Endocrinol 1998;16:153–159 
( ) 
22. Kroboth PD, Salek FS, Pittenger AL, Fabian TJ, Frye RF. 
DHEA and DHEA-S: a review. J Clin Pharmacol 1999;39: 
327–348 
( ) 
23. Findling JW, 
Raff H. Newer diagnostic techniques and 
problems in Cushing’s disease. Endocrinol Metab Clin 
North Am 1999;28:191–210 
( ) 
31

BASIC PRINCIPLES 

24. Boscaro M, Barzon L, Fallo F, Sinono N. Cushing’s syndrome. 
Lancet 2001;357:783–791 
( ) 
25. Molitch, ME. Diagnosis and treatment of prolactinomas. 
Adv Intern Med 1999;44:117–153 
( ) 
26. Rose MP, Gaines Das ER, Balen AH. Definition and measurement 
of follicle stimulating hormone. Endocr Rev 
2000;21:5–22 
( ) 
27. Broekmans FJ, 
Scheffer GJ, Bancsi LF, Dorland M, 
Blankenstein MA, te Velde ER. Ovarian reserve tests in 
infertility practice and normal fertile women. Maturitas 
1998;30:205–214 
( ) 
28. Lipscomb GH, Stovall TG, Ling FW. Nonsurgical treatment 
of ectopic pregnancy. N Engl J Med 2000;343:1325–1329 
( ) 
29. Daya S. Human chorionic gonadotropin increase in normal 
early pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987;156:286–290 
( ) 
30. Rotmensch S, Cole LA. False diagnosis and needless therapy 
of presumed malignant disease in women with falsepositive 
human chorionic gonadotropin concentrations. 
Lancet 2000;355:712–715 
( ) 
31. Layman LC. Reproductive genetics. In: Seifer DB, Samuels 
P, Kniss DA, eds. Physiologic basis of gynecology and 
obstetrics. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2001:20–37 
32. Layman LC. The genetic basis of of female infertility. In: 
Rimoin DL, Connor JM, Pyeritz RE, Korf BR. Emery & 
Rimoin’s principles and practice of medical genetics. 4th 
ed. London: Churchill Livingstone, 2002:947–960 
33. Hedenfalk I, Duggan D, Chen Y, Radmacher M, Bittner M, 
Simon R, et al. Gene-expression profiles in hereditary 
breast cancer. N Engl J Med 2001;344:539–548 
( ) 
34. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 
American College of Medical Genetics. Preconception and 
prenatal carrier screening for cystic fibrosis: clinical and 
laboratory guidelines. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
35. The human genome. Nature 2001;409:813–958 
36. The human genome. Science 2001;291:1148–1432 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Sexual Development and Puberty 


Genetic sex is determined at fertilization, but the embryonic 
gonad is bipotential, capable of differentiating into 
either an ovary or testis. Differentiation occurs in an 
orderly sequence of events during gestation (Fig. 14). 
With puberty, secondary sexual characteristics develop, 

again following an orderly sequence of events and culminating 
in the ability to reproduce. Abnormalities occur as 
a result of a number of factors at any stage, and they 
should be evaluated. Treatment is available to ameliorate 
the effects of many abnormalities. 


n FIG. 14. Gonadal sexual differentiation. The indifferent gonad begins to show differentiation into the ovary or testis during 
the sixth week. The testis develops primitive sex cords that differentiate into seminiferous tubules (outer portion) and rete testis 
(inner portion). The mesonephric (wolffian) ducts join the rete testis through efferent ductules. At 8 weeks, Leydig’s cells develop 
and secrete testosterone. In the ovary, the primordial germ cells remain in the cortical areas. Oogonia increase in number by 
mitosis until the 16th week, when meiosis begins. Meiosis continues in the ovary until after birth. During this time, a layer of follicular 
cells surrounds each oocyte to become primordial follicles. (Fossum G. Embryology of the reproductive mechanism. In: 
Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. I. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia, PA: Current Medicine, 
1999:1.15 with permission) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

SEXUAL DIFFERENTIATION 
IN THE FETUS 

Mammalian sexual differentiation is controlled by both 
genetic and hormonal influences. The gonadal ridge, a 
bulge on the medial aspect of the urogenital ridge in early 
gestation (weeks 5–7), is differentiated only when germ cells 
migrate into the region. These germ cells arise in the embryo, 
move to an extraembryonic site in the yolk sac, and then 
migrate through the dorsal mesentery to the gonadal ridge. 

Although the human gonad is bipotential, in the 
absence of the necessary testicular determinants, it will 
develop as an ovary. Testicular determination is directed 
by the sex-determining region of the Y chromosome 
(SRY). In the absence of a testis, both internal and external 
genitalia will be female. Male internal and external 
genitalia are dependent on the action of SRY to induce 
testicular differentiation, production of müllerian-inhibiting 
substance (MIS) from Sertoli’s cells to induce müllerian 
regression, production of testosterone from Leydig’s 
cells to preserve male internal ductal development, conversion 
of testosterone to dihydrotestosterone to induce 
male external genital development, and the presence of 
androgen receptors in the target tissues to induce end 
organ responsiveness. Differentiation of the testes occurs 
between days 43 and 50 of gestation. First-trimester testicular 
testosterone secretion is controlled by hCG from 
the placenta. Fetal pituitary gonadotropins contribute to 
testosterone secretion after 12 weeks of gestation. 
Testosterone is converted to dihydrotestosterone in the 
genital skin by the enzyme 5a -reductase. Fusion of labioscrotal 
folds to form a scrotum will occur only with androgen 
exposure in the first trimester. Androgen exposure later 
in gestation will result in clitoromegaly (Image 1) (1). 

The presence of germ cells is mandatory for ovarian 
differentiation, but not for testicular formation. In ovarian 
development, the germ cells enter meiosis (Fig. 15), 
and these oocytes are then enclosed by granulosa cells to 
form a primitive follicle. This process requires the presence 
of two intact and active X chromosomes. In female 
somatic cells, all but one X chromosome are inactivated; 
this process is termed lyonization. Reactivation of the 
inactivated X chromosome allows expression of genes 
from both chromosomes to control both oogenesis and 
folliculogenesis. Absence of a portion of, or a complete, 
X chromosome can lead to oocyte/follicular degeneration 
and gonadal dysgenesis. Non–X-linked genes also may 
be involved in oocyte maturation. 

Testicular differentiation of the gonadal ridge is primarily 
under the genetic control of the Y chromosome. 
The role of the Y chromosome is facultative; ie, it ensures 
testicular formation by encoding a diffusable factor that 
induces testicular differentiation. In 46,XX males and 
46,X (deleted Y) females, the critical region of the Y 
chromosome is the distal short arm near what is termed 
the pseudoautosomal region (Fig. 16). The pseudoautoso-

A B 
n FIG. 15. Meiosis. (Fossum G. Embryology of the reproductive 
mechanism. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. 
I. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia, PA: 
Current Medicine, 1999:1.5 with permission) 
mal region of Y pairs with X during meiosis and can 
engage in recombination. Asymmetrical pairing of X and 
Y might result in translocation of the testicular-determining 
region within the pseudoautosomal region, leading to 
alterations in sexual development. 

Initial studies using deletion mapping identified a 
highly conserved DNA segment that contained a gene 
coding for a zinc finger protein, which was termed ZFY. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Pseudoautosomal region 

11.3 


11.2 


11.1 


11.1 


11.211 


11.212 


11.22 


11.23 


12 



CSF2RA—Haemopoiesis 
IL3RA 
ANT3 
HOIMT XE7 
MHC2 
XG 
SRY—Sex determination? 
RPS4Y 
ZFY—Transcription factor 

TSPY—Germ cell 


AMELY—Tooth enamel 


KAL—Neuronal migration 
STSp 
T221—Homologue in Xg21.1–q21.3 


AZF—Spermatogenesis 
Family of transcripts with Poly 
A binding most 

n FIG. 16. Physical map of the Y chromosome indicating some known genes and gene regions. (Bradman N, Thomas M. Why 
Y? The Y chromosome in the study of human evolution, migration and prehistory. Science Spectra 1998, no. 14) 
Subsequent studies determined that ZFY was not the testicular-
determining factor. In one study, investigators 
searching the region between the break point in the ZFYnegative 
XX males and the pseudoautosomal boundary 
identified the SRY gene (2). Expression of this gene has 
been demonstrated in the testis of the embryonic male 
mouse, and lack of expression has been shown in the 
female gonadal ridge. Expression resumes in adult testes 
and appears to be germ cell dependent. A mouse model 
carrying a mutation that inactivates this region produced 
XY female mice. A transgene including SRY was inserted 
into XX mouse embryos and was found to induce testicular 
development in those embryos. One transgenic 
embryo that developed to maturity had a normal male phenotype 
with small testes, but without spermatogenesis consistent 
with the findings in nontransgenic XX males (3). 

The direct evidence of germline sex reversal in mice is 
strong evidence in support of SRY as the sex-determining 
gene. However, some questions still remain in humans. 
For example, SRY has been identified in most 46,XX 
males but is also present in most 46,XY females with 
Swyer syndrome. Approximately 10% of these individuals 
have point mutations in a highly conserved central 
region of the SRY gene, termed the HMG-related box, 
which encodes a motif common to other DNA-binding 
transcription factors. Alternative mechanisms for sex 

reversal must be postulated to explain these exceptions. 
Multiple autosomal genes also play a role in testicular 
differentiation. Abnormalities can result in some forms of 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis. 

The SRY gene directs male gonadal differentiation by 
inducing a cascade of gene activation and protein production. 
Differentiation of the Sertoli’s cell is an early 
male-specific change that is important in inhibition of 
meiosis and direction of primordial germ cell differentiation 
toward spermatogonia. Sertoli’s cells also produce 
MIS. The gene for MIS has been cloned and mapped to 
the short arm of chromosome 19. Müllerian-inhibiting 
substance causes regression of the müllerian ducts during 
early male embryogenesis and also has been noted to be 
expressed in granulosa cells in females, where it may act 
to inhibit oocyte meiosis. The SRY gene may play a role 
in transcriptional regulation of MIS. The mechanism of 
action is not believed to be direct, because there appear to 
be intervening regulatory factors between SRY and the 
MIS promoter. The SRY gene also has been shown to 
induce sexually dimorphic expression of steroidogenic 
factor 1 (SF-1), with early transcripts present in both 
sexes but subsequent levels declining in females during 
differentiation. The SF-1 binds to an upstream regulatory 
element of MIS and may be one of the intervening regulatory 
factors between SRY and MIS expression. 


SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA 

The finding of ambiguous genitalia in an infant is a rare 
and emotionally charged condition that requires immediate 
attention. The etiology is virilization of genetic 
females (female pseudohermaphroditism), undermasculinization 
of genetic males (male pseudohermaphroditism), 
or rarely, true hermaphroditism with presence of 
both ovarian and testicular tissue (Fig. 17 and Image 2). 

Etiology 

The most common cause of female pseudohermaphroditism, 
and of genital ambiguity overall, is congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia. Deficiency of 21-hydroxylase 
accounts for the vast majority of cases, but 11-hydroxylase 
deficiency and 3-hydroxysteriod dehydrogenase 
deficiency also may occur. The salt-wasting form of 21hydroxylase 
deficiency is life threatening and therefore is 
the most critical condition to be excluded in the differential 
diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia. The presence of 
hypertension suggests possible 11-hydroxylase deficiency. 
In all of these adrenal enzyme–deficiency states, masculinization 
of the female fetus occurs secondary to 
exposure to high levels of androgenic precursors produced 
by the adrenal gland. The enzymatic block causes 
decreased biosynthesis of cortisol, with subsequent 
impaired negative feedback on corticotropin production 
resulting in adrenal hyperplasia and overproduction of 
androgens. Inhibition of aldosterone biosynthesis leads to 
impaired renal conservation of sodium and the potential 
for circulatory collapse. Hypertension is caused by the 
accumulation of steroid intermediates such as 11-deoxycorticosterone, 
which promotes salt and water retention. 

Rarely, female pseudohermaphroditism is the result of 
exposure of the female fetus to androgens from nonadrenal 
sources. Exogenous maternal androgen ingestion 
has been implicated in several cases, although placental 
metabolism of androgens will in general protect the fetus 
from anything other than very high doses. Rare adrenal 
and ovarian tumors may produce high levels of androgens, 
as may theca-lutein cysts. (For a description of 
deficiency of the aromatase enzyme, see “Abnormalities 
of Puberty.”) Inability of the placenta to convert androgens 
to estrogens during pregnancy results in high maternal 
and fetal androgen levels, with subsequent virilization 
of the female fetus. 

In male pseudohermaphroditism, genetic males are 
undermasculinized secondary either to inadequate production 
of testosterone or dihydrotestosterone or to lack 
of androgen responsiveness in the target tissues. Mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis (45,X/46,XY) is a form of gonadal 
dysgenesis, with the degree of genital ambiguity dependent 
on the degree of differentiation of the dysgenetic testicular 
elements. Leydig’s cell hypoplasia results from 
defects in the LH receptor, causing failure of fetal testicular 
Leydig’s cell differentiation and, thus, impaired testosterone 
production with varying degrees of genital ambiguity. 

A number of defects in testosterone biosynthesis also 
have been described. Deficiency of 17a -hydroxylase 
causes hypertension and hypokalemia, in addition to genital 
ambiguity. Patients with 17-ketoreductase deficiency 
may have only isolated clitoromegaly and present at 
puberty with both breast development and symptoms of 
virilization. Deficiency of 5a -reductase is an autosomalrecessive 
condition with normal testes producing normal 
amounts of testosterone but conversion to dihydrotestosterone 
impaired in genital skin. This condition leads to 
severe ambiguity of the external genitalia with labioscrotal 
fusion and a urogenital sinus. Incomplete or partial 
androgen insensitivity syndrome is caused by a mutation 
in the androgen receptor gene that leads to only partial 
function. The external genital abnormalities can be highly 
variable, ranging from phenotypic female to phenotypic 
male. 

Patients with true hermaphroditism most commonly 
have a 46,XX karyotype. In some patients, SRY DNA can 
be detected by using molecular techniques, although it is 
not always present. Approximately 10% of patients with 
true hermaphroditism have 46,XY karyotypes. Rarely, 
the karyotype is 46,XY/46,XX, which is believed to arise 
from the fusion of 46,XY and 46,XX embryos, forming a 
chimera. Gonadal development is variable; any combination 
of ovary, testis, and ovotestis—either unilateral or 
bilateral—is possible. The degree of genital ambiguity 
also varies. In general, the ovarian tissue is more normally 
functional than the testicular tissue, and pregnancy has 
been reported in some true hermaphrodites. 

Diagnosis 

Evaluation of an infant with ambiguous genitalia should 
be initiated in the delivery room. Definitive assignment of 
sex should be withheld, but parents should be reassured 
that appropriate evaluation will result in accurate determination 
of the appropriate sex of rearing. Physical 
examination should include careful inspection of the genital 
area (Box A). A palpable gonad strongly suggests that 
the infant is a genetic male (Y chromosome) or, rarely, a 
true hermaphrodite. In the absence of a palpable gonad, 
the most likely diagnosis is congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 
Because the salt-wasting form of this condition can 
lead to life-threatening electrolyte disturbances and 
adrenal failure, early diagnosis is critical. Signs of 
adrenal crisis include vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, 
and eventually shock and coma. Physical examination 
also should look for any other somatic anomalies that 
might be consistent with mixed gonadal dysgenesis. 

The first laboratory studies that should be performed 
are analysis of serum electrolytes, 17a -hydroxyprogesterone, 
and karyotype. During the first 24 hours of life, 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels may be elevated secondary 
to placental production; therefore, if the level is 
elevated, the test should be repeated. A persistently elevated 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone level is caused by 21hydroxylase 
deficiency in more than 90% of cases and by 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 17. Differential diagnosis of ambiguous genitalia. 

BOX A 
Physical Examination 
for Ambiguous Genitalia 

Are gonads palpable? Palpation of the genital and inguinal 
regions is the most important part of the physical examination. 
Gonads in the inguinal regions or in scrotal folds are 
almost certainly testes. Ovaries are not found in scrotal 
folds or in the inguinal regions. The testes, however, may 
be intraabdominal. If testes are not palpable, the infant 
should be considered to have congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
until demonstrated otherwise. 

What is the phallus length? Measured from the pubic 
ramus to the tip of the glans, a stretched penile length of 
less than 2.5 cm is 2.5 standard deviations below the 
mean for infants at 40 weeks of gestational age (2.0 cm for 
36 weeks and 1.5 cm for 32 weeks). The normal newborn 
clitoris measures less than 1 cm long; a normal newborn 
penis measures 2.8–4.2 cm in length. 

What is the position of the urethral meatus? The urethral 
meatus can range from a mild hypospadias to an opening 
in the perineal area into a urogenital sinus. Hypospadias is 
almost always accompanied by chordee, which is a ventral 
curvature of the phallus resulting from a shortened urethra. 

To what degree are the labioscrotal folds fused? The findings 
can range from unfused labia majora of a normal 
female through labia with variable degrees of posterior 
fusion; to a bifid scrotum; to a fully fused, normal-appearing 
male scrotum. The distance from the anus to the edge 
of the vagina divided by the distance from the anus to the 
base of the clitoris is a ratio that is less than 0.5 in normal 
females. A ratio greater than 0.5 indicates some degree of 
labioscrotal fusion. 

Is there a vagina, vaginal pouch, or urogenital sinus? Does 
the rectal examination suggest a midline structure that 
might be a uterus? A uterus can be palpable, especially 
shortly after birth, when the uterus is a little enlarged in 
response to maternal estrogen. 

Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic endocrinology 
and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
1999:370–371 

11-hydroxylase deficiency in approximately 7% of cases. 
The dehydroepiandrosterone level can also be determined 
to assist in differentiation of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
deficiency. Levels of 11-deoxycortisol will be elevated 
in 11-hydroxylase deficiency. A serum sample 
should be frozen to be available for future analysis of 
other steroid intermediates, should it be indicated. 
Electrolytes and glucose should be monitored daily 
because adrenal crisis may not be manifested for 5–7 
days. 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

If a labioscrotal gonad is palpated or a Y chromosome 
is detected on karyotype analysis, serum testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone levels should be assessed. It is difficult 
to detect a blind-ending vaginal pouch in a newborn, 
and even ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) may not be adequate in identifying the presence 
of a uterus. The level of dihydrotestosterone will help differentiate 
5a -reductase deficiency from incomplete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome, because there are low 
levels in the former and normal levels in the latter. If 
testosterone levels are low, an hCG stimulation test can be 
performed to assess gonadal biosynthetic capacity. For the 
test, a dose of 1,000 units of hCG is given intramuscularly 
daily for 3 days, and serum testosterone and dihydrotestosterone 
levels are measured 24 hours after the 
final dose. Levels of testosterone greater than 100 ng/dL 
indicate adequate biosynthetic capacity. Adequate serum 
samples should be frozen for possible subsequent assay of 
steroid precursors. This step will allow differential diagnosis 
of the various rarer enzymatic defects in steroid 
biosynthesis if the standard testing does not result in a specific 
diagnosis. 

Therapy 

Appropriate therapy is determined by the diagnosis. 
Determination of the sex of rearing depends on the genital 
findings. Sex assignment in male pseudohermaphrodites 
should be determined by the potential for the child’s genitalia 
to function sexually in adulthood. Genetic females 
with ambiguity should undergo corrective surgery. There is 
no absolute consensus regarding timing, but in general, clitoroplasty 
can be accomplished successfully shortly after 
birth, whereas correction of significant labioscrotal fusion 
may be better accomplished in an older child, except in cases 
that require treatment of urethral obstruction for voiding purposes. 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia requires corticosteroid 
replacement, as well as mineralocorticoid 
replacement in salt-wasting forms. The presence of a Y chromosome 
necessitates gonadal extirpation, either shortly after 
diagnosis or, in the case of androgen insensitivity syndrome, 
after pubertal breast development is completed. 

Ambiguous genitalia in a 46,XY infant may be undiagnosed 
after evaluation of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone 
levels and the response to hCG. Further imaging 
studies or even surgical exploration may be required to rule 
out true hermaphroditism and mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 
as well as to facilitate gonadectomy. Patients with defects 
in testosterone biosynthesis may respond well to testosterone 
replacement. Intramuscular administration of 25–50 
mg of testosterone every 3 weeks for a total of three doses 
should result in growth of at least 1.5 cm in the stretched 
phallus. Failure to respond indicates severe androgen resistance. 
These patients, in general, should be raised as 
females with appropriate reconstructive surgery because of 
difficulties in surgical construction of a functional penis. 
These decisions should be made in careful consultation 
with the family after all diagnostic test results are available. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT 

Puberty is the result of complex neuroendocrine events 
that cumulate optimally with the most critical aspect of 
survival of the human species: the ability to reproduce. 
This transition interval between childhood and adulthood 
includes somatic growth, the development of secondary 
sexual characteristics, and marked psychologic changes. 
Understanding the normal pubertal process is critical in 
the evaluation of children for possible abnormalities of 
puberty and the evaluation of young patients with menstrual 
complaints. 

The onset of puberty depends on a wide variety of 
genetic and environmental factors. Genetics may play the 
most profound influence on development if environmental 
factors such as nutrition are controlled. The average 
interval between menarche in monozygotic twins is 2.2 
months, compared with an interval of 8.2 months in dizygotic 
twins. In the general population, the age of menarche 
appears to have declined markedly since the 
beginning of the 1900s. This change may reflect better 
nutrition intake and public health. The decline leveled off 
by 1960. However, newer studies have challenged the 
validity of these data, and the seeming decline in age of 
pubertal onset may be only a reflection of inaccurate data 
collected in limited populations (4). 

Hormonal Events 

The hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian (HPO) axis is intact 
in the fetus by early midgestation and is well developed 
at birth. It is responsible for the episodic release of GnRH 
in the fetus, which stimulates germ cell division. In 
midgestation the average fetus has approximately 6 million 
oocytes. The normal process of atresia reduces this 
number to approximately 1 million to 2 million at birth 
and to half a million at puberty. The level of FSH rises 
even further at birth, probably because of withdrawal of 
maternal estrogens. The resulting ovarian stimulation 
produces follicle stimulation. Small ovarian follicles and 
functional ovarian cysts in the fetus, often noted on both 
prenatal and postnatal ultrasonograms, are the result of 
this normal physiologic process. 

The HPO axis is quiescent during childhood, becoming 
active again at the onset of puberty. It controls the 
hormonal cascade that regulates reproductive function, 
which results in the synthesis of GnRH. Secretion of 
GnRH, in turn, stimulates both the release of FSH and LH 
from the pituitary gland and ovarian sex steroid production 
from the ovary. Activation of the HPO axis ultimately 
results in the production of sex steroids from the 
gonads; this is termed gonadarche. 

During the axis’s quiescent period, there is a decline in 
GnRH, independent of ovarian steroids (it occurs in girls 
without ovaries). During these years, FSH levels are higher 
than LH levels, a pattern often referred to as a prepu


bertal gonadotropin ratio. This ratio reverses later, during 
pubertal development. 

The HPO axis is responsible for many of the primary 
changes of puberty. In very early puberty, some illdefined 
changes of the central nervous system (CNS) 
result in the first physiologic change of puberty: an 
increase in GnRH pulses during sleep. These pulses 
gradually occur during daylight hours as well, resulting in 
the advancement of puberty. 

Activation of another axis, the hypothalamic–pituitary–
adrenal (HPA) axis, generally has already begun. 
This axis produces secretion of adrenal androgens and 
ultimately results in the development of pubic hair, a process 
termed adrenarche. There appears to be a dissociation 
between the HPA and the HPO axes. Advancement 
of adrenarche without gonadarche and of gonadarche 
without adrenarche occurs in some pathologic conditions 
(see the discussion of the adrenal gland). 

Sequence of Puberty 

The classic sequence of puberty in girls is growth acceleration, 
thelarche, pubarche, maximal growth acceleration, 
menarche, and ovulation. Adrenarche can precede 
thelarche in some children. This sequence variant seems 
to be especially prevalent in girls of African descent. 
Maximal growth acceleration is reached prior to menarche. 
Growth after menarche generally is limited to an 
average of 1–3 in. Girls with earlier menarche will have 
more growth potential left at menarche than will girls 
with later menarche. 

Timing of Puberty 

The sequence of thelarche to menarche generally occurs 
within approximately 2–3 years but ranges considerably 
from child to child (Fig. 18). The duration of time from 
pubertal onset to menarche depends on the age of pubertal 
onset. Girls experiencing earlier puberty have a longer 
interval from onset of puberty to menarche. In one study, 
the time lapse from pubertal onset to menarche was 2.8 
years in girls with pubertal onset at 9 years, compared 
with an interval of approximately 1.4 years in girls with 
pubertal onset at 12 years (5). 

The time from menarche to ovulation in half the cycles 
averages approximately 3 years but occurs significantly 
quicker in girls with younger menarche. In girls with 
menarche at less than 12 years, approximately half of the 
cycles are ovulatory in 1 year. In contrast, in girls with 
menarche between 12 and 13 years, it takes approximately 
3 years to achieve ovulation in 50% of cycles (6). 

Racial differences also were reported. In the United 
States, black girls entered puberty 1.0–1.5 years earlier 
than white girls and began menstruating 8.5 months earlier 
(4) (Table 2). Data on other races were not analyzed, 
because other racial groups made up less than 3% of the 
study population. 


SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

8 
9 
10 
1112 
1314151617 


Height spurtMenarche 
Breast(Tanner stage) 
Pubichair 
(Tanner stage) 
2345223344554325
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
Age (years) 
n FIG. 18. Timing of events of puberty. , 1969 data from a study of British schoolchildren. , 1997 data from a study of 

American schoolchildren. (From Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in pattern of pubertal changes in girls. Arch Dis Child 
44:291–303, 1969; and Pediatrics in Review, vol 8, no 2. Columbus, Ohio: Ross Laboratories, 1986) 

n TABLE 2. Sequence of Puberty 
Mean Age (Years) 
Event 
African 
Americans 
White 
Americans 
Thelarche 
Adrenarche 
Breast bud 
Pubic hair 
Maximal growth 
Menarche 
8.87 
8.78 
12.16 
9.96 
10.51 
10.5 
11.0 
11.4 
12.88 

Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, Bourdony CJ, Bhapkar MV, Kock GG, et al. Secondary sexual characteristics 
and menses in young girls seen in office practice: a study from the Pediatric Research in Office Settings network. 

Pediatrics 1997;99:505–512 

Tanner Staging 

Tanner staging was developed in 1969 to provide structure 
for clinicians to document breast and pubic hair 
development in a standardized fashion (7). The pubertal 
normatives identified in this study were based on the 
observation of 192 British children with a lower socioeconomic 
background, not a contemporary U.S. population 
of girls. In 1997, an office-based study of more than 
17,000 U.S. girls showed an earlier age of pubertal onset 
than the older standards (4) (see Fig. 18 and Table 2). 

Whether this difference reflects a declining age of puberty 
or flawed previous standards is unknown. 

The majority of girls, approximately 62%, are at breast 
stage Tanner IV at menarche (Fig. 19). Approximately 
10% are at Tanner V (adult contour) at menarche, and 25% 
are at Tanner II (breast buds) (8). On average, an adolescent 
progresses to Tanner V staging approximately 2 years 
after menarche. Girls participating in strenuous exercise 
may have aberrant progression in development and differing 
ages of achieving specific landmarks. For example, in 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 19. Tanner staging of breast development. Tanner I, elevation of papilla (no development; a prepubertal breast); Tanner 
II, a small breast bud elevating the papilla; Tanner III, continued enlargement of the breast mound without separation of the papilla 
and mound; Tanner IV, separation of the papilla above the breast mound; and Tanner V, recession of the papilla to the breast 
mound (adult breasts). Tanner V breasts are differentiated from Tanner III breasts by size and can be defined only by sequential 
examination. (Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical gynecologic endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 1999:398) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

one study, 75% of young dancers were at Tanner III (ele-nomenon. For pubic hair development, most girls are 
vated) at menarche, and 25% were Tanner II (8). Athletes Tanner IV (midescutcheon) stage at menarche and achieve 
may progress much quicker through Tanner breast stages Tanner V (female escutcheon) stage, on average, approxithan 
other girls when they go through a “catch-up” phe-mately 1 year after menarche (Fig. 20). 


n FIG. 20. Tanner staging of pubic hair development. Tanner I, no pubic hair (prepubertal pattern); Tanner II, isolated long 
hairs, mainly along the labia majora; Tanner III, course, curled hairs increasing in number; Tanner IV, adult-type pattern, but only 
on the mons pubis; and Tanner V, pubic hair spread beyond the mons (adult pattern). (Speroff L, Glass RH, Kase NG. Clinical 
gynecologic endocrinology and infertility. 6th ed. Baltimore: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999:399) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ABNORMALITIES OF PUBERTY 
Precocious Puberty 

The 1997 data (5) have prompted discussion regarding 
the definition of precocious puberty. Based on the old 
standards, textbooks generally state that breast development 
before age 8 years is considered precocious (see 
Fig. 18). Recommendations based on more current data 
are that girls who have pubic hair or breast development 
when they are younger than 7 years (white girls) or 
younger than 6 years (African-American girls) receive an 
evaluation for precocious development (9). These recommendations 
caution that for white girls with development 
beginning after age 7 or African-American girls after age 
6, evaluation also is appropriate in any of the following 
additional conditions: 

• 
Rapid progression of puberty (bone age >2 years 
ahead of chronologic age and a predicted height 
of <150 cm or 2 standard deviations or more 
below the genetic target height) 
• 
Findings that relate to the central nervous system 
(CNS), such as headaches, neurologic symptoms, 
and seizures 
• 
Pubertal progression that affects the emotional 
health of the family or the girl 
Not all experts agree that the definition of precocious 
puberty should be changed based on the recent U.S. 
study, because it did not analyze racial groups other than 
white and African-American girls, and it was not from a 
random general population (10). Some experts recommend 
a bone age and height prediction in all children 
with breast or pubic hair before ages 8 and 9 years, 
respectively, because it may predict abnormal development 
more accurately. 

Puberty is initiated by the reactivation of the HPO 
axis, which is relatively quiescent between infancy and 
the onset of puberty. The mechanism for this reactivation 
has not been characterized completely, but it does require 
pulsatile GnRH stimulation. Central precocious puberty 
is a disease process characterized by premature hypothalamic 
GnRH activity. The most common etiology in 
females is idiopathic. Other conditions that must be ruled 
out include CNS tumors, such as craniopharyngiomas; 
trauma; infection; and juvenile primary hypothyroidism. 
Another possibility is Silver’s syndrome, a dwarfing syndrome 
with small stature, craniofacial disproportion. and 
elevated gonadotropin levels. 

GnRH-independent (peripheral) precocious puberty 
results from an independent source of sex steroids, rather 
than from maturation of the HPO axis. Steroids may be 
produced by ovarian cysts, functional ovarian tumors 
such as granulosus cell neoplasms, adrenal tumors, or 
ingestion of exogenous steroids. A rare cause is 
McCune–Albright syndrome. Patients exhibit precocious 
puberty and other signs of endocrine hyperfunction, as 

well as polyostotic fibrous dysplasia and café au lait 
spots. An activating somatic mutation of the gene coding 
for the stimulatory G protein component of glycoprotein 
hormone receptors leads to independent activation of the 
receptor without hormone. In granulosa cells, this process 
leads to the synthesis of estradiol through activation of 
FSH receptors without FSH being present. Heterosexual 
precocious puberty in females results from prepubertal 
production of androgens with growth of pubic and axillary 
hair and skeletal maturation. This condition may be 
secondary to exogenous androgen ingestion, androgensecreting 
tumors, or congenital adrenal hyperplasia. 

The diagnosis of idiopathic central precocious puberty 
in females is a diagnosis of exclusion. Pseudoprecocious 
puberty can be subdivided into premature thelarche and 
premature adrenarche. Premature thelarche is early breast 
development without other signs of sexual maturation; no 
other signs of precocious development are present (Fig. 
21). Bone age should be normal. Close follow-up is necessary 
to rule out progression to true precocious puberty. 
Premature adrenarche is the isolated appearance of pubic 
or axillary hair. It may be associated with excess adrenal 
androgen secretion secondary to partial deficiencies of 
steroidogenic hormones, but it also is commonly seen in 
African-American girls. 

Evaluation and treatment are not considered necessary 
for most African-American girls who develop pubertal 
signs when they are older than 6 years or for white girls 
older than 7 years unless there is rapid progression, an 
unacceptable predicted adult height based on bone age, 
and CNS-related findings or significant behavioral problems 
thought to be related to the progression of puberty. 
For most girls in this age group, pubertal development 
will be slow and ultimate adult height unaffected. 


n FIG. 21. Girl with precocious puberty. Breast development 
(Tanner stage III, approaching stage IV) in a 5-year-old 
girl with central precocious puberty. Note nipple and areolar 
maturation. (Lee PA. Normal and precocious puberty. In: 
Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol 1: Pediatric 
and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 
1998:4.11 with permission) 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

The aim of treatment in central precocious puberty is 
suppression of gonadotropin production. Chronic administration 
of GnRH agonists has proven to be a remarkably 
safe and effective therapy for children of both sexes. 
Within 6–18 months after beginning daily therapy, pubertal 
levels and patterns of secretion of gonadotropins and 
sex steroids revert to prepubertal levels and patterns. 

A striking aspect of this therapy is the regression of 
secondary sexual characteristics, the cessation of menstrual 
bleeding, and the slowing of bone growth. In addition, 
any behavioral problems previously present and 
related to the precocity usually are reduced. 

Delayed Puberty and Primary 
Amenorrhea 

Etiologies for delayed puberty and primary amenorrhea 
may be divided into hypogonadal (ie, hypoestrogenic) and 
eugonadal (ie, well-estrogenized) categories (11). Patients 
with hypogonadism may have hypergonadotropism secondary 
to ovarian failure or central abnormalities affecting 
the normal maturation of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, 
leading to hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. The eugonadal 
category is comprised of patients with clinical evidence 
of normal steroidogenesis but delayed menarche. 
This group frequently has developmental failure or 
obstruction of the female müllerian system. Less common 
eugonadal etiologies include failure to develop a mature 
positive feedback mechanism despite adequate endogenous 
estrogen production (eg, polycystic ovary disorder), 
pituitary prolactinoma, and intersex disorders such as 
androgen insensitivity syndrome. 

Adolescents should be examined each year during the 
pubertal process with a genital inspection and evaluated 
with a growth chart and appropriate testing rather than 
wait until they meet the absolute ages previously held for 
pubertal delay (age 13 years, 2.5 standard deviations 
from the mean for thelarche; age 15 years, 2.5 standard 
deviations from the mean for menarche; and age 16 
years, 3 standard deviations from the mean for menarche). 
Inspection of the introitus, placement on a growth 
chart, and determination of FSH levels will identify the 
three most common causes of delayed puberty (ovarian 
failure, congenital absence of the uterus and vagina, and 
constitutional delay) and its etiology for two thirds of 
patients. 

Total absence of breast development at age 13 years 
requires some preliminary investigation. In addition to a 
thorough general physical examination and counseling, 
assessments of serum FSH and LH, TSH, and prolactin 
should be obtained. An elevation in serum FSH should 
signal cytogenetic evaluation. Undetectable or low serum 
gonadotropin levels necessitate finer scrutiny for pituitary 
tumors using computed tomography or MRI. Bone age 
determination may be helpful in selected cases, because it 
correlates better with sexual development than does 
chronologic age. 

Menarcheal delay accompanied by normal sexual and 
somatic growth requires a careful pelvic examination to 
exclude anatomic etiologies. This examination should be 
accompanied by abdominal and pelvic ultrasonography if 
the vagina is absent or represented by a shallow pouch. 
The presence of ovaries with follicles and absence of a 
uterus essentially establishes the diagnosis of müllerian 
agenesis. An abdominal ultrasonographic examination 
performed at the same visit will allow identification of 
unilateral renal agenesis or pelvic kidney associated with 
this condition. Determination of serum testosterone level 
is necessary only if the diagnosis is not straightforward; a 
value that approximates the range for males would suggest 
androgen insensitivity. Cytogenetic studies are indicated 
only when complete androgen insensitivity 
syndrome is a diagnostic consideration after the examination 
and studies just discussed have been performed. 

Gonadal Dysgenesis and 
Hypergonadotropic Hypogonadism 

Gonadal dysgenesis consists of a spectrum of disorders 
with gonadal failure resulting in hypergonadotropic hypogonadism. 
Individuals with gonadal dysgenesis present 
with delayed puberty consisting of lack of secondary sexual 
development and primary or secondary amenorrhea. 
The most common etiology is privation of X chromosomal 
material. Karyotypes range from 45,X or 46,X (delX) 
single cell lines to mosaic and structural abnormalities of 
the X chromosome. Less commonly, apparently normal 
karyotypes (46,XX or 46,XY) are detected (11, 12). 

In 1938, Turner reported seven females who were 
short and had sexual infantilism, a congenital webbed 
neck, and cubitus valgus. Subsequent chromosome studies 
determined that phenotypically identical individuals 
had 45,X chromosome complements. These patients had 
characteristic somatic anomalies, referred to as Turner’s 
stigmata (Figs. 22 and 23). The most common visceral 
anomalies are coarctation of the aorta, bicuspid aortic 
valves, and horseshoe kidney. More and more reports are 
accumulating of patients with Turner syndrome developing 
dilation of the ascending aorta and, rarely, dissections 
and rupture. At birth they may demonstrate a cystic 
hygroma or lymphedema of the hands and feet. Internal 
gonadal development consists of only white streaks of 
fibrous stroma with a paucity or complete lack of follicles. 
Studies have demonstrated the presence of primordial 
oocytes in the gonads of 45,X fetuses, demonstrating 
that the pathologic cause of gonadal dysgenesis is oocyte 
depletion due to premature loss, rather than failure of 
germ cell differentiation or migration. 

The 45,X chromosomal complement seen in these 
patients may arise from meiotic nondysjunction or 
anaphase lag during spermatogenesis or oogenesis. 
Parental studies have shown the X chromosome to be 
maternal in origin in 80–85% of cases, indicating loss of 
the paternal X as the most common etiology for this syn



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


A
AAB 
BB


n FIG. 22. Turner’s syndrome in a girl aged 12 years 5 
months with a 45,X karyotype. Her height was 126.7 cm 
(–4.6 SD); her weight was 31.2 kg (–1.9 SD); and her bone 
age was 11 years. Note the down-turned mouth, cubitus valgus, 
and widely spaced nipples; she also had a low posterior 
hairline, edema of the dorsum of the hands, and 
dystrophic nails. She had stage II pubic hair from adrenal 
androgens, but estradiol was undetectable, and levels of 
both luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone 
were high. (Styne DM, Kaplan SL. Normal and abnormal 
puberty in the female. Pediatr Clin North Am 1979; 
26:123–148) 
drome. Molecular studies have demonstrated undetected 
mosaicism in some patients with apparent single cell line 
45,X Turner’s syndrome. Because monosomy for nonsex 
chromosomes is uniformly lethal, it may be that most 
45,X patients actually have undetected mosaicism or partial 
translocations. The 45,X karyotype is the most frequent 
abnormal karyotype seen in first-trimester abortus 
material, demonstrating that most 45,X conceptions 
result in spontaneous fetal loss, and fewer than 3% result 
in delivery of a viable infant. In live newborn females, the 
approximate incidence of 45,X is 1 in 3,500. 

Approximately one third of patients with X chromosome 
privation have a single 45,X cell line (11). The 
majority exhibit chromosomal mosaicism (45,X with 
another cell line) or structural abnormalities of the X chromosome, 
such as deletions or an isochromosome for the 
long arm of X. In general, all patients with privation of X 
chromosomal material exhibit short stature, because statural 
determinants are present on both arms of the X chromosome; 
however, the other somatic anomalies seen in 

n FIG. 23. (
((A
AA) 
)) Appearance of one of the original seven 
cases of Turner’s syndrome reported in 1938. (
((B
BB) 
)) The same 
patient, photographed in 1972, almost 35 years after publication 
of the original case report. The karyotype was documented 
to be 45,X. The patient had received little estrogen in 
intervening years and experienced severe osteoporosis. 
(Becker KL. Principles and practice of endocrinology and 
metabolism. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 
2001;863) 
Turner’s syndrome are more variably expressed. Patients 
with mosaicism are more likely to retain some follicles in 
their gonadal streaks, and 10–20% may present with some 
secondary sexual development and even menstruation, 
compared with fewer than 5% of 45,X patients. Fertility is 
rare in any patient with Turner’s syndrome. Pregnancy out-
comes are relatively poor, with approximately 40% resulting 
in healthy, normal newborn infants. One third result in 
fetal loss and one third of liveborn infants have abnormalities, 
usually chromosomal. Patients with gonadal dysgenesis, 
especially those with an isochromosome for the long 
arm of X, are at increased risk for developing autoimmune 
diseases such as diabetes and hypothyroidism. 

Patients with mixed gonadal dysgenesis have a mosaic 
karyotype of 45,X/46,XY. They present with short stature, 
primary amenorrhea, and somatic anomalies similar to 
other patients with Turner’s syndrome. However, their 
external genitalia may exhibit varying degrees of genital 
ambiguity, depending on the degree of gonadal function 
present. Patients with bilateral streak gonads (Image 3) 
have normal infantile female external genitalia. Those 
with an intraabdominal dysgenetic testis may have isolated 
clitoromegaly (Image 1). If the dysgenetic testis is 
functional enough to descend into the labioscrotal pouch, 


the patients may have more profound genital ambiguity 
with labioscrotal fusion. The presence of a cell line containing 
a Y chromosome places these patients at a 20–30% 
risk of developing a gonadoblastoma or germ cell tumor. 

Lack of ovarian function in patients with gonadal dysgenesis 
results in deficient secretion or no secretion of 
sex steroids. Lack of estrogen negative feedback results 
in elevated FSH and LH levels. Adrenal androgens usually 
are adequate to induce normal adrenarche; however, 
breast tissue and other estrogen-dependent tissues remain 
infantile. Estrogen replacement therapy is necessary for 
normal secondary sexual development, as well as to prevent 
the development of osteoporosis. Most of these 
patents have normal müllerian development, so cyclic 
progesterone replacement is necessary to prevent endometrial 
hyperplasia. 

Low-dose estrogen replacement therapy has been 
advocated for patients with gonadal dysgenesis to allow 
maximal growth of the long bones without premature 
epiphyseal closure, as well as maximized adult height. 
This therapy may also reduce the risk of abnormal (tubular) 
breast development, which occurs in association with 
high-dose estrogen replacement therapy. Anabolic 
steroids such as oxandrolone also have been used to maximize 
height. This relatively weak androgen has minimal 
virilization risks. More recently, recombinant growth hormone 
has become available. It often is used in combination 
with steroids with some increase in adult height. The 
efficacy of these therapies is somewhat limited, because 
patients with X chromosome privation lack normal genetic 
statural determinants and therefore never achieve a normal 
adult height. Although patients with Turner’s 
syndrome have become pregnant with donor oocytes, 
four recent reports of death during or immediately after 
pregnancy make this option most concerning. 

Patients with Gonadal Dysgenesis and 
Normal Stature 

Some individuals with gonadal dysgenesis have a normal 
female karyotype (46,XX). They also have hypergonadotropic 
hypogonadism secondary to lack of ovarian 
function. They have absence of secondary sexual development 
and primary amenorrhea. In general, they lack the 
somatic anomalies associated with X chromosome privation. 
They also have normal stature, because genetic statural 
determinants are present. This condition is inherited 
in some families in an autosomal recessive fashion. In 
most cases, no specific genetic mutation has been 
identified. 

Molecular mutations involving sex steroid production 
or action have been found that present in a phenotypic 
fashion similar to hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, but 
do not directly affect germ cell survival. Several mutations 
of the FSH receptor gene have been described (13). 
Individuals with these mutations have high gonadotropin 
levels, low to normal sex steroid production, impaired 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

folliculogenesis, and primary or secondary amenorrhea. 
The 46,XX individuals with mutations of the LH receptor 
gene also present with elevated LH levels but normal follicular-
phase estrogen production and normal secondary 
sexual development. They do develop primary or secondary 
amenorrhea and cystic ovaries. Mutations in the 
gene for steroidogenic acute regulatory protein (StAR) 
and the gene for 17a -hydroxylase (CYP17) both result in 
phenotypic females regardless of karyotype because of 
lack of synthesis of androgens or estrogens. These 
patients present with elevated gonadotropin levels and 
sexual infantilism. Both conditions require replacement 
of adrenal steroids, as well as estrogen replacement therapy 
for secondary sexual development. Mutations in 
CYP19 (causing aromatase deficiency) blocks estrogen 
biosynthesis. Affected 46,XX individuals present with 
hypergonadotropic hypogonadism and failure of secondary 
sexual development (14). Mothers with aromatase-
deficient progeny develop virilization during 
pregnancy because of failure of placental aromatase to 
convert precursor androgens to estrogens. Affected 
female progeny have ambiguous genitalia at birth secondary 
to the high androgen levels. In addition to corrective 
genital surgery, these patients require estrogen 
replacement starting as early as 3 years of age to prevent 
ovarian cyst formation; the dosage should be low enough 
so as not to induce secondary sexual development. 

Gonadal dysgenesis also occurs in individuals with 
normal male karyotypes (46,XY; Swyer syndrome). 
These patients present with hypergonadotropic hypogonadism 
with lack of secondary sexual development, normal 
infantile female external genitalia, and normal 
internal female ductal development. They are of normal 
or above-average height because of the presence of normal 
genetic statural determinants, and they have delayed 
closure of the epiphyses due to lack of sex steroid production. 
Approximately 10% of these patients have point 
mutations in the SRY gene or a deletion in the short arm 
of the Y chromosome that includes SRY. In the remainder 
of patients, SRY is normal, suggesting that other genes 
must be important in the control of testicular differentiation 
(15). The Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene (WT1) is a 
transcription factor expressed in the primordial gonad and 
kidney. Mutations in this gene lead to XY gonadal dysgenesis, 
as well as nephropathy and Wilms’ tumor. These 
mutations appear to affect gonadal development prior to 
the action of SRY. The SOX9 gene, a class of genes related 
to SRY, is involved in both skeletal development and 
gonadal differentiation. It is expressed in Sertoli’s cells in 
the developing testis. Patients with camptomelic dyplasia 
due to a mutation of SOX9 have a dwarfing syndrome and 
XY gonadal dysgenesis (16). Another transcription factor, 
SF-1, is expressed in both Leydig’s and Sertoli’s cells 
in the developing testis. Mutations have been associated 
with both adrenal insufficiency and XY gonadal dysgenesis. 
A gene on the X chromosome, DAX1, also has been 
found to play a role in gonadal development. When it is 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

duplicated, it is not subject to X chromosome inactivation. 
Expression appears to oppose the action of WT1 in 
modifying SF-1 transactivation and results in sex reversal of 
46,XY embryos, causing XY gonadal dysgenesis. This condition 
has been termed dosage-sensitive sex reversal (17). 

Leydig’s cell hypoplasia is a condition caused by an 
inactivating mutation in the gene coding for the LH receptor 
(18). The phenotype of patients with this condition is 
similar to XY gonadal dysgenesis. Patients with severe 
defects have female external genitalia or mild ambiguity 
secondary to lack of testosterone synthesis. They lack 
müllerian structures because the testes do produce MIS. 
Mild defects result in abnormal male external genitalia 
with micropenis or hypospadias. One 46,XX individual 
with primary ovarian failure was also described. 

The presence of a Y chromosome in patients with dysgenetic 
gonads places them at a 20–30% risk of developing 
a gonadal tumor, most commonly a gonadoblastoma 
or dysgerminoma (19). Because these tumors can arise as 
early as the first decade of life, patients with diagnosed 
46,XY gonadal dysgenesis should have their gonads 
extirpated. In the majority of these individuals, the uterus 
will be present and should be maintained, allowing the 
option of donor oocyte in vitro fertilization in the future. 
Bilateral gonadectomy often can be accomplished laparoscopically 
with current techniques. 

Hypogonadotropic Hypogonadism 

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism results from a temporary 
or permanent inability to secrete GnRH or 
gonadotropins. Such defects also may be caused by an 
inability of GnRH to be transported from the hypothalamus 
to the pituitary or by lack of target organ response 
secondary to GnRH receptor mutations. These patients 
have undetectable to low normal levels of pituitary 
gonadotropins. Multiple diverse etiologies are present 
within this group and may be responsible for delaying or 
interrupting the normal pattern of pubertal maturation 
within the hypothalamus and pituitary (11) (Box B). 
Among these etiologies, anorexia nervosa and milder 
variants are becoming more frequent. The psychiatric 
aspects of these disorders remain a special challenge. 

A standard assay for TSH allows discrimination 
between low and normal values, which is useful in the 
differential diagnosis of pituitary and hypothalamic 
hypothyroidism. Computed axial tomographic scanning 
or MRI with and without contrast media, coupled with 
serum prolactin determinations, can help diagnose early 
pituitary tumors in this age group. 

The differential diagnosis of irreversible gonadotropin 
failure and physiologic delay can be difficult. Pubertal 
delay beyond the 15th birthday is unlikely to be physiologic 
or constitutional. Identifying a normal pubertal pattern 
of gonadotropin release in response to exogenous 
GnRH stimulation (predominant rise of LH to more than 
10 mIU/mL and a lesser response of FSH) has been the 

BOX B 
Etiologies of Delayed Puberty 

Multiple diverse etiologies may be responsible for delaying 
or interrupting the normal pattern of pubertal maturation 
within the hypothalamus and pituitary: 

Physiologic or constitutional delay (reversible) 

Systemic disease processes (sustained malnutrition) 
Gastrointestinal malabsorption 
Anorexia nervosa 
Exercise 


Endocrine disease processes 
Primary hypothyroidism 
Cushing’s disease or syndrome 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (untreated) 
Hyperprolactinemia (with or without prolactinoma) 


Hypothalamic–pituitary etiologies (irreversible) 
Isolated gonadotropin-releasing hormone deficiency 


with or without anosmia (Kallmann’s syndrome) 
Pituitary insufficiency 
Pituitary tumors (eg, craniopharyngioma) 

Reindollar RH, Byrd JR, McDonough PG. Delayed sexual development: 
a study of 252 patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1981;140: 
371–380 

mainstay for diagnosis of physiologic delay after other 
disorders have been excluded. More recently, the identification 
of a pubertal ovarian appearance on pelvic ultrasonography 
(ie, multifollicular ovaries) has become more 
practical for corroborating the diagnosis of physiologic 
delay than the GnRH challenge test. Mutations in the 
GnRH receptor gene have been identified as rare causes 
of irreversible hypogonadotropic hypogonadism (20, 21). 
Although GnRH gene mutations have been present in 
mice, they have not been identified in humans. Patients 
should be treated with cyclic estrogen and progestin therapy 
(22). Mutations of the Kallmann gene (KALIG-I, also 
referred to as the Kal gene) on Xp have been identified in 
some subjects with Kallmann’s syndrome (23, 24). This 
gene appears to encode a cell adhesion protein that facilitates 
the migration of the GnRH neurons from the medial 
olfactory placode to the hypothalamus. Patients should 
be treated with estrogen replacement therapy (22). 

Eugonadism 

Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina (Rokitansky 
syndrome) is the most common anatomic genital abnormality 
associated with delayed menarche and the second 


most common cause of pubertal aberrancy or primary 
amenorrhea (11). Less frequently, a patient may have a 
functional but obstructed genital tract, including a transverse 
vaginal septum or an imperforate hymen. 

The patient with eugonadism who has complete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome has evidence of steroid 
production. A lack of pubic hair with normal breast development 
identifies individuals who have 46,XY karyotypes, 
testes, and receptor defects for androgens (see the 
earlier discussion of Tanner staging). These individuals’ 
relative lack of hair and male levels of testosterone differentiate 
them from people with Rokitansky syndrome. 
Associated urinary tract abnormalities in the latter group 
should be excluded by ultrasonography or intravenous 
pyelography. 

Other patients with eugonadism exhibit pubertal maturation 
but present with delayed menarche associated with 
chronic anovulation (11). Heterogeneous etiologies may 
be identified, including hyperprolactinemia, hypothyroidism, 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, and even forms 
of hypothalamic suppression. The large majority of these 
patients, however, have hyperandrogenic chronic anovulation 
or polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS). The workup 
always should include measurement of serum prolactin 
and TSH levels to rule out other causes of estrogenic 
anovulation. Other hormone assays, including those for 
androgens, may be appropriate based on the presentation. 
Recently, it has become apparent that insulin resistance 
often mediates the reproductive and medical problems 
associated with hyperandrogenic anovulation or polycystic 
ovarian disease. Diagnosis and treatment of insulin 
resistance in the very young patient is still evolving. 

Dyssynchronous Puberty 

Müllerian anomalies usually present during the adolescent 
years as primary amenorrhea (müllerian aplasia, 
vaginal atresia) or cryptomenorrhea (transverse septum, 
incomplete longitudinal septum). Because of the proximity 
and timing of the development of the genital and urinary 
systems, abnormalities in one system often are 
associated with abnormalities in the other (25). 

Müllerian aplasia (Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser 
syndrome) classically refers to patients with congenital 
absence of the uterus and vagina (also called CAUV or 
müllerian aplasia). This syndrome is considered a fusion 
failure of the müllerian anlagen during development. As a 
result, canalization of the vagina and uterine remnants 
does not occur. The patients typically have small bilateral 
uterine remnants attached to normal fallopian tubes 
that are associated with normal ovaries. Variations of this 
aberrant müllerian system also have been described. After 
gonadal dysgenesis, this is the second most common 
cause of primary amenorrhea. Its proposed incidence 
rates range from 1 per 10,000 to 1 per 4,000. Occurrence 
is usually sporadic, although it has been reported to occur 
in several sibships of a few families. In addition, identical 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

twins who were concordant and discordant for müllerian 
aplasia have been described. 

Because ovarian and adrenal function are normal in 
patients with müllerian aplasia, these individuals usually 
progress through puberty normally. On examination they 
are found to have an absent vagina; occasionally they 
have a vaginal pouch created by prior attempts at coitus. 
Physical examination also may reveal skeletal abnormalities 
in 11–50% of patients. The most common skeletal 
abnormality is scoliosis; rarely, more dramatic limb defects, 
such as phocomelia or lobster claw deformity, may be 
found. 

DIAGNOSIS 

The diagnosis of müllerian aplasia is usually clinical. The 
differential diagnosis includes complete androgen insensitivity. 
Because virtually all patients with complete 
androgen insensitivity have absent or significantly 
reduced pubic hair, it is usually easy to differentiate the 
two conditions at the time of examination in postpubertal 
patients. A pelvic–abdominal ultrasonographic examination 
is the most useful study to obtain, because it usually 
confirms the absence of a midline uterine structure and 
identifies ovaries with follicles. At the same time, the 
ultrasonographic study should be used to evaluate the 
kidneys, because up to 30% of patients with müllerian 
aplasia may have unilateral renal agenesis or a single 
pelvic kidney. Should any further confusion exist about 
the diagnosis, a serum testosterone level will further differentiate 
between müllerian aplasia (normal female levels) 
and androgen insensitivity syndrome (near-normal 
male levels). A karyotype should be determined only for 
the patient with diagnosed androgen insensitivity in order 
to confirm the 46,XY karyotype or for the prepubertal 
patient with an absent vagina or a vaginal pouch. 
Magnetic resonance imaging has been suggested to assess 
the internal genitalia, but it is rarely needed. Because the 
diagnosis is usually apparent after performing the physical 
and ultrasonographic examinations, laparoscopy is not 
indicated for diagnostic purposes. 

After the diagnosis of müllerian aplasia, the adolescent 
should be offered psychologic support to help her 
adjust. Routine referral to a psychiatrist is usually not 
necessary. Counseling should be available within the 
gynecologist’s office. The most helpful intervention is to 
pair the patient as a “buddy” with an older patient who 
has been diagnosed and treated, and preferably who has 
dealt with many of the psychosocial and sexual issues 
associated with this condition. These patients should be 
told that a normal sex life will be possible after a neo-
vagina has been created and that pregnancy is possible 
through assisted reproductive technologies and the use of 
a gestational carrier. Many babies have been born through 
this technology without evidence of müllerian aplasia to 
date (27). 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

TREATMENT 

A vagina can be created through use of dilators. This 
method has a reported success rate of more than 90%. 
Some adolescent women who have dealt with the psychologic 
issues surrounding the diagnosis of müllerian aplasia 
may want to start this treatment even before becoming 
sexually active. Others delay such treatment indefinitely, 
often because of denial. Surgical creation of a neovagina 
by the McIndoe procedure also has a high success rate but 
may result in more complications. Furthermore, if the 
patient does not have sexual intercourse or does not use 
dilators, postoperative stricturing of the vagina may occur 
over time, necessitating additional surgery. Recently, the 
use of an absorbable adhesion barrier instead of a skin 
graft has been proposed for this procedure, but it has been 
tested on only a few patients. Other procedures that have 
been described include Williams vaginoplasty, colovaginoplasty, 
amnion vaginoplasty, tissue expansion techniques, 
and rectus abdominis musculocutaneous flap 
(28–30). Because at least eight cases of vaginal carcinoma 
have been reported after the creation of a neovagina, Pap 
tests should be performed periodically. 

POSTOPERATIVE CONCERNS 

Transverse vaginal septa occur less commonly than does 
müllerian aplasia. Embryologists generally agree that 
they are probably caused by a mesodermal proliferation 
error and not a lateral fusion defect. Transverse septa are 
often perforate and are less frequently imperforate. They 
occur most commonly (46%) at the junction of the middle 
and upper thirds of the vagina. When located in the 
lower vagina, a transverse septum may be misdiagnosed 
as an imperforate hymen. 

The level of the defect should be determined preoperatively, 
if at all possible, to assist in counseling the patient 
and planning the surgical procedure. This determination 
may be possible with pelvic ultrasonography. If the level 
still cannot be determined, MRI may be performed. 
Views of the kidneys probably will be obtained with the 
pelvic ultrasonography or MRI; they are not specifically 
needed, however, because the incidence of renal malformation 
in patients with true transverse vaginal septa is no 
higher than that in the general population. In contrast, the 
incidence is increased in patients with müllerian aplasia 
and longitudinal defects, especially those with hemiobstruction 
(obstruction of one side of an unfused müllerian 
system—uterus didelphys). 

Drainage of the hematocolpos and anastomosis of the 
vagina usually can be accomplished by a vaginal 
approach when a low septum is present. When a high septum 
is present, a simultaneous vaginal and abdominal 
approach by two experienced surgeons may be necessary. 
If the septum is thick, removal usually results in a defect 
that is too great for vaginal advancement, and a graft is 
required. The surgeon must be careful to avoid creating 
an hourglass shape in the vaginal canal at the site of the 
septum after removal. 

Longitudinal vaginal septum defects may occur as 
errors of lateral fusion, canalization, or septum reabsorption. 
These anomalies may result in difficulty with sexual 
intercourse or tampon insertion, as well as an arrest of the 
second stage of labor. They may be associated with uterine 
fusion defects and renal abnormalities as well. 
Obstruction of one side may occur and, when associated 
with a didelphic uterus, result in the formation of a hematocolpos. 
Patients with a hemiobstructed vagina have regular 
menses associated with their patent side; they may 
present with cyclic pain, irregular prune-colored bleeding 
or leukorrhea (if a fistula develops to the hematocolpos), 
or a mass—all caused by the hemiobstruction. Virtually 
all patients with hemiobstruction have renal agenesis ipsilateral 
to the side of the obstruction. Less than 10% of 
nonobstructed patients with a longitudinal vaginal septum 
have renal agenesis. All obstructed and symptomatic 
septa should be excised. 

Vaginal atresia is failure of the urogenital sinus to 
form the lower vagina, with normal müllerian structures 
above. Patients usually present during the teenage years 
with primary amenorrhea and a midline pelvic mass 
(hematocolpos and hematometra). Ovarian function is 
normal. Because of the small amount of vaginal tissue 
missing, it is usually possible to perform a vaginal 
advancement. Skin grafts are rarely needed. 

If the vagina and cervix are absent and a normal uterus 
is present, the treatment is more controversial. Most 
experts recommend a total abdominal hysterectomy, 
because the chance of pregnancy is remote (two reported 
cases to date) after reconstructive surgery (31, 32). 
Furthermore, death may occur from sepsis. Some experts, 
however, recommend that a fistulous tract be created with 
a stent from the uterine cavity to the neovagina. 
According to one report, the procedure was performed in 
11 patients, 9 of whom achieved menstruation (33). 

Most isolated uterine abnormalities are not diagnosed 
during the childhood or adolescent years. Patients with a 
rudimentary horn, however, may present with pelvic pain 
during early adolescence. This condition results from 
failure of fusion of the müllerian ducts, along with maldevelopment 
of one side. If the horn is noncommunicating, 
severe dysmenorrhea, hematometra, or pyometra 
may result. Diagnosis is usually apparent on ultrasonography, 
which should be followed by laparoscopy. 
Pregnancy in a rudimentary horn results in rupture in 
90% of cases and can result in maternal death. Resection 
of the rudimentary horn is indicated on diagnosis. 

Androgen Insensitivity Syndromes 

The androgen receptor is a member of the superfamily of 
nuclear transcription factors that mediate the action of 
steroid hormones. Ligand binding forms an activated 
complex that binds to specific DNA sequences on target 
genes. The androgen receptor gene has been mapped to 
the X chromosome at Xq11–12. The gene consists of eight 
exons coding for a large aminoterminal end, a DNA-bind



ing region and an androgen-binding domain. The androgen 
receptor mediates the action of both testosterone and 
dihydrotestosterone, and it is therefore essential for primary 
development of male internal and external genitalia, 
as well as for normal secondary sexual development at 
puberty. Mutations of the androgen receptor gene lead to 
diminished or absent androgen action, resulting in complete 
or partial androgen insensitivity. All 46,XY individuals 
with complete androgen insensitivity present as 
phenotypic females with a blind-ending vaginal pouch 
and diminished or absent pubic hair. Patients with incomplete 
androgen insensitivity present with varying degrees 
of abnormal external genital development ranging from a 
predominantly female phenotype with some ambiguity of 
the external genitalia to predominantly male phenotypes 
with hypospadias, micropenis, or only impaired spermatogenesis. 


COMPLETE ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY 

Patients with complete androgen insensitivity have normal 
testicular development with normal Sertoli’s cell and 
Leydig’s cell function (34). The Sertoli’s cells produce 
müllerian-inhibiting substance, causing regression of the 
müllerian system that results in absence of the cervix and 
uterus and the formation of a blind-ending vaginal pouch. 
Although testosterone is produced and converted to dihydrotestosterone, 
the lack of a functional receptor leads to 
regression of the wolffian derivatives and lack of external 
male genital development. The external genitalia remain 
infantile female, although in some cases the descent of a 
testis may occur as a mass bulging in the labial pouch. At 
puberty there is impaired pubic and axillary hair development 
because of lack of androgen action, but breast 
development does occur, probably secondary to peripheral 
conversion of androgens to estrogens (Image 4). 

More than 200 mutations of the androgen receptor 
gene have been described. Most are point mutations 
occurring in exons 2–8, the DNA- and androgen-binding 
domains. Some deletions also have been described as 
causing complete androgen insensitivity syndrome. There 
is no specific genotype-to-phenotype correlation, and 
some individual mutations have been shown to have variable 
expressivity within families. Several of these cases 
have been shown to be new somatic cell mutations with 
somatic mosaicism. 

Laboratory evaluation of these patients reveals testosterone 
in the low to normal male range and a relatively 
elevated LH level. The karyotype is 46,XY. Either the elevated 
testosterone level or the karyotype can be used to 
differentiate this syndrome from müllerian agenesis. The 
testes may be located intraabdominally or at some point 
along the inguinal canal into the labial pouch. The risk of 
malignancy is increased, as in any other cryptorchid 
testis, but it is probably no greater than 1–2%. Therefore, 
it is recommended that the testes be allowed to remain in 
situ until completion of breast development, at which 
time the patient can undergo laparoscopic gonadectomy. 

SEXUAL DEVELOPMENT AND PUBERTY 

INCOMPLETE ANDROGEN INSENSITIVITY 

Patients with incomplete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
have variable phenotypes, from normal female to 
normal male with impaired spermatogenesis and a spectrum 
of genital ambiguities between those extremes (35). 
Both Reifenstein’s and Lubs syndromes have been 
demonstrated to be forms of incomplete androgen insensitivity. 
These patients are characterized by bilateral 
testes, no müllerian derivatives, and pubertal breast 
development or gynecomastia. 

Kennedy’s disease is a form of spinobulbar motor neuronopathy 
with partial androgen insensitivity. It results 
from the expansion of a polyglutamine tract in the 
aminoterminal of the androgen receptor gene to greater 
than 38 repeats (normal is 10–31). These patients are phenotypic 
males with a mild form of androgen insensitivity 
that presents later in life with testicular atrophy and 
decreased spermatogenesis. Other mild forms of androgen 
insensitivity may present as infertility in an otherwise 
normal male with oligospermia or azoospermia. 

Treatment of incomplete androgen insensitivity must 
be individualized. Some patients with normal female 
external genitalia or marked ambiguity should be raised 
as females and undergo any necessary genital reconstructive 
surgery. Others with more extensive virilization can 
be raised as males, but they also may require reconstructive 
surgery for hypospadias or subsequent treatment for 
infertility. 

References 

1. Zaontz MR, Packer MG. Abnormalities of the external genitalia. 
Pediatr Clin North Am 1997; 44:1267–1297 
( ) 
2. Sinclair AH, Berta P, Palmer MS, Hawkins JR, Griffiths 
BL, Smith MJ, et al. A gene from the human sex-determining 
region encodes a protein with homology to a conserved 
DNA-binding motif. Nature 1990;346:240–244 
( ) 
3. Sinclair AH. New genes for boys. Am J Hum Genet 1995; 
57:998–1001 
( ) 
4. Herman-Giddens ME, Slora EJ, Wasserman RC, Bourdony 
CJ, Bhapkar MV, Kock GG, et al. Secondary sexual characteristics 
and menses in young girls seen in office practice: 
a study from the Pediatric Research in Office Settings network. 
Pediatrics 1997;99:505–512 
( ) 
5. Marti-Henneberg C, Vizmanos B. The duration of puberty 
in girls is related to the timing of its onset. J Pediatr 
1997;131(4):618–621 
( ) 
6. Apter D, Vihko R. Early menarche, a risk factor for breast 
cancer, indicates early onset of ovulatory cycles. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1983;57:82–86 
( ) 
7. Marshall WA, Tanner JM. Variations in pattern of pubertal 
changes in girls. Arch Dis Child 1969;44:291–303 
( ) 
8. Warren MP. The effects of exercise on pubertal progression 
and reproductive function in girls. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1980;51:1150–1157 
( ) 
9. Kaplowitz PB, Oberfield SE. Reexamination of the age 
limit for defining when puberty is precocious in girls in the 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

United States: implications for evaluation and treatment. 
Drug and Therapeutics and Executive Committees of the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society. Pediatrics 
1999;104:936–941 


( ) 
10. Rosenfield RL, Bachrach LK, Chernausek SD, Gertner JM, 
Gottschalk M, Hardin DS, et al. Current age of onset of 
puberty. Pediatrics 2000;106:622–623 
( ) 
11. Reindollar RH, Byrd JR, McDonough PG. Delayed sexual 
development: a study of 252 patients. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1981;140:371–380 
( ) 
12. Layman LC, Reindollar RH. The genetics of hypogonadism. 
Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 1994;5:53–68 
13. Layman LC. Mutations in the follicle-stimulating hormonebeta 
(FSH b ) and FSH receptor genes in mice and humans. 
Semin Reprod Med 2000;18:5–10 
( ) 
14. Bulun SE. Aromatase deficiency and estrogen resistance: 
from molecular genetics to clinic. Semin Reprod Med 
2000;18:31–39 
( ) 
15. Kent-First M. The Y chromosome and its role in testis differentiation 
and spermatogenesis. Semin Reprod Med 
2000;18:67–80 
( ) 
16. Warne GL, Zajac JD. Disorders of sexual differentiation. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1998;27:945–967 
(button) 
17. Ostrer H. Sexual differentiation. Semin Reprod Med 2000; 
18:41–49 
( ) 
18. Latronico 
AC. Naturally occurring mutations of the 
luteinizing hormone receptor gene affecting reproduction. 
Semin Reprod Med 2000;18:17–20 
( ) 
19. Levin HS. Tumors of the testis in intersex syndromes. Urol 
Clin North Am 2000;27:543–551 
( ) 
20. Layman LC, Peak DB, Xie J, Sohn SH, Reindollar RH, 
Gray MR. Mutation analysis of the gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone receptor gene structure in idiopathic hypogo24. 
Hardelin JP, Levilliers J, del Castillo I, Cohen-Salmon M, 
Legouis R, Blanchard S, et al. X chromosome-linked 
Kallmann syndrome: stop mutations validate the candidate 
gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 1992;89:8190–8194 
( ) 
25. Boyd ME, Daniels E. Development of the female genital 
tract and external genitalia. In: Gidwani G, Falcone T, eds. 
Congenital malformations of the female genital tract: diagnosis 
and management. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams 
& Wilkins, 1999:1–20 
26. Emans SJ, Laufer MR, Goldstein DP. Pediatric and adolescent 
gynecology. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 
1998 
27. Petrozza JC, 
Gray MR, David AJ, Reindollar RH. 
Congenital absence of the uterus and vagina is not commonly 
transmitted as a dominant genetic trait: outcomes of 
surrogate pregnancies. Fertil Steril 1997;67:387–389 
( ) 
28. Broadbent TR, Woolf RM, Hebertson R. Nonoperative construction 
of the vagina: two unusual cases. Plast Reconstr 
Surg 1984;73:117–123 
( ) 
29. Baldwin DD, Landa HM. Common problems in pediatric 
gynecology. Urol Clin North Am 1995;22:161–176 
( ) 
30. Edmonds DK, Muram D. Sexual developmental anomalies 
and their reconstruction: upper and lower tracts. In: 
Sanfilippo JS, Muram D, Dewhurst J, Lee PA, eds. Pediatric 
and adolescent gynecology. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders, 200:553–583 
31. Geary WL, Weed JC. Congenital atresia of the uterine 
cervix. Obstet Gynecol 1973;42:213–217 
( ) 
32. Zarou GS, Esposito JM, Zarou DM. Pregnancy following 
the surgical correction of congenital atresia of the cervix. 
Int J Gynaecol Obstet 1973;11:143–156 
33. Rock JA, Zacur HA, Dlugi AM, Jones HW Jr, TeLinde RW. 
Pregnancy success following surgical correction of imperforate 
hymen and complete transverse vaginal septum. 
nadotropic hypogonadism. Fertil Steril 1997;68:1079–1085 

Obstet Gynecol 1982;59:448–451 


( ) 
(button) 
21. Layman LC, Cohen DP, Jin M, Xie J, Li Z, Reindollar RH, 
34. Gottlieb B, Pinsky L, Beitel LK, Trifiro M. Androgen 
et al. Mutations in gonadotropin-releasing hormone recep-insensitivity. Am J Med Genet 1999;89:210–217 
tor gene cause hypogonadotropic hypogonadism. Nat Genet 
( ) 
35. Hiort O, Sinnecker GH, Holterhus PM, Nitsche EM, Kruse 
1998;18:14–15 

K. The clinical and molecular spectrum of androgen insen( 
) 
22. Rebar R. Puberty. In: Berek JS, ed. Novak’s gynecology. 
sitivity syndromes. Am J Med Genet 1996;63:218–222 
12th ed. Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1996;771–807 
( ) 
23. Bick D, Franco B, Sherins RJ, Heye B, Pike L, Crawford J, 
et al. Brief report: intragenic deletion of the KALIG-1 gene 
in Kallmann’s syndrome. N Engl J Med 1992;326: 
1752–1755 
( ) 

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

The Ovary and the Menstrual Cycle 


The development of predictable, regular, cyclic, and 
spontaneous ovulatory menstrual cycles is regulated by 
complex interactions of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis, 
the ovaries, and the genital tract. The average length of the 
cycle in women of reproductive age is approximately 28 
days, with a range of 25–32 days. The greatest variability 
of the menstrual cycle occurs at the onset of menarche and 
just before menopause. During these transitions, inadequate 
follicular development, inadequate luteal progesterone 
production, and anovulatory cycles often occur. 

The sequence of hormonal events leading to ovulation 
dictates the menstrual cycle. During each cycle, a single 
ovarian follicle emerges as dominant over all others in its 
cohort and subsequently directs the sequence and timing 
of events leading to ovulation. Thereafter, the corpus 
luteum governs events in the luteal phase of the cycle. 

Estrogen produced by the ovary (or more specifically, 
by the selected follicle) is the essential hormonal signal 
on which most events in the normal menstrual cycle 
depend. More recent studies in both nonhuman primates 
and in women, many using new and powerful molecular 
techniques, suggest that autocrine and paracrine actions 
of various locally produced intraovarian peptide hormones 
and growth factors play a major modifying role. 
The normal menstrual cycle ultimately may depend as 
much on local regulatory mechanisms as on the feedback 
actions of ovarian steroid hormones. 

THE MATURE OVARY 

The ovary has three distinct regions: 1) an outer cortex 
containing the germinal epithelium and follicles, 2) a central 
medulla consisting of stroma, and 3) hilum around 
the area of attachment of the ovary to the mesovarium. 
The germinal epithelium consists of coelom-derived 
cells, but its function is not understood. Follicles are 
embedded in loose connective tissue of the ovarian cortex 
and can be subdivided as nongrowing (primordial) and 
growing. Most follicles are nongrowing throughout the 
reproductive years. In humans, the number of ova reaches 
a peak of approximately 8 million halfway through 
fetal life development. Evidence suggests that there is no 
further germ cell development following birth. The primordial 
follicle is composed of a single layer of granulosa 
cells and a single immature oocyte arrested in the 
diplotene stage of the first meiotic division, and it does 
not resume meiosis until ovulation. The primordial follicle 
is separated from the surrounding stroma by a thin 
basal lamina or basement membrane. 

The oocyte is enclosed in a single layer of spindleshaped 
cells with processes that reach the basal lamina. 

The oocyte and granulosa cells do not have a direct blood 
supply; thus, they exist in their microenvironment separated 
from contact with other cells by the basal lamina. 

The growing follicles are divided into five stages: primordial, 
primary, secondary, tertiary, and graafian (Fig. 
24) (1). The first three stages of growth can occur in the 
absence of pituitary function and are believed to be controlled 
by intraovarian mechanisms. One hypothesis suggests 
that these early stages of follicular development 
occur over several menstrual cycles and that the total time 
to attain a preovulatory cycle averages 85 days. However, 
this theory remains controversial, and most researchers 
believe that a group of primary follicles are recruited in 
the luteal phase of the prior menstrual cycle. 

The next phase of follicular development includes a 
cuboidal differentiation in the spindle-shaped cells, 
which undergo successful meiotic divisions to form a 
multilayered stratum granulosa or zona granulosa. The 
oocyte enlarges and secretes a glycoprotein-containing 
substance called the zona pellucida. The oocyte is then 
considered a primary follicle. 

The secondary follicle is formed by further proliferation 
of granulosa cells, as well as differentiation of the 
stroma and theca. The theca adjacent to the basal lamina 
is termed the theca interna, and thecal cells merging with 
the surrounding stroma are designated the theca externa. 
The secondary follicle acquires an independent blood 
supply consisting of one or more arterioles that terminate 
in the capillary bed of the basal lamina. These capillaries 
do not penetrate the basement membrane. 

Further hypertrophy of the theca and the appearance of 
the antrum, a fluid-filled space among the granulosa cells, 
accompany the tertiary follicle. The fluid in the antrum 
consists of plasma transudate and secretory products of 
granulosa cells, some of which are estrogens that are 
found at higher concentrations than in peripheral blood. 
At this stage, the follicle rapidly increases in size under 
the influence of gonadotropins to form the mature, or 
graafian, follicle. During this stage, the granulosa and 
oocyte remain enclosed by the basal lamina and are still 
devoid of vascularization. The antral fluid increases in 
volume. The recruited primordial follicles either develop 
into a dominant mature graafian follicle designated to 
ovulate or degenerate as a result of atresia. Because of 
atresia, the oocyte and granulosa cells with the basal laminae 
die and are replaced by fibrous tissue. In contrast, the 
thecal cells outside the basal lamina do not differentiate; 
they return to the pool of cells consisting of ovarian interstitial 
or stromal cells. The process of atresia generally is 
believed to be secondary to an effect of hormones or 
growth factors formed by the mature dominant follicle 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Primordial 
follicle 


Primary 
follicle 

Secondary 
follicle 


Tertiary 
follicle 

Graafian 
follicle 

Cumulus oophorous 
granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 
Granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 

Granulosa cells 
Oocyte 

Zona pellucida 

Basement laminae 

Granulosa cells 
Oocyte 
Zona pellucida 
Theca 


Theca externa 

Theca interna 

Basement laminae 
Zona pellucida 
Fully grown oocyte 

Antrum 
Multiple layers of 
granulosa cells 

Antrum (follicular fluid) 

Theca interna 

Zona pellucida 

Membrana 
granulosa cells 

Basement laminae 

Fully grown oocyte 

Theca externa 

n FIG. 24. The structure and classification of the ovarian follicle during growth and development (Modified from Erickson GF, 
Magoffin DA, Dyer CA, Hofeditz C. The ovarian androgen producing cells: a review of structure/function relationships. Endocr 
Rev 1985;6(3):371–399. Copyright © by The Endocrine Society) 
through intrinsic ovarian mechanisms. There is general 
agreement that atresia of follicles is an apoptotic process, 
or programmed cell death (1). 

The ovarian stroma consist of three major cell types: 
connective tissues similar to the other tissues, contractile 
cells, and several types of interstitial cells. The primary 
interstitial cells are the first to develop, and they are identified 
in the fetal ovary. Secondary interstitial cells are 
derived from the thecal cells of the atretic follicles. These 
enlarged epithelial cells undergo hypertrophy and maintain 
active steroidogenic features of the thecal cells from 
which they are derived. Secondary interstitial cells retain 
responsiveness to luteinizing hormone LH. Thecal interstitial 
cells of the tertiary follicles are the active site of 
androgen secretion. They develop from mesenchymal 

cells that differentiate when the secondary follicles form. 
Thecal interstitial cells contain LH receptors and the 
enzymes 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and 4,5-isomerase. 
These cells increase markedly in size and develop 
the ultrastructural characteristics of steroid-secreting 
cells. The hilum of the ovary, where the blood vessels and 
lymphatics enter the ovary, is the locus of specific interstitial 
cells, termed hilar cells. The physiologic function 
of the hilar cells is obscure, but because of their intimate 
association with nerve fibers and blood vessels, they may 
influence ovarian function (2). 

In the mature dominant follicle, oocyte growth occurs 
and meiosis resumes following ovulation and is complete 
following fertilization. During growth, the oocyte 
increases in diameter from 20 mm to 120 mm. The 


growth period is associated with an accumulation of 
nutrition stores. The presence of granulosa cells is an 
absolute requirement for growth of the oocyte. The 
oocyte is surrounded by a collection of granulosa cells, 
termed the corona radiata, that interacts with the oocyte 
by gap junctions (3). The zona pellucida that forms 
between the corona radiata and the oocyte during the formation 
of the primary follicle contains specific receptors 
for sperm. It prevents polyspermia and promotes movement 
of the fertilized ovum from the fallopian tube to the 
uterus. Meiosis is complete with the release of the second 
polar body at the time of fertilization. 

Ovarian Hormones and Hormonal 
Regulation 

All steroids of the ovary, as well as those produced by the 
testes, adrenal gland, and placenta, are derived from 
cholesterol. Cholesterol can be obtained from three 
sources: 1) preformed cholesterol, which circulates in 
blood in the form of lipoproteins, 2) cholesterol synthesized 
de novo within the ovary from two-carbon units 
(acetylcoenzyme A), and 3) cholesterol liberated from 
cholesterol esters stored within lipid droplets. The cholesterol 
used by the ovary is derived primarily from the 
uptake of plasma lipoprotein cholesterol (4). Low-density 
lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol is the principal source of 
cholesterol used for steroidogenesis. In the ovary, LH 
stimulates the activity of adenylate cyclase, which releases 
cAMP. This in turn serves as a second mRNA for the 
LDL receptor for the purpose of binding and uptake of 
LDL cholesterol, as well as the formation of cholesterol 
esters. Cholesterol is then transported to the inner mitochondrial 
membrane by cAMP-activated steroidogenic 
acute regulatory protein. A 30-kd mitochondrial protein, 
it is believed to be the key mediator of acute induction of 
steroidogenesis. The conversion of cholesterol to pregnenolone 
is the rate-limiting step in ovarian steroidogenesis 
and is catalyzed by a cholesterol side chain cleavage 
enzyme complex. 

The principal steroid-producing cells of the ovary— 
the granulosa, the thecal, and the corpus luteum cells— 
possess the complete enzymatic complement required for 
steroid hormone formation. The main pathway of steroid 
synthesis in the corpus luteum is the D 4-pathway, which 
involves the conversion of 17a -hydroxypregnenolone to 
progesterone. In the human ovarian follicle, the D 5-pathway 
is the preferred pathway for the formation of androgens 
and estrogens, because thecal cells of the human 
ovary metabolize 17a -hydroxypregnenolone more efficiently 
than 17a -hydroxyprogesterone. However, the predominant 
steroid differs among each of these cell types, 
so the corpus luteum primarily forms progesterone and 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone, the thecal and stromal cells 
secrete androgen, and the granulosa cells predominantly 
secrete estrogen. The factors that determine which steroid 
is secreted by each cell type include the levels of 

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

gonadotropin and gonadotropin receptors, the expression 
of steroidogenic enzymes, and the availability of LDL 
cholesterol. 

The rate of steroid production during the menstrual 
cycle is a function of the content of four key enzymes: 

• 
P450scc, which converts cholesterol to pregnenolone 
•3b -Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase, which converts 
pregnenolone to progesterone 
• 
Cytochrome P450 17a -hydroxylase (P45017a ), 
which converts pregnenolone to androgens 
• 
Cytochrome P450 aromatase (P450arom), which 
converts androgens to estrogens. 
Luteinizing hormone regulates the first step in steroid 
hormone biosynthesis by controlling the conversion of 
cholesterol to pregnenolone, whereas FSH controls the 
conversion of androgens to estrogens. The current view of 
the steroidogenic pathway in the human ovary encompasses 
the formation of androstenedione in the thecal 
cells, which crosses the basement membrane and is con-
verted to estrone by P450arom in the granulosa cells, as 
well as the conversion of estrone to estradiol by 17b hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1 (Figs. 25 and 26). 

Intraovarian Signaling Systems 

A number of putative intraovarian regulators have been 
described, and the vital roles they play are beginning to 
be appreciated (1). In addition to its negative-feedback 
effects on pituitary FSH secretion, inhibin has important 
actions within the ovary, where it regulates androgen production 
in the theca by enhancing the actions of LH and 
other growth factors. Inhibin consists of two distinct peptides 
(designated as alpha and beta subunits) linked by 
disulfide bonds. Two forms exist: inhibin A and inhibin 

B. Each contains the same alpha subunit and one of two 
distinct, but related, beta subunits (b A, b B). These same 
subunits, when combined (b A–b A, b A–b B, b B–b B), form 
other peptides known as activins (activin A, activin AB, 
and activin B, respectively), which have actions that 
oppose those of inhibin. In the follicle, activin increases 
FSH binding by regulating receptor concentrations. It 
enhances FSH-stimulated estrogen and inhibin secretion 
but interferes with inhibin’s ability to potentiate LH-stimulated 
thecal androgen production. Activin also suppresses 
granulosa cell progesterone synthesis, an action 
that may prevent premature luteinization. Follistatin is yet 
another of the peptides in this family; it also modulates 
FSH actions in the ovary by binding to, and thus inhibiting, 
the actions of activin. 
Considerable evidence now suggests that events within 
the ovary are also regulated by various growth factors. 
These ubiquitous polypeptide molecules operate through 
local autocrine and paracrine mechanisms to modulate 
cell proliferation and functions. There are many different 
growth factors; among the more important are IGF-I and 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Thecal cell Granulosa cell 

LH 

R 
Blood 
cAMP 
Protein 
kinase A 
P450scc 
P450c17 
P450c17 
3b -HSD 
Cholesterol 
Pregnenolone 
17-OH Pregnenolone 
DHEA 
Androstenedione 
REstradiol-17b 
ESTRONE 
Androstenedione 
P450arom 
17b -HSD1 
cAMP 
Protein 
kinase A 
Basement 
FS 


n FIG. 25. The two cell–two gonadotropin hypothesis and key enzymes involved in steroidogenesis in the human ovary. 
Abbreviations: LH indicates luteinizing hormone; R, receptor; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate; DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; 
3-HSD, 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; 17-HSD1, 17-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1. (Modified from Hseuh AJ, Adashi EY, Jones PBC, et al. Hormonal regulation of the differentiation of cultured 
granulosa cells. Endocrin Rev 1984;5:76–127. Copyright © 1984 by The Endocrine Society. From Carr BR. Disorders of 
the ovary and female reproductive tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams textbook of 
endocrinology. 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1998:765) 
IGF-II, also known as somatomedins. Their physiologic 
effects are mediated by specific transmembrane receptors. 
In the ovary, receptors for IGF-I can be found on 
both granulosa and theca cells; IGF-II receptors are plentiful 
in luteinized granulosa cells and in the corpus 
luteum. As their name implies, these peptides are structurally 
similar to insulin. In fact, insulin cross-reacts with 
the IGF-I receptor; conversely, IGF-I binds to the insulin 
receptor, albeit with limited affinity. 

By themselves, IGF-I and IGF-II have only modest 
effects, but in synergy with gonadotropins, their effects 
are dramatic. When IGF-I teams with FSH, it stimulates 
granulosa proliferation, aromatase activity, LH receptor 
synthesis, and inhibin secretion; because IGF-I is produced 
in the theca, these effects appear to be paracrine in 
nature. In contrast, autocrine mechanisms operate in the 
theca, where IGF-I combines with LH to stimulate androgen 
production. Another family of peptides, known as 
IGF-binding proteins, regulates the tissue effects of these 
growth factors by binding them and preventing their 
access to membrane surface receptors. The main binding 
protein in serum is IGF-binding protein 3; its synthesis in 
the liver primarily depends on growth hormone, and circulating 
levels reflect the total IGF concentration (IGF-I 
plus IGF-II). These binding proteins also are synthesized 
in the ovary, where they inhibit IGF actions. Their synthesis, 
in turn, is inhibited by FSH and both IGF-I and 
IGF-II—actions that maximize growth factor availability. 
Evidence suggests that IGF-binding proteins 1 and 3 play 
an important role in growing follicles, whereas IGF-binding 
proteins 2, 4, and 5 are expressed primarily in atretic 
and regressing follicles. 

Other growth factors and peptides also may be important 
intraovarian regulators. Epidermal growth factor is a 
potent granulosa cell mitogen. Transforming growth factors 
a and b (derived from the same gene family as 
activin and inhibin), fibroblast growth factor, and 
platelet-derived growth factor are others that exhibit regulatory 
actions in vitro. Cytokines such as interleukin-1, 
derived from resident ovarian macrophages, also may be 
operating. There is also an intraovarian renin–angiotensin 
system that may be involved in angiogenesis. Another 
peptide, endothelin-1, has been implicated as the putative 
luteinization inhibitor. Whether GnRH-like peptides and 
oxytocin, also found in preovulatory follicles, have any 
specific functions is unknown. 

HYPOTHALAMIC SECRETION OF 
GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING 
HORMONE 

The neurohormone that controls gonadotropin secretion 
is GnRH. It is secreted from the median eminence of the 
hypothalamus by a cluster of neurons called the arcuate 
nucleus. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone is a 10-amino 
acid peptide that stimulates secretion of both LH and 
FSH from the anterior pituitary gland; it is synthesized in 
these neurons (5). 

The gene that encodes the 92-amino acid precursor 
protein containing GnRH has been localized to the short 
arm of chromosome 8. This precursor protein contains, in 
order, a 23-amino acid signal sequence, the GnRH 
decapeptide, a 3-amino acid proteolytic processing site, 


THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

22

21 

23 26 
19 
11 
12 
13 16 
18 20 
2417 
25 
27 
12 
9 
10 8 
14 15 
HO 3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Cholesterol 
Luteinizing 
hormone P450 scc (Cholesterol side CH3 
chain cleavage 
enzyme) C O 

3b HSD 

P45017a 

(hydroxysteroid(17a -hydroxylase) dehydrogenase/isomerase) 

CH3 CH3 
HO 

CO CO

Pregnenolone 

Theca 

OH 

HO O 
Progesterone

17-Hydroxypregnenolone 

CH3 

P45017a 

P45017a 
(17, 20-lyase) O (17a -hydroxylase) C O 

OH 

HO O 

Dehydroepiandrosterone 17a -Hydroxyprogesterone 

P45017a 
(17, 20-lyase)

3b HSDO OH 
(hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase/ 
isomerase) 


17b -HSOR 
(17b -hydroxysteroid 
oxidoreductase)


OO 
Androstenedione Testosterone 

P450 Arom P450 Arom

Follicle-stimulating 

(aromatase) (aromatase)

P45017a

hormone 

(17, 20-lyase)

O OH 

17b -HSOR 
(17b -hydroxysteroid 
oxidoreductase)


HO HO 
Estrone Estradiol 

Granulosa Corpus luteum 

n FIG. 26. Principal pathways of steroid hormone biosynthesis in the human ovary. Although each cell type of the ovary contains 
the complete enzyme complement required for the formation of estradiol from cholesterol, the amounts of the various 
enzymes, and consequently the predominant hormones formed, differ among the cell types. The major enzyme complement for 
the corpus luteum, theca, and granulosa cells are shown by the brackets; as a consequence, these cells produce predominantly 
progesterone and 17a -hydroxyprogesterone (corpus luteum), androgen (theca), and estrogen (granulosa). The major sites of 
action of LH and FSH in mediating this pathway are shown by the horizontal arrows. The dotted line emphasizes that the 
metabolism of 17a -hydroxyprogesterone is limited in the human ovary. (Reproduced, with permission, from Carr BR. Disorders of 
the ovary and female reproductive tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen PR, eds. Williams textbook of 
endocrinology, 8th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1992:733–798) 
and a 56-amino acid peptide termed GnRH-associated hypogonadotropic hypogonadism because of absent or 
peptide. When GnRH is released into the circulation, it is deficient gonadotropin secretion. Embryologic studies 
degraded rapidly, with a half-life of 2–4 minutes. have shown that GnRH neurons originally develop in the 

The physiologic importance of the GnRH-containing epithelium of the olfactory placode, migrate across the 
neurons is apparent from observations that specific cribriform plate, enter the forebrain with the nervus teranatomic 
lesions within the arcuate nucleus result in minalis and vomeronasal nerves, travel medially to the 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

olfactory bulbs, and eventually enter the septal–preoptic 
area of the hypothalamus. Gene defects have been found 
in the neural cell adhesion proteins that facilitate this neuronal 
migration. The result is absence of GnRH neurons 
in the hypothalamus and the olfactory bulbs, causing 
hypogonadotropic hypogonadism and anosmia 
(Kallmann’s syndrome). In Kallmann’s syndrome, the 
pituitary gland is usually normal, and treatment with 
exogenous pulsatile GnRH can result in normal gonadal 
function and ovulation. Other neurologic abnormalities 
may be present in some patients, including cerebellar 
ataxia, nerve deafness, color blindness, and cleft lip and 
cleft palate. Abnormalities of thirst and vasopressin 
release also may occur. Thus, the absence of these migration 
facilitation proteins may cause other problems of 
neuronal differentiation. The gene defect resulting in loss 
of this adhesion molecule has been localized to Xp22.3 in 
the X-linked form, with the locus being termed KALIG-1 
(Kallmann’s syndrome interval gene 1) (6). 

Classic neurotransmitters, including norepinephrine, 
dopamine, and serotonin, as well as more recently defined 
transmitters including endogenous opiates and 
prostaglandins, appear to influence secretion of GnRH 
from the hypothalamus. Norepinephrine appears to stimulate 
GnRH release, whereas dopamine and serotonin probably 
exert inhibitory effects (7). Endogenous opioids 
inhibit hypothalamic secretion of GnRH. Corticotropinreleasing 
hormone also appears capable of suppressing 
GnRH secretion and may be part of the reason for the 
association of stress and hypothalamic amenorrhea in 
some women. In addition, both estrogens and androgens 
bind to cells within the hypothalamus and anterior pituitary, 
and progestins bind to cells within the hypothalamus, 
apparently to modulate GnRH release. The GnRH 
secreted in the arcuate nucleus is transported in high concentrations 
to the anterior pituitary via the pituitary portal 
vascular system. Because of the rapidity with which 
GnRH is degraded, as well as its dilution within the circulation, 
peripheral levels of GnRH are extremely low and 
do not reflect hypothalamic–pituitary interaction accurately. 
Very high levels of GnRH may be present in the portal 
circulation when peripheral levels are undetectable. 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone binds to specific 
receptors located on the cell membranes of pituitary 
gonadotropes. When these receptors are activated by 
GnRH, second messengers (which almost certainly 
include phospholipids and calcium and may include protein 
kinase C and cAMP/protein kinase A) result in rapid 
release of LH and FSH. 

Both LH and FSH are secreted in a pulsatile manner. 
Based on the observation that the pulses of gonadotropin 
coincide with the coordinated depolarization of many 
arcuate neurons, it appears that the pulse generator for the 
regulation of the reproductive system resides within the 
arcuate nucleus. In women, the average frequency with 
which GnRH is released, based on measurements of LH 
secretion, varies from every 60 minutes in the follicular 

phase of the menstrual cycle to every 4 hours during the 
midluteal phase. Presumably, it is the nearby neuronal 
systems and gonadal steroids that modify the pulsatile 
release of GnRH. 

With constant exposure to high doses of GnRH (ie, 
nonpulsatile), LH and FSH levels initially increase and 
then begin to decrease progressively over time. This 
biphasic response ultimately results in hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism, with markedly reduced LH and FSH 
secretion, decreased gonadal steroid secretion, and in 
effect, medical castration. 

Two separate mechanisms are believed to play roles in 
this biphasic gonadotropin response: desensitization and 
down-regulation. Desensitization refers to the uncoupling 
of the activated GnRH-receptor–binding complex from 
intracellular events that are normally set in motion after 
receptor binding. Down-regulation refers to a decrease in 
the number of unoccupied GnRH receptors. After GnRH 
binding, internalization of GnRH-receptor complexes leads 
to a decrease in the number of receptors. Continuous exposure 
to high doses of GnRH does not allow adequate 
replenishment of unoccupied receptors on the cell surface. 
Thus, continuous exposure to GnRH will lead to a dosedependent 
reduction in the number of unoccupied GnRH 
receptors because of 1) increased receptor occupancy 
(accounting for perhaps two thirds of the reduction in 
GnRH receptors) and 2) receptor loss. Despite the high percentage 
of occupied receptors, pituitary gonadotropin content 
decreases, suggesting that the occupied GnRH 
receptors are functionally uncoupled from the intracellular 
mechanisms for normal hormone synthesis and release. 
Although desensitization is not understood, it is presumed 
that conformational changes in the gonadotrope surface 
membrane occur. Down-regulation and desensitization may 
represent the mechanisms by which pituitary gonadotropes 
protect themselves from excessive stimulation. 

Down-regulation and desensitization also occur with 
administration of long-acting synthetic GnRH agonists. 
Thus, women’s disorders that depend on ovarian steroid 
secretion, including anovulatory bleeding, endometriosis, 
dysmenorrhea, hirsutism, precocious puberty, premenstrual 
syndrome, and uterine leiomyomata, can be treated 
with GnRH agonists. Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
analogues are approved for only a few of their possible 
uses. Because the profound hypoestrogenism associated 
with treatment with these analogues results in accelerated 
bone loss, these drugs currently are approved for use for 
only 6 continuous months in any given individual. 
Studies are under way to determine whether the addition 
of various agents, such as progestins alone or with estro-
gen or bisphosphonates (ie, add-back therapy), may prevent 
or reduce this bone loss. 

Long-acting agonists initially stimulate gonadotropin 
secretion for perhaps 1–2 weeks before down-regulation 
leads to very low levels of LH and FSH. Because of the 
early stimulatory effects of GnRH agonists, GnRH antagonists 
were developed and are currently available for 


treatment in cycles of in vitro fertilization. Antagonists 
reduce the number of ampules of gonadotropins and prevent 
LH surges, and pregnancy rates are similar to those 
with agonists (8). 

Pulsatile GnRH can be used to induce ovulation in 
women with an intact pituitary gland. Human chorionic 
gonadotropin can be administered to support the corpus 
luteum after ovulation. Alternatively, the administration of 
GnRH can be continued. Hyperstimulation is uncommon 
with GnRH. As might be expected, it is highly effective in 
women with hypothalamic amenorrhea, in whom pulsatile 
secretion of GnRH is diminished. Even in such amenorrheic 
women, however, pregnancy rates have been no 
greater than those achieved with menotropin therapy. 

GONADOTROPIN REGULATION 
OF THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

Follicular Phase 

Initiation of follicular growth, or folliculogenesis, begins 
during the last few days of the luteal phase of the previous 
menstrual cycle and ends with ovulation. During this 
period, plasma progesterone and estrogen levels decline 
because of the demise of the corpus luteum, and FSH levels 
rise. The rise in FSH in the late luteal phase is also 
associated with a dramatic fall in the level of inhibin A 
and inhibin B (Fig. 27) (9). The rise in FSH initiates the 
development of follicles and the next menstrual cycle. 
Ovulation probably occurs randomly during consecutive 
cycles, not preferentially to one ovary or the other. 

After the onset of menses, development of the follicle 
continues, but FSH levels decline as a result of the negative 
feedback of estrogens and the rise of inhibin secreted 
by the developing follicle. The decline in FSH—together 

Days relative to midcycle LH peak 
Inhibin B (pg/mL)
Inhibin A (pg/mL) 
-14 -7 0 7 14 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
n FIG. 27. Major elevations of mean circulating concentrations 
of inhibin B (follicular phase) and inhibin A (luteal 
phase) during the menstrual cycle. Time zero represents midcycle 
luteinizing hormone surge. (Drawing based on data 
from Groome NP, Illingworth PJ, O’Brien M, et al. 
Measurement of dimeric inhibin B through the human menstrual 
cycle. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 81:1401–1405, 1996. 
Adapted by Yen SSC. The human menstrual cycle. In: Yen 
SSC, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
Physiology, pathophysiology and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:191–217) 
THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

with secretion by the growing follicle of additional 
intraovarian protein hormones, which include growth factors, 
cytokines, and a variety of other protein hormones 
(as discussed earlier)—is believed to promote steroidogenesis 
favoring the dominant follicle, while possibly 
inhibiting adjacent follicles from growing. 

Three specific stages have been described in the development 
of a dominant follicle. The first stage is recruitment. 
From a pool of nonproliferating follicles a cohort 
of follicles are recruited during days 1–4 of the menstrual 
cycle in response to FSH. Once this stage is attained, 
the recruited follicles must either continue on to ovulate 
or undergo atresia. The following stage is selection, and 
it occurs when one follicle ovulates and the others undergo 
atresia. This stage occurs around days 5 and 7 of the 
menstrual cycle. In the final stage of development—dominance—
the dominant follicle grows and continues to 
suppress other ovarian follicles. This stage occurs 
between days 8 and 12 of the cycle and ends at the time 
of ovulation, ranging from days 13 to 15 (10). 

During the proliferative phase, estrogen levels rise 
parallel to the growth of the follicle and the number of 
granulosa cells. The granulosa cells are the exclusive 
source of FSH receptors. The increase of FSH in the late 
luteal phase of the previous cycle leads to an increase in 
the number of FSH receptors and, subsequently, to an 
increase in estradiol secretion by the granulosa cells. The 
increase in FSH receptors appears to reflect an increase in 
the number of granulosa cells rather than an increase in 
FSH receptors per cell. The increase in estradiol formation 
appears to increase the number of estradiol receptors. 
Follicle-stimulating hormone also induces the enzyme 
aromatase and, in the presence of estradiol, the formation 
of LH receptors on granulosa cells. After the appearance 
of LH receptors, the preovulatory granulosa cells begin to 
secrete small quantities of progesterone. The preovulatory 
secretion of progesterone, although somewhat limited, 
is believed to exert positive feedback on the estrogenprimed 
pituitary to cause a release or help augment the 
release of LH. In addition, during the late follicular phase, 
LH stimulates thecal cell production of androgens (particularly 
androstenedione), which are then transferred to the 
adjacent follicles, where they are aromatized to estrone by 
the follicles and, in the presence of 17b -hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 1, converted to estradiol. This 
sequence is believed to be the primary pathway of formation 
of estradiol in the human ovary (11). 

During the preantral and early antral follicular growth, 
follicles produce more androgens than estrogens. This 
situation may be due to the presence of the enzyme 
5a -reductase, which converts testosterone to the nonaromatizable 
androgen dihydrotestosterone. Larger antral 
follicles, particularly the dominant follicle with its larger 
quantity of aromatase, secrete more estrogens. This 
change in the microenvironment and balance of androgens 
and estrogens of the ovary appears to be important 
in the selection of the dominant follicle. The process of 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

atresia in smaller follicles may be due to an excess 
amount of dihydrotestosterone, which appears to inhibit 
aromatization. 

The fluid bathing the granulosa cells contains a large 
number of ovarian steroids and other protein hormones. 
In large follicles (>8 mm in diameter), the FSH, estrogen, 
and progesterone levels in follicular fluid are extremely 
high. (In small follicles, the levels of androgens are higher 
than they are in large follicles and in the follicular 
fluid.) These observations support the hypothesis of 
microenvironmental control of follicular growth by hormones 
in the follicular fluid. 

Gonadotropin secretion varies during the menstrual 
cycle. As discussed earlier, FSH levels, which are elevated 
in the early part of the follicular phase, decline until 
just before ovulation. In contrast, LH levels are low in the 
first part of the follicular phase. In the presence of 
increased estrogen; however, LH secretion begins to 
increase by the midfollicular phase as a result of positive 
feedback from estrogen. Secretion of LH in response to 
LH-releasing hormone increases markedly from the early 
to the late follicular phase. The frequency of spontaneous 
LH pulses varies during the menstrual cycle. During the 
early part of the cycle, LH pulses appear to be of constant 
amplitude and occur in frequencies of around 60–90 
minutes. During the late follicular phase, just before the 
midcycle surge of LH, the LH pulse frequency increases, 
and LH amplitude may also increase (Fig. 28) (11). 

Ovulation 

The onset of the LH surge resulting from increasing secretion 
of estrogen by preovulatory follicles is a relatively 
precise predictor of the time of ovulation, occurring some 
34–36 hours before the release of the ovum from the follicle. 
The peak of LH secretion occurs 10–12 hours before 
ovulation. The LH surge stimulates the resumption of the 
meiosis process in the ovum with the release of the first 
polar body. Luteinization of the granulosa cells increases 
progesterone secretion via another messenger within the 
follicle, cAMP. Spontaneous luteinization occurs in the 
absence of LH when granulosa cells are removed from the 
follicle and cultured. This finding has led to the hypotheses 
that oocyte maturation inhibitor or luteinization 
inhibitor prevents ovulation, and that the effects of these 
factors are overcome at the time of ovulation (12). 

Just before ovulation, the follicle becomes vascularized. 
At this time there appears to be a protrusion of the 
follicular wall (the stigma), which develops and is the site 
of rupture with release of the oocyte–cumulus complex. 
The precise mechanism of follicular rupture is complex. 
It appears that progesterone and cAMP augment or activate 
proteolytic enzymes (eg, collagenase and plasmin) 
that digest the collagen in the follicular wall, resulting in 
distensibility and thinning just before ovum release. 
There is no evidence that an increase in follicular pressure 
causes follicular rupture, but measurements have not 
been obtained at the precise instance of rupture of the fol


licle. Prostaglandins and other related substances reach a 
peak concentration in follicular fluid just before ovulation. 
These substances are believed to be involved in the 
rupture of the follicle, possibly by stimulating smooth 
muscle contraction and thereby aiding the extrusion of 
the oocyte–cumulus mass. It is known that women treated 
with prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors often retain 
the ovum, fail to ovulate, and develop a “luteinized 
unruptured follicle.” 

Immediately before the LH peak, estradiol levels in 
the plasma fall rapidly. The fall in LH may be due to 
down-regulation of its own receptors or to direct inhibition 
by an increase in progesterone secretion. The ovulatory 
peak of FSH, which is thought to be stimulated by 
progesterone, may have a variety of functions, including 
stimulating the plasminogen activator and increasing 
granulosa cell receptors (13). The postovulatory fall in 
LH could be due to the loss of positive feedback caused 
by a decline in estrogen levels or by the depletion of LH 
content in the pituitary. 

Luteal Phase 

During the preovulatory surge of LH, a series of morphologic 
and chemical changes (a process referred to as 
luteinization) occur in the cells of the granulosa and 
theca. During luteinization, these cells undergo hypertrophy 
and exhibit increased size and synthesis of hormones 
under LH stimulation. After ovulation, the basement 
membrane separating the granulosa from the theca breaks 
down, and blood vessels and capillaries invade the granulosa 
cells. The growth of blood vessels may be due to a 
variety of described angiogenic factors expressed in the 
developing corpus luteum. 

The morphologic change of the corpus luteum, or yellow 
body, has been well characterized. It includes the 
proliferation of granulosa cells, which occurs the day 
after ovulation, followed by capillary invasion of the 
granulosa cells, which is initiated on day 2 after ovulation; 
the capillaries reach the central cavity by day 4. 
Hemorrhage into the central cavity can occur with the 
formation of a fibrin clot, and fibroblasts appear in the 
central cavity by day 5. Maximum capillary dilation and 
blood flow is obtained by day 7 or 8. During its development, 
the corpus luteum may secrete as much as 40 mg of 
progesterone per day. Considering its small size, the corpus 
luteum is the most active steroidogenic tissue in 
humans. The cells that make up the corpus luteum 
are derived from the granulosa and theca cells, which 
make up the follicle. The granulosa cells become 
granulosa–lutein cells (or large cells), and the theca cells 
are transformed into theca–lutein cells (small cells). The 
so-called K cells, scattered throughout the corpus luteum, 
are believed to be due to macrophages. In the absence of 
pregnancy, the corpus luteum undergoes degeneration. 
This process, termed luteolysis, is first apparent by day 8 
after ovulation. During luteolysis the granulosa–lutein 
cells shrink, and the theca cells become more prominent. 


THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

Progesterone (P) (ng/mL)
Estradiol (E2 ) (pg/mL) (mlU/mL) 
Higher centers 
Hypothalamus 
Gonadotropins 
Maturing follicle 
Endometrium 
60 
40 
20 
10 
200 
100 
10 
5 
0 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 
Days 
Corpus luteumOvulation 
FSH 
LH 
Anterior 
pituitary 
n FIG. 28. Diagrammatic representation of events of pituitary, ovarian, and menstrual cycles. Note that the plasma estradiol 
level peaks on approximately day 12, plasma follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) levels peak on 
approximately day 13, and ovulation occurs on approximately day 14. (Couchman GM, Hammond CB. Physiology of reproduction. 
In: Scott JR, DiSaia PJ, Hammond CB, Spellacy WN, eds. Danforth’s obstetrics and gynecology. 7th ed. Philadelphia: 
JB Lippincott, 1994:30) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Later, both cell types undergo cell death, possibly involving 
the process of apoptosis in some species. The remaining 
corpus luteum tissue is composed of a dense 
connective tissue and is termed the corpus albicans. 

The regulation of steroid hormone synthesis by the corpus 
luteum involves a number of factors. These include 
the number of granulosa–lutein cells, the number of LH 
and FSH receptors, and the availability of substrate. As 
previously discussed, the granulosa cells of the follicle are 
avascular. Thus, they do not have ready access to LDL. 
The levels of LDL in the granulosa cells—and in follicular 
fluid—are very low. As a result, the granulosa cells have 
a limited ability to form progesterone. However, after ovulation, 
extensive vascularization of the follicle takes place, 
providing increased levels of cholesterol to the luteinized 
granulosa cells. The increased availability of LDL to the 
granulosa–lutein cells provides the substrate for these cells 
to secrete increased quantities of progesterone. Treatment 
of corpus luteum tissue in vitro with hCG and LH increases 
the number of LDL receptors and enhances progesterone 
secretion. In addition, hCG increases the LDL 
receptor mRNA in granulosa cells. Binding sites for LH 
and hCG are maximal during this period. Women with 
extremely low levels of LDL cholesterol exhibit low progesterone 
secretion during the luteal phase (14). 

The pattern of hormone secretion by the corpus luteum 
is different from that of the follicle. After ovulation, estro-
gen levels decrease. This decrease is followed by a secondary 
rise that reaches a peak at the midluteal phase, 
which is followed by a secondary decrease toward the end 
of the menstrual cycle. The rise in estradiol parallels the pattern 
of progesterone secretion. Studies of the ovarian 
venous blood draining the corpus luteum suggest that the 
corpus luteum is the source of hormone secretion during the 
luteal phase. The role of LH as a primary luteotropic agent 
was first established in studies of hypophysectomized 
women. In these women, after induction of ovulation, the 
length of the luteal phase and the amount of progesterone 
secreted were entirely dependent on repeated injections of 
LH. The administration of LH or hCG during the luteal 
phase can extend the functional life span of the corpus 
luteum and the secretion of progesterone for up to 2 weeks. 

The secretion of progesterone during the luteal phase 
is episodic, and the pulses of LH correspond with pulses 
of progesterone. The frequency and amplitude of LH 
secretion during the luteal phase regulate the luteal phase 
function. A reduction in FSH during the follicular phase, 
however, is associated with a shortened luteal phase, 
smaller corpora luteum, and reduced responses of dispersed 
corpus luteum cells in vitro. In addition, continued 
administration of LH-releasing hormone analogues during 
either the follicular phase or the luteal phase reduces 
the life span of the corpus luteum. A reduction in LH 
concentration, pulse frequency, and pulse amplitude also 
reduces the length of the luteal phase. The corpus luteum 
of primates, however, can recover from a transient withdrawal 
of LH, depending on the age of the corpus luteum. 
Progesterone secretion in the luteal phase is correlated 

with the number of LH and hCG receptors and basal 
activity of adenylate cyclase. 

The role of other luteotropic factors in women is less 
clear. Prolactin does not appear to be luteotropic in women 
(in contrast to what happens in rats); however, defective 
luteal function occurs when prolactin levels are either elevated 
or significantly suppressed by bromocriptine, 
although the mechanism is not understood. In addition, 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) appears to be inhibitory to granulosa 
cells in vitro. The secretion of relaxin, inhibin, and 
oxytocin by the human corpus luteum may modulate corpus 
luteum function. It appears not to play a role in the 
maintenance of early pregnancy, however, because agonadal 
women treated with estrogen and progesterone alone 
have carried pregnancy to term after donor embryo transfer. 

In the absence of pregnancy, the function of the corpus 
luteum rapidly declines 9–11 days after ovulation, but the 
mechanism of luteolysis remains unclear. Both PGF2 and 
exogenous estrogens appear to be luteolytic in nonhuman 
primates, as well as in women. However, antiestrogens 
and aromatase inhibitors do not decrease the length of the 
luteal phase or alter corpus luteum function. In addition, 
the fact that estrogen receptors are absent in the luteal 
cells of women indicates that estrogen does not play a 
role in luteal regression. 

STEROID HORMONE EFFECTS 
ON THE FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE 
TRACT 

Fluctuations in estrogen and progesterone levels produce 
striking effects on the reproductive tract. Characteristic 
changes occur in the endometrium during the menstrual 
cycle, which makes dating of the endometrium possible 
(Video 1; Images 5–30) (15). The proliferative phase is 
not dated as easily as the luteal phase because it involves 
only an increase in growth of the endometrium, primarily 
of the glands. The glands are narrow and tubular, and 
mitosis and pseudostratification are present. After ovulation, 
which occurs on day 14, changes in the endometrium 
occur in a specific order. On cycle day 16, glycogen accumulates 
in the basal portion of the glandular epithelium, 
resulting in pseudostratification and subnuclear vacuoles. 
This is the first sign of ovulation that can be attributed to 
the cycle day. On day 17, the glands become more tortuous 
and dilated. By day 18, the vacuoles and epithelium 
are smaller and often are located beside the nuclei, and 
glycogen is present in the apex of the cells. On day 19, 
transluminal secretion is seen, and pseudostratification 
and vacuolation have entirely disappeared. On cycle days 
21 and 22, the endometrial stroma becomes edematous. 
On day 23, stromal cells surrounding the spiral arterioles 
begin to enlarge, and stromal mitosis becomes apparent. 
Day 24 is characterized by the appearance of predecidual 
cells surrounded by spiral arterioles and numerous stromal 
mitoses. By day 25, predecidual cells begin to differentiate 
under the surface epithelium. By day 27, the upper 
portion of the endometrial stroma appears to be a solid 


sheet of well-differentiated decidua-like cells. Differentiation 
of the decidua is accompanied by a marked increase in 
lymphocytic infiltration. Menstruation begins on day 28. 

The breakdown of the endometrium begins when the 
absence of conception is associated with the decline in corpus 
luteum, followed by declines in plasma estrogens and 
progesterones. These hormonal changes cause endometrial 
effects, including vascular changes, tissue death, and finally 
menstruation. With a reduction and shrinkage of the 
height of the endometrium, blood flow through the spiral 
arterioles decreases, and vasodilation ensues. The spiral 
vessels feeding the endometrium undergo rhythmic vasoconstriction 
and vasodilation. These responses lead to disruption 
of the blood vessels and, eventually, to endometrial 
ischemia and cell death. Menstruation ensues and consists 
of blood and desquamated superficial endometrial tissue. 
The average duration of the menstrual flow is 4–6 days, 
and the average amount of menstrual blood lost in women 
is 30 mL. After resumption of the estrogen secretion by the 
ovarian follicles, endometrial healing leads to prolonged 
vasoconstriction and formation of a fibrin clot over the 
denuded endometrial cells. 

(If a pregnancy should occur, the continuing secretion 
of progesterone carries through the decidual changes seen 
in the later portion of the cycle, causing the typical Arias-
Stella reaction seen in Image 31.) 

PREMENSTRUAL SYNDROME 

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS) refers to the cyclic and 
repetitive emergence, during the luteal phase of the menstrual 
cycle, of distressing physical, psychologic, and 
behavioral changes that disappear by the end of the menstrual 
flow (16). Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
(PMDD), as defined by the American Psychiatric 
Association in its Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, 4th edition, text revision, refers to a 
moderate to severe form of PMS characterized by multiple 
symptoms that impair lifestyle (17). The criteria listed 
in Box C must be fulfilled in order for PMDD to be the 
diagnosis (18). PMS, as recently defined in the 10th revision 
of the International Classification of Diseases (ICD10), 
is a much less stringent diagnosis than PMDD (Box 
C) (19). The ICD-10 diagnostic criteria also are more 
relaxed than criteria used in the 1980s and early 1990s to 
diagnose PMS (19), which were characterized by the 
cyclic recurrence of symptoms of moderate or greater 
severity with adverse impact on quality of life (20). In 
both PMDD and PMS, symptoms follow the proper temporal 
relationship to the menstrual cycle. The diagnosis of 
PMDD additionally requires prospective documentation 
of symptoms that are severe enough to interfere with some 
aspect of family, career, social, or job-related activities. 

Symptoms 

More than 150 symptoms have been attributed to PMS. 
Symptoms can be subcategorized into psychologic symp-

THE OVARY AND THE MENSTRUAL CYCLE 

toms, physical symptoms, and behavioral symptoms 
(Table 3). Ninety percent of all women report experiencing 
predictable mood changes or physical symptoms 
prior to the onset of their menses. The large majority 
(50% or more) experience only mild symptoms that do 
not interfere with quality of life. Mild symptoms during 
the week preceding menstruation are traditionally called 
moliminal or premenstrual symptoms; however, in ICD10, 
they may meet the diagnosis of PMS. Women with 
mild moliminal symptoms generally have not been 
included in research trials for the treatment of PMS (20). 

In women of reproductive age, 20–40% have premenstrual 
symptoms that are severe enough to interfere 
to some degree with normal activities. The term PMS 
applies when these symptoms occur with the proper 
temporal relationship to menstruation. Many patients 
with moderate PMS also meet criteria for PMDD. As 
many as 3–5% of women experience symptoms severe 
enough to incapacitate them for one or several days per 
month. Although the average age at onset of symptoms is 
26 years, symptoms usually are present for many years 
before a woman seeks medical attention. The incidence of 
PMS and PMDD is similar in adolescent females and 
adult women. 

Women who report premenstrual symptoms should 
be evaluated in a systematic manner (20). A medical and 
psychiatric history must be obtained, and underlying 
psychiatric disorders need to be identified. Many psychiatric 
disorders can be exacerbated premenstrually. 
Forty percent to 60% of women who are referred or who 
seek treatment for PMS have generalized psychiatric 
disorders, not PMS. In addition, 10% of women seeking 
PMS care have personality disorders (21). It is prudent 
to consider referral for formal mental health evaluation. 
Both PMS and PMDD may coexist with generalized 
medical problems, such as chronic fatigue syndrome or 
irritable bowel syndrome, and occasionally are superimposed 
on chronic affective disorders. A psychosocial history 
should try to identify past or present history of 
abuse, sexual trauma, and thoughts of suicide. Work, 
sleep, diet, lifestyle, and major stressors also need to be 
evaluated, as well as current medications, substance abuse 
(eg, caffeine, alcohol, smoking, and laxatives), and results 
of prior treatments. 

Frequently there is a large discrepancy between 
recalled, retrospective data and information obtained 
prospectively throughout the menstrual cycle. The suspicion 
of PMS and PMDD is confirmed or refuted with 
some form of daily symptom reporting. Symptom calendars 
and daily rating scales (see Fig. 29) are therefore the 
most important tool for diagnosing PMS. The patient 
records symptoms and their severity daily, allowing the 
physician to document the temporal and severity components 
of the symptom complex. A provisional diagnosis 
may be made after 1 month, and a diagnosis is confirmed 
after 2 months. The main feature discriminating PMS 
from psychiatric disorders is the presence of one rela



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tively symptom-free week in the follicular phase of every 
cycle. The major differential diagnosis for PMS is therefore 
a chronic affective illness that demonstrates premenstrual 
worsening of symptoms, the so-called premenstrual 
magnification or exacerbation of the underlying mood 
disorder. Symptom calendars used in conjunction with 

basal body temperature allow PMS to be diagnosed after 
hysterectomy if the ovaries were preserved. 

Gonadal steroid effects alone cannot explain PMS; it is 
due to the complex, yet poorly understood, interaction of 
reproductive endocrine factors, brain neurochemistry, and 
underlying vulnerability factors (20). Ovulation is essential 

BOX C 
Diagnosis of Premenstrual Dysphoric Disorder and Premenstrual Syndrome 

Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 

1. At least five of the following symptoms, with at least one being a core symptom, are present a week before menses and remit a 
few days after the onset of menses: 
Depressed mood or dysphoria (core symptom) Marked lack of energy 
Anxiety or tension (core symptom) Marked change in appetite, overeating, or food cravings 
Affective lability (core symptom) Hypersomnia or insomnia 
Irritability (core symptom) Feeling overwhelmed 
Decreased interest in usual activities Other physical symptoms (eg, breast tenderness, bloating, 
Concentration difficulties headache, joint or muscle pain) 

2. 
Symptoms must interfere with work, school, usual activities, or relationships. 
3. 
Symptoms must not merely be an exacerbation of another disorder. 
4. 
Criteria 1, 2, and 3 must be confirmed by prospective daily ratings for at least two cycles. 
Premenstrual syndrome 

1. 
Symptoms do not meet DSM-IV-TR criteria for premenstrual dysphoric disorder but do meet ICD-10 criteria for premenstrual 
syndrome. 
2. 
Symptoms occur only in the luteal phase, peak shortly before menses, and cease with menstrual flow or soon after. 
3. 
One or more of the following symptoms are present: 
Aches and pains

Mild psychologic discomfort 

Poor concentration

Bloating and weight gain 

Sleep disturbance

Breast tenderness 

Change in appetite

Swelling of hands and feet 

4. Functional impairment is not required. 
Abbreviations: DSM-IV-TR indicates Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th edition; ICD-10, International Classification of 
Diseases, 10th revision. 

Source: American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders. 4th ed, text revision. Washington, DC: APA, 2000 
and World Health Organization. Mental and behavioural disorders. In: International classification of diseases and related health problems. 10th rev. 
Vol. 1. Geneva: WHO, 1992:311–387 

n TABLE 3. Common Symptoms of Premenstrual Syndrome 
Type Symptoms 
Psychologic Anxiety, irritability, labile moods, depression, anger, sadness, crying easily, nervous tension 
Physical Headaches, breast tenderness, bloating, swelling of the extremities, skin problems, aches, 
gastrointestinal symptoms, abdominal pain 
Behavioral Increased appetite, food cravings, decreased motivation, decreased concentration and efficiency, 
avoidance of activities, changes in libido, increased nap taking, social isolation 


Name: Month: 

Day of month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 
Irritability 
Anxiety 
Nervous tension 
Mood swings 
Anger/rage 
Violent behavior 
Depression 
Crying easily 
Despondency 
Overemotionality 
Fatigue 
Skin problems 
Swelling (hands, feet) 
Breast tenderness 
Abdominal bloating 
Headaches 
Migraine headaches 
Abdominal cramps 
General aches/pains 
Hot flushes 
Nausea 
Gastrointestinal problems 
Food cravings 
Insomnia 
Increased naps 
Clumsiness 
Confusion 
Inability to concentrate 
Forgetfulness 
Avoidance of activities 
Weight 
BBT 
Scale: 
No symptom 0 
Mild 1 
Moderate 2 
Severe 3 
Menstrual flow M 
Therapy 

n FIG. 29. Premenstrual syndrome symptom diary. 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

for the expression of PMS. Many mono-etiologic theories 
have been proposed and dispelled, including simple hormonal 
excesses or deficiencies. Luteal phase reductions in 
serotonin activity and endogenous opioid peptide activity 
are the biologic factors that have the strongest association 
with PMS. Abnormalities in magnesium, zinc, and circadian 
rhythms also have been associated with it. Diets high 
in fat, salts, sugar, and caffeine all have been linked to 
PMS, with high-fat diets correlating best with dysphoric 
mood. Menorrhagia, pelvic pain, and genetic predisposition 
also may play a role in PMS. 

Therapy 

The goal of PMS therapy is to reduce the number of 
affected days or the severity of symptoms or both, as well 
as to improve the level of psychosocial functioning. 
Reducing moliminal symptomatology is a realistic goal 
for most patients. Measures as simple as education, support, 
stress reduction, and exercise may have a dramatic 
impact on patients with moderate PMS. The physician 
should encourage regular sleep habits to help entrain circadian 
rhythms; meals with a good balance of protein, 
fiber, and complex carbohydrates and that are low in fat, 
salt, and simple sugars also can help. A beverage rich in 
carbohydrates, vitamins, and minerals has been developed 
that stimulates increased serotonin levels and transiently 
reduces PMS symptoms (22). Caffeine and 
alcohol should be limited whenever possible. Calcium 
supplementation of 1,200 mg daily may help reduce 
physical and emotional symptoms associated with PMS 
(23). Magnesium supplementation may help reduce 
water retention, abdominal bloating, breast tenderness, 
and negative affect. Most studies fail to document clinical 
improvement with vitamin B6 (pyridoxine). 

Stress appears to exacerbate premenstrual complaints. 
Relaxation techniques and cognitive behavioral treatments 
generally are used as adjuncts to other treatments; 
evidence for their benefit, however, is conflicting (24), 
Randomized clinical trials have found that moderate aerobic 
exercise improves PMS symptoms. Evening brightlight 
therapy and partial sleep deprivation also may be of 
benefit. Many patients with mild PMS and about a third 
of patients with moderate PMS or PMDD respond well to 
the self-help measures and lifestyle modifications 
described. 

Pharmacologic treatment is available for moderate to 
severe PMS symptoms and PMDD. Data from randomized 
clinical trials do not support the use of progesterone 
vaginal suppositories or orally administered progesterone 
as a primary treatment for PMS, a practice once common 
(24). Lack of data notwithstanding, because of its low 
incidence of adverse effects, orally administered progesterone 
may be tried empirically before trying other therapies 
that have high cost or significant adverse effects. 
Any long-term improvement in mood symptoms is likely 
to be due to the sedative properties of several metabolites 
of progesterone. 

Medical therapy may take a symptom-targeted 
approach or simply try to suppress ovulation (Table 4) 
(20). Results of controlled clinical trials suggest that 
either approach can help the majority of women. 
Physical symptoms such as pain and water retention may 
be managed by the luteal phase administration of nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs and diuretics, respectively. 
Diuretics are best reserved for women who have 
documented premenstrual gain in weight. Many women 
experience an improvement in mood and overall sense of 
well-being if distressing physical symptoms are relieved. 
Caution should be exercised when nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs are used in combination with diuretics 
because of the potential for renal toxicity. 

Psychotropic agents are effective for the emotional 
symptoms of PMS and PMDD. Alprazolam, a triazolobenzodiazepine, 
is the best-studied anxiolytic agent (25). 
Cyclic administration of low doses reduces symptoms of 
anxiety, depression, tension, and headaches. Buspirone 
is a nonbenzodiazepine anxiolytic that improves anxiety 
and irritability without sedation or dependency risk. 
Antidepressants of the selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor class have recently emerged as the primary treatment 
for PMDD and moderate to severe PMS (26). These 
agents demonstrate a consistent and significant improvement 
in mood, function, and overall symptoms in clinical 
trials (27). Although fluoxetine is the only selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitor currently approved by the FDA to 
treat PMDD, sertraline, citalopram, and paroxetine all 
have proven efficacy. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors generally are administered throughout the cycle, 
although evidence suggests that luteal phase administration 
also may be effective (28). They may be used with 
combination oral contraceptives (OCs), but generally not 
with anxiolytics. The tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine 
has been shown to improve irritability, dysphoria, 
and overall global assessment; however, adverse effects 
render clomipramine a second line to selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors and alprazolam (24). 

In the presence of severe symptoms, suppression of 
ovulation is the other effective treatment strategy. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonists are the most 
effective agents for eliminating psychologic and physical 
symptoms, although they are expensive (29). These substances 
induce a hypoestrogenic, anovulatory state that 
very effectively relieves PMS symptoms. Improvement 
may not be observed during the first treatment month 
because of the biphasic response in estrogen levels. 
Because long-term therapy is required for PMS, estrogen–
progestin replacement therapy is frequently added 
back to reduce the risk of osteoporosis and ameliorate the 
vasomotor flushes and vaginal dryness associated with 
therapy. Patients in whom PMS symptoms recur on hormonal 
add-back regimens require adjustment of the addback 
schedule, usually the progestogen component. 
Tibolone may be used as an add-back alternative to estrogen–
progestin therapy (30). 


n TABLE 4. Medications for Premenstrual Syndrome 
Medication Dosage Indication Main Adverse Effects 
NSAIDs Luteal phase administration Pain Gastrointestinal upset, rash 
Diuretics Luteal phase administration Fluid retention Dizziness, palpitations, weakness, excess diuresis, dehydration 
Alprazolam 0.25 mg daily to 0.25 mg four . 
times daily in the luteal phase 
Taper dosage during menstruation 
Anxiety, depression Sedation, abuse potential, tolerance, withdrawal seizures 
Buspirone 15–30 mg daily in the luteal phase Anxiety Dizziness, nausea, headache 
Fluoxetine* 10–20 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Anxiety, nervousness, insomnia, appetite suppression, nausea, 
weight loss, headache, sexual dysfunction 
Sertraline 50–100 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Paroxetine 10–30 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Citalopram 10–20 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Same as fluoxetine 
Clomipramine 25–75 mg daily or in the luteal 
phase only 
Mood symptoms Dry mouth, fatigue, sweating, vertigo, nausea, constipation, 
insomnia, appetite changes, sexual dysfunction 
Danazol 200–400 mg daily generally 
inhibits ovulation 
Suppression of ovulation Oiliness of the skin, weight gain, hair growth, acne, decreased 
breast size, masculinization of fetus 
GnRH agonists Leuprolide acetate: 3.75 mg monthly 
Goserelin acetate: 3.6 mg monthly 
Suppression of ovulation Vasomotor flushes, reduced breast size, headaches, vaginal 
dryness, arthralgias, loss of bone mineral content 
Transdermal estradiol 0.2 mg daily. 
Induce menses intermittently with 
progesterone or progestin 
Suppression of ovulation Bloating, breast tenderness, nausea, headaches, weight gain. 
Endometrial hyperplasia. 
Medroxyprogesterone 
acetate 
15–20 mg daily or 150 mg 
intramuscularly every 3 mon 
Suppression of ovulation Irregular bleeding, breast tenderness, headaches, depression, 
nausea 
Tibolone 2.5 mg daily as single agent or as 
add-back with GnRH agonist 
GnRH agonist add-back Acne, oiliness of skin 

Abbreviations: NSAIDs indicates nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs; GnRH, gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 
*Only drug approved for premenstrual dysphoric disorder by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Dosages of danazol sufficient to inhibit ovulation treat 
PMS and PMDD very effectively (31). Although dosages 
of 100 mg daily infrequently suppress ovulation, they are 
effective for alleviating premenstrual breast tenderness. 
Luteal phase (half-cycle) administration of 200 mg of 
danazol daily also helps premenstrual mastalgia. 
Danazol’s androgenic and hypoestrogenic adverse effects, 
however, may hinder long-term patient acceptance or 
compliance. Skin care must be emphasized, lipoprotein 
levels and liver function must be checked intermittently, 
and effective barrier contraception must be maintained. 

Very few controlled clinical trials have used oral contraceptive 
pills in PMS. However, after 30 years of 
widespread use, it is obvious that oral contraceptives are 
not a dramatic cure for PMS. In contrast, dosages of 
transdermal estradiol or medroxyprogesterone acetate 
sufficient to inhibit ovulation do lessen PMS. Women 
who are taking oral contraceptives when they present for 
PMS evaluation should discontinue their use to allow 
proper diagnosis. Tibolone has been shown to improve all 
PMS symptoms without significant adverse effects. 

A trial of medical therapy should precede surgical castration 
(18). After documenting baseline symptoms with 
a PMS diary for 1 month, a 3-month trial of a GnRH agonist 
or danazol should be instituted. The PMS symptoms 
should be documented during the trial of GnRH agonist 
alone during month 1, estrogen add-back therapy during 
month 2, and estrogen with progestogen add-back therapy 
during month 3. 

For the few women who require it, bilateral ovariectomy 
with hysterectomy is the surgical treatment of choice. 
Postoperative estrogen replacement generally does not 
result in symptom recurrence. Endometrial ablation and 
hysterectomy alone are not advised for women with PMS, 
although when performed for menorrhagia they may result 
in improvement of coexisting PMS. Symptom reduction 
appears to be related to the degree of improvement in menstrual 
flow. PMS clearly can persist after hysterectomy. 

References 

1. Yeh J, Adashi EY. 
The ovarian life cycle. In: Yen SSC, 
Jaffee RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1999:153–190 
2. Erickson GF, Magoffin DA, Dyer CA, Hofeditz C. The 
ovarian androgen producing cells: a review of structure/ 
function relationships. Endocr Rev 1985;6:371–399 
(button) 
3. Adashi EY. The ovarian follicular apparatus. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:18–40 
4. Carr BR, MacDonald PC, Simpson ER. The role of lipoproteins 
in the regulation of progesterone secretion by the 
human corpus luteum. Fertil Steril 1982;38:303–311 
(button) 
5. Brann DW, Mahesh VB. Excitatory amino acids: evidence 
for a role in the control of reproduction and anterior pituitary 
hormone secretion. Endocr Rev 1997;18:678–700 
(button) 
6. Yen SS. Neuroendocrinology of reproduction. In: Yen SS, 
Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: 
physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th 
ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:30–80 
7. Schwartz J. Intercellular communication in the anterior 
pituitary. Endocr Rev 2000;21:488–513 
( ) 
8. Felberbaum R, Diedrich K. Ovarian stimulation for in-vitro 
fertilization/intracytoplasmatic sperm injection with 
gonadotrophins and gonadotrophin-releasing hormone analogues: 
agonists and antagonists. Hum Reprod 1999;14: 
207–221 
( ) 
9. Groome NP, Illingworth PJ, O’Brien M, Pai R, Rodger PE, 
Mather JP, et al. Measurement of dimeric inhibin B 
throughout the human menstrual cycle. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1996;81:1401–1405 
( ) 
10. Hodgen GD. The dominant ovarian follicle. Fertil Steril 
1982;38:281–300 
( ) 
11. Carr BR. Disorders of the ovaries and female reproductive 
tract. In: Wilson JD, Foster DW, Kronenberg HM, Larsen 
PR, eds. Williams textbook of endocrinology. 9th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders Co, 1998:751–817 
12. Channing CP, 
Schaerf FW, Anderson LD, Tsafriri A. 
Ovarian follicular and luteal physiology. In: Greep RO, ed. 
International review of physiology: reproductive physiology 
III. Vol 22. Baltimore: University Park Press, 1980: 117–201 
13. Yen SS. The human menstrual cycle: neuroendocrine regulation. 
In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive 
endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical 
management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999: 
191–217 
14. Illingworth DR, Corbin DK, 
Kemp ED, Keenan EJ. 
Hormone changes during the menstrual cycle in abetalipoproteinemia: 
reduced luteal phase progesterone in a 
patient with homozygous hypobetalipoproteinemia. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 1982;79:6685–6689 
( ) 
15. Noyes RW, 
Hertig AT, Rock J. Dating the endometrial 
biopsy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1975;122:262–263 
( ) 
16. Association of Professors in Gynecology and Obstetrics. 
Premenstrual syndrome and premenstrual dysphoric disorder: 
scope, diagnosis, and treatment. Washington, DC: 
APGO, 1998 
17. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical 
manual of mental disorders: DSM-IV-TR. 4th ed rev. 
Washington, DC: APA, 2000:771–774 
18. Casson P, 
Hahn PM, Van Vugt DA, Reid RL. Lasting 
response to ovariectomy in severe intractable premenstrual 
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1990;162:99–105 
( ) 
19. World Health Organization. Mental and behavioural disorders. 
In: International statistical classification of diseases 
and related health problems. 10th rev. Vol 1. Geneva: WHO, 
1996:311–387 
20. Smith S, Schiff I, eds. Modern management of premenstrual 
syndrome. New York: WW Norton, 1993 
21. Gise LH, Lebovits AH, Paddison PL, Strain JJ. Issues in the 
identification of premenstrual syndromes. J Nerv Ment Dis 
1990;178:228–234 
( ) 

22. Sayegh R, Schiff I, Wurtman J, Spiers P, McDermott J, 
Wurtman R. The effect of a carbohydrate-rich beverage on 
mood, appetite, and cognitive function in women with premenstrual 
syndrome. Obstet Gynecol 1995;86:520–528 
(button) 
23. Thys-Jacobs S, Starkey P, Bernstein D, Tian J. Calcium carbonate 
and the premenstrual syndrome: effects on premenstrual 
and menstrual symptoms. Premenstrual Syndrome 
Study Group. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:444–452 
(button) 
24. Wyatt K, Dimmock P, 
O’Brien PM. Premenstrual syndrome. 
Clin Evid 2000;4:1121–1133 
25. Freeman EW, Rickels K, Sondheimer SJ, Polansky M. A 
double-blind trial of oral progesterone, alprazolam, and 
placebo in treatment of premenstrual syndrome. JAMA 
1995;274:51–57 
( ) 
26. 
Dimmock PW, Wyatt KM, Jones PW, O’Brien PM. Efficacy 
of selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors in premenstrual 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

phoria. Canadian Fluoxetine/Premenstrual Dysphoria 
Collaborative Study Group. N Engl J Med 1995;332: 
1529–1534 


( ) 
28. Freeman EW. Rickels K, Arredondo F, Kao LC, Pollack SE, 
Sondheimer SJ. Full- or half-cycle treatment of severe premenstrual 
syndrome with a serotonergic antidepressant. J 
Clin Psychopharmacol 1999;19:3–8 
( ) 
29. Brown CS, Ling FW, Andersen RN, Farmer RG, Arheart 
KL. Efficacy of depot leuprolide in premenstrual syndrome: 
effect of symptom severity and type in a controlled trial. 
Obstet Gynecol 1994;84:779–786 
( ) 
30. Di Carlo C, Palomba S, Tommaselli GA, Guida M, Di 
Spiezio Sardo A, Nappi C. Use of leuprolide acetate plus 
tibolone in the treatment of severe premenstrual syndrome. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:380–384 
( ) 
31. Halbreich U, Rojansky N, Palter S. Elimination of ovulation 
syndrome: a systematic review. Lancet 2000;356: 1131–1136 

and menstrual cyclicity (with danazol) improves dysphoric 
(button) 
premenstrual syndromes. Fertil Steril 1991;56:1066–1069

27. Steiner M, Steinberg S, Stewart D, Carter D, Berger C, Reid 
R, et al. Fluoxetine in the treatment of premenstrual dys-
(button) 
Disorders of Ovulation and Menstruation 


THE APPROACH TO THE PATIENT 
WITH ABNORMAL MENSTRUATION 

The major abnormalities of menstruation are amenorrhea 
and abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB). Because any abnormality 
of menstruation may be associated with pregnancy, 
pregnancy always must be ruled out as a cause. 

Amenorrhea 

Amenorrhea indicates failure of the hypothalamic–pituitary–
gonadal axis to induce the cyclic changes in the 
endometrium that normally result in menses, the absence 
of end organs, or obstruction of the outflow tract. It is 
important to remember that amenorrhea may result from 
an abnormality at any level of the reproductive tract. How 
long a woman must be amenorrheic before the condition 
is considered pathologic is arbitrary; however, any 
woman who has concerns about the absence of menses 
should be evaluated. 

Amenorrhea may be defined as 1) the absence of menstruation 
for 3 months or more in women with past 
menses (ie, secondary amenorrhea) or 2) the absence of 
menarche by age 16 years in girls who have never 
menstruated (ie, primary amenorrhea). Recent data suggest 
that pubertal development and, hence, menarche, 
continue to begin earlier in American girls (1). 
Consequently, some clinicians consider evaluating a girl 

with primary amenorrhea by age 14, particularly if 5 
years or more have passed since the first evidence of 
pubertal development. Women who menstruate fewer 
than nine times in any 12-month period should be evaluated 
in the same way as women with secondary amenorrhea. 
The separation of amenorrhea into primary and 
secondary categories is artificial and should not be considered 
in the evaluation of the amenorrheic woman. 
Likewise, the term postpill amenorrhea, which is sometimes 
used to refer to women who do not menstruate 
within 3 months of discontinuing the use of oral contraceptives, 
conveys nothing about the cause of the amenorrhea 
and should not alter the evaluation. 

Amenorrhea is not a diagnosis in itself but rather a 
sign of a disorder. Although amenorrhea is physiologic in 
prepubertal girls, during pregnancy, during lactation, and 
after menopause, it should be regarded as pathologic 
when it is present at any other time during the normal 
reproductive years. Pathologic amenorrhea has been estimated 
to occur in 5% of women of reproductive age. In 
general, menses occur at intervals of 28 days plus or 
minus 3 days in two thirds of women, with a normal 
range of 18–40 days. It is useful to think about three 
broad categories of amenorrhea (Box D): 

1. Amenorrhea with anatomic causes (including 
pregnancy), which almost always can be identified 
by physical examination alone 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX D 
Causes of Amenorrhea 

Anatomic causes 

Pregnancy 
Müllerian agenesis or dysgenesis (uterine, cervical, or vaginal) 
Imperforate hymen 
Cervical stenosis 
Various disorders of sexual differentiation 
Intrauterine adhesions (Asherman’s syndrome) 

Ovarian failure 

Cytogenetic abnormalities 
Structural alterations or absence of an X chromosome 
Trisomy X with or without mosaicism 

Enzymatic defects 
17a -Hydroxylase deficiency 
Galactosemia 

Defective gonadotropin secretion or action 
Gonadotropin receptor or postreceptor defects 
Secretion of biologically inactive gonadotropin 

Environmental insults 
Chemotherapeutic agents 
Ionizing irradiation 
Viral infection 
Surgical injury or extirpation 

Immune disturbances 
In association with other autoimmune disorders 
Isolated 
In association with congenital thymic dysplasia 

Idiopathic causes 

Chronic anovulation 

Hypothalamic causes 
Psychogenic, including pseudocyesis 
Exercise associated 
Associated with eating disorders, nutritional 
Secondary to systemic illness 
Hypothalamic neoplasms 

Pituitary causes 
Isolated gonadotropin deficiency (including Kallmann’s 
syndrome) 
Hypopituitarism 
Pituitary neoplasms, including microadenomas 

With inappropriate steroid feedback 
Functional androgen excess (polycystic ovary syndrome) 
Adrenal hyperplasia 
Neoplasms producing androgens or estrogens 
Neoplasms producing human chorionic gonadotropin 
(including trophoblastic disease) 
Liver and renal disease 
Obesity 

Other endocrine disorders 
Thyroid dysfunction 
Adrenal hyperfunction 

2. Amenorrhea caused by ovarian failure 
3. Amenorrhea due to chronic anovulation resulting 
from any of a number of endocrine disturbances 
It generally is impossible to distinguish between ovarian 
failure and chronic anovulation without laboratory testing. 

The most important aspect of the clinical evaluation is 
the history and physical examination. During the physical 
examination, special attention should be directed toward 
evaluating the following: 

• 
Body dimensions and habitus 
• 
Distribution and extent of terminal androgenstimulated 
body hair 
• 
Extent of breast development by Tanner staging, 
along with the presence or absence of breast 
secretions 
• 
External and internal genitalia, with emphasis on 
evidence of exposure to androgens and estro-
gens 
Administration of exogenous progestin is recommended 
frequently, both to aid in clinical diagnosis and to evaluate 
the biologic levels of estrogen. Either progesterone 
in oil (100–200 mg administered intramuscularly) or 
medroxyprogesterone acetate (5–10 mg administered 
orally every day for 5–10 days) can be given. Any genital 
bleeding within 10 days of the completion of these regimens 
is regarded as a positive test result. If the test result 
is negative (suggesting low levels of endogenous estro-
gen), then estrogen and progestin together (eg, oral conjugated 
estrogen, 2.5 mg daily for 25 days, together with 
oral medroxyprogesterone acetate, 5–10 mg for the last 
10 days of estrogen therapy) should induce bleeding if the 
endometrium is normal. Alternatively, a lower dose of 
conjugated estrogen, 1.25 mg daily, can be given for 
50–60 days, with oral medroxyprogesterone acetate 
added for the last 10 days. This test will determine with 
certainty if the outflow tract is intact. Although the test is 
sometimes helpful in evaluating amenorrheic women, the 
results are not always definitive. In fact, one survey found 
that almost half the women with so-called premature 
ovarian failure bleed in response to progestin (2). Thus, 
progestin challenge should never be used as the sole diagnostic 
test by which amenorrheic women are evaluated. 
Instead, basal concentrations of FSH, prolactin, and TSH 
should be determined to confirm the clinical impression 
in almost all amenorrheic women. In women with evidence 
of hirsutism, at a minimum, total testosterone and 
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate levels should be determined 
to rule out any serious cause (Fig. 30). Endometrial 
biopsy to rule out endometrial hyperplasia is 
warranted in women with amenorrhea or irregular menses 
and evidence of continuing estrogen secretion. Therapy 
for amenorrhea should be based on the cause and the 
desires of the patient regarding fertility. 


DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Measure FSH, PRL, TSH 

­ TSH 
1° hypothyroidism 
­ PRL 
Normal TSH 
Evaluate 
hyperprolactinemia 

­ FSH Normal TSH, PRL 
Normal or low FSH 
Evaluate Hirsutism No hirsutism or 
for gonadal present virilization 
“failure” 
Measure T, DHEAS Measure T 


T >200 ng/dL Normal or mildly ­ T Normal or mildly Mildly ­ T Normal T 
or DHEAS >7.0 m g/mL DHEAS 5.0–7.0 m g/mL ­ T and/or DHEAS (normal (normal 
(normal or ­ LH) or ­ LH) or ¯ LH) 

Evaluate for Evaluate for 
neoplasm “adult-onset” CAH 


PCOS-
like HCA 
?Evaluate 
for “adultonset” 
CAH 

n FIG. 30. Flow diagram for the laboratory evaluation of amenorrhea. Such an analysis must be considered as an adjunct to 
the clinical evaluation of the patient. Measurement of basal follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), prolactin (PRL), and thyroid-stimulating 
hormone (TSH) or thyrotropin is the initial step. Elevated TSH results in evaluation for primary hypothyroidism. Elevated PRL 
in the presence of normal TSH should signal an evaluation for hyperprolactinemia. Elevated FSH leads to evaluation for premature 
ovarian failure. Normal values lead to evaluation for chronic anovulation secondary to hypothalamic causes or “peripheral” 
causes such as polycystic ovary syndrome. If hirsutism is present, serious causes such as a neoplasm or adrenal hyperplasia 
must be excluded. Abbreviations: CAH indicates congenital adrenal hyperplasia; DHEAS, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate; 
HCA, hypothalamic chronic anovulation; LH, luteinizing hormone; PCOS, polycystic ovary syndrome; T, testosterone. (From Rebar 
RW. The ovaries. In: Wyngaarden JB, Smith LH, Bennett JC, eds. Cecil textbook of medicine. 19th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 
1992:1367) 

Abnormal Uterine Bleeding 

ETIOLOGY 

Abnormal uterine bleeding is the most common indication 
for gynecologic consultation. Abnormal uterine bleeding 
is also believed to be the indication for 80–90% of dilation 
and curettage (D&C) procedures performed in nonpregnant 
women in the United States, accounting for approximately 
350,000 procedures annually (3). By some 
measures, AUB is the second most common indication for 
hysterectomy in the United States after uterine leiomyomas, 
accounting for approximately 20%, or 120,000 
procedures annually (4, 5). 

Abnormal uterine bleeding may be defined as uterine 
bleeding that occurs at unexpected times or is of abnormal 
duration or amount. It may take any of several forms, with 
the bleeding altered in frequency, duration, or amount. It 
always must be differentiated from bleeding originating in 
the urinary or gastrointestinal tracts. Broadly speaking, 
AUB can be divided into organic causes, which are found 
in perhaps 25% of cases, and so-called dysfunctional (or 
anovulatory) uterine bleeding (Box E). Organic causes 
can be divided further into causes associated with systemic 
diseases and those associated with disorders of the 

BOX E 
Etiology of Abnormal Uterine Bleeding 

Organic causes 

Systemic disease 
Coagulation disorders (primary or secondary) 
Thyroid dysfunction 
Liver disease 

Reproductive tract disease 
Pregnancy-related disorders 
Malignancies 
Benign uterine abnormalities (fibroids, polyps) 
Iatrogenic causes (intrauterine contraceptive devices, 

estrogens) 
Lower genital tract disease 
Functional ovarian cysts and other benign ovarian 

neoplasms 

Dysfunctional (anovulatory) uterine bleeding 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

reproductive tract. Dysfunctional (anovulatory) uterine 
bleeding may be defined as bleeding resulting from a 
functional abnormality of the HPO axis and is present in 
the majority of women with AUB. 

The frequency of the various causes of AUB varies 
with the age of the patient. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding 
is more common early and late in the reproductive 
years. Organic causes, especially neoplasms, increase 
with advancing age. 

Different abnormalities cause AUB during the prepubertal 
years. Newborn girls sometimes spot for a few 
days after birth because of placental estrogenic stimulation 
of the endometrium in utero. Withdrawal of the estro-
gen at birth leads to sloughing of the endometrium. 
Accidental trauma to the vulva or vagina is the most common 
cause of bleeding during childhood. Vaginitis with 
spotting, most often because of irritation from a foreign 
body, also may occur. Prolapse of the urethral meatus and 
tumors of the genital tract also must be considered in the 
differential diagnosis. When the bleeding is due to the 
ingestion of estrogen-containing drugs (typically oral 
contraceptives) by children, there is rarely significant 
pubertal development. Of course, sexual abuse always 
must be considered in the young girl presenting with 
abnormal bleeding. In summary, it is clear that most of 
the prepubertal causes of bleeding are really not uterine 
in origin. 

Although perhaps as many as half of all menstrual 
cycles are anovulatory when menses begin, the actual 
incidence of dysfunctional uterine bleeding in adolescents 
is low. Typically, anovulatory bleeding occurs at 
intervals longer than normal menstrual cycles, whereas 
bleeding due to organic causes tends to occur more 
frequently than regular menses. In most cases of anovulatory 
bleeding beginning in adolescence, there is spontaneous 
resolution. However, it is important to remember 
that as many as 5% of patients with AUB during the 
teenage years have a primary coagulation disorder (6). It 
is also important to rule out pregnancy-related bleeding 
during the reproductive years. 

Any woman older than 40 years with AUB must be 
evaluated for a malignancy, despite the fact that most 
causes of such bleeding are benign. Endometrial hyperplasia 
clearly is a possibility in women who do not ovulate 
on a regular basis, even in women much younger than 
40 years. The finding of endometrial hyperplasia after 
menopause always should result in a search for a source 
of estrogen, either from exogenous therapy or from an 
endogenous (commonly ovarian) neoplasm. 

EVALUATION AND TREATMENT 

In the evaluation of women with AUB, obtaining a thorough 
history is of paramount importance. Emphasis 
should be placed on learning the pattern and quantity of 
bleeding. Because most women are poor at estimating 
blood loss and recalling exactly when they bled, all 

patients should be asked to keep a prospective menstrual 
calendar in which they record days and severity of bleeding. 
Menses lasting for more than 8 days or in which 
blood loss is more than 80 mL are probably abnormal (ie, 
menorrhagia). Unfortunately, there is no good simple 
method for measuring blood loss, and the diagnosis is 
often made by history, examining menstrual calendars, or 
documenting iron-deficiency anemia. It has been estimated 
that as many as 20% of women have excessive menstrual 
blood loss and that the incidence is similar for 
African-American and white U.S. women (7). 

More than half of functional ovarian cysts, most commonly 
follicular and corpus luteum cysts, induce some 
form of menstrual irregularity, ranging from amenorrhea 
to menorrhagia, and most resolve spontaneously. Clearly 
abnormal bleeding is also a common complaint of 
women using hormonal and other forms of contraception. 
It is also important to remember that thyroid dysfunction 
may cause disorders of bleeding ranging from amenorrhea 
to menorrhagia. 

The physical examination also is important. The 
hemodynamic stability of any patient with abnormal 
bleeding should be assessed. The pelvic examination will 
rule out obvious organic causes. Warranted laboratory 
tests include a complete blood count to assess hematologic 
status, a platelet count and other coagulation studies 
to rule out a coagulation defect, and thyroid function 
studies to rule out a thyroid abnormality. The most common 
coagulation defects seen in this age group are 
immune thrombocytopenic purpura and disorders of 
platelet function such as von Willebrand’s disease. 
Discussion with a hematologist is indicated, because 
coagulation studies may miss some abnormalities. 

Just which patients should undergo further assessment 
of the endometrium is problematic, as is the type of evaluation 
to be undertaken. An endometrial biopsy is indicated 
in any woman older than 35 years with AUB; in any 
woman with a prolonged history of irregular bleeding; 
and in most, if not all, women with severe bleeding. 
Measurement of endometrial thickness by transvaginal 
ultrasonography appears to be of value in postmenopausal 
women who are not taking exogenous estrogen. 
Several studies have indicated that there is almost never 
any significant pathology when the endometrial thickness 
is less than 5 mm (8). Sonohysterography, also called 
saline infusion ultrasonography, has become increasingly 
popular because it can be done in the office at the time of 
the initial evaluation and appears almost as accurate as 
hysteroscopy in diagnosing abnormalities within the uterine 
cavity (9, 10). Some clinicians prefer hysteroscopy 
because it is generally superior to blind biopsy in identifying 
abnormalities and allows for treatment of many 
abnormalities at the time of diagnosis. Unfortunately, it is 
also the most expensive of the various procedures; moreover, 
it is not clear that this procedure is necessary to 
make the diagnosis in most cases. Until definitive data 


indicate when each of these procedures is warranted, 
physicians will need to exercise their own judgment in 
evaluating women with AUB. 

The management of AUB also requires judgment, but 
following a few principles can serve the clinician well. 
First, one must rule out an organic cause for the bleeding. 
Second, hormonal therapy almost always can stop anovulatory 
bleeding, but both the patient and the physician 
must recognize that bleeding will recur at a later time (a 
time, it is hoped, that is controlled and planned). In general, 
medical management is always preferred for the 
treatment of AUB, especially if the patient is interested in 
future childbearing or if menopause will occur shortly. 
The actual management of AUB depends on the severity 
of the problem, the age of the patient, and her desire for 
future fertility. 

In young women, typically teenagers, with AUB, only 
reassurance and prospective charting may be necessary 
with mild light, irregular bleeding, especially because 
most adolescents will begin or resume regular ovulatory 
cycles within 2 years (6). In teenagers in whom the bleeding 
has been more prolonged and erratic such that there is 
some anemia (but the patient is hemodynamically stable), 
therapy must be individualized. If the young woman is 
sexually active (but not pregnant), a progestin-dominant 
oral contraceptive should control the bleeding and simultaneously 
provide contraception. If the patient is not sexually 
active, a progestin such as medroxyprogesterone 
acetate may be given for 10–14 days every 30–60 days to 
induce intermittent “chemical curettage” and prevent 
chronic unopposed stimulation of the endometrium. 
However, it often takes several months before intermittent 
progestins can control irregular uterine bleeding. 
Oral iron therapy should always be provided as well. In 
general, the hormonal therapy can be discontinued, if 
desired, in 6–12 months. Most women will have regular 
menses when therapy is stopped, but thorough evaluation 
is warranted if irregular bleeding recurs. 

In acute severe menorrhagia (with signs of acute blood 
loss such that the patient is hemodynamically unstable), 
blood transfusion may be required to restore hemodynamic 
stability. Hormonal therapy is almost always effective 
in controlling the bleeding. Any of several regimens 
may be used, but in general, large doses of estrogen must 
be given initially, and progestin must be added to stabilize 
the endometrium. For example, an oral contraceptive 
agent containing 35 m g of ethinyl estradiol may be given 
every 6 hours until the bleeding stops (generally within 
48 hours). The dosage then may be tapered by reducing it 
by one pill every other day. Withdrawal bleeding may be 
permitted after the dosage has been reduced to one tablet 
each day, or it may be deferred for several days by continuing 
to administer one tablet daily. Oral contraceptives 
then should be given in the usual cyclic fashion for 6–12 
months. If hormonal therapy cannot control the bleeding, 
the diagnosis of dysfunctional uterine bleeding should be 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

questioned, and evaluation and biopsy of the endometrium 
is warranted. 

Treatment of the woman older than 35 years with AUB 
is more problematic. Organic causes of uterine bleeding are 
more common and mandate at least visualization, if not 
sampling, of the endometrium. Hormonal therapy with a 
progestin alone or with estrogen and a progestin can be used 
to control anovulatory bleeding and menorrhagia; combination 
therapy may be more effective. It is clear that low-dose 
combination oral contraceptive agents are effective in the 
majority of women with AUB (11). Hysterectomy is more 
commonly employed in this age group, particularly if the 
patient no longer desires childbearing. 

A number of medications have proven effective in the 
treatment of menorrhagia associated with ovulatory menstrual 
cycles. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory agents are 
clearly of benefit in some, but not all, women with 
increased menstrual blood loss. Five of seven randomized 
trials concluded that mean menstrual blood loss was less 
with these agents than with a placebo, whereas two trials 
showed no significant difference (12). This therapy can 
be used for long-term treatment, because adverse effects, 
mainly gastrointestinal problems, are mild with intermittent 
therapy administered only when the patient is bleeding. 
These agents can be given in combination with oral 
contraceptives or progestins to achieve more effective 
reduction in menstrual blood loss. 

Studies from Europe indicate that progestin-containing 
intrauterine devices, although not approved by the 
FDA for this purpose, may be the most effective therapy 
for menorrhagia, effecting a reduction in blood loss of as 
much as 90% in some women (13). The androgenic 
steroid danazol also is effective in reducing blood loss, 
even at relatively low doses, but adverse effects are common 
and more severe than those of other medical therapies. 
Epsilon-aminocaproic acid, tranexamic acid, and 
para-aminomethylbenzoic acid are potent inhibitors of 
fibrinolysis and have been used effectively, particularly in 
Europe, to reduce menstrual blood loss. However, 
adverse effects limit their utility, and they have not been 
approved for this purpose by the FDA (14, 15). Although 
extensive data are lacking, it is likely that GnRH analogues, 
perhaps with add-back therapy to prevent bone 
loss, are very effective in reducing blood loss (16), but 
their expense mitigates their use except in women who 
fail to respond to other methods of medical management 
and who wish to retain their childbearing capacity. 

For women of reproductive age who desire childbearing, 
induction of ovulation is an effective means of controlling 
anovulatory bleeding. There is little, if any, role 
for the use of depot medroxyprogesterone acetate in the 
management of AUB, particularly in the treatment of 
acute bleeding and in individuals in whom the cause of 
the bleeding has not been established with certainty. 
Although this drug may be effective in some women, it 
also is known to cause irregular bleeding and may merely 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

compound the problem. Other, more easily reversible 
forms of contraception are equally or more effective and 
should be used. 

There are several surgical approaches to the treatment 
of abnormal uterine bleeding. The appropriate procedure 
depends on the individual circumstances. 

Dilation and curettage is indicated for diagnostic purposes 
when endometrial sampling is warranted but 
endometrial biopsy in the office is not feasible or has 
been nondiagnostic. Although D&C has been found 
empirically to be effective in the management of acute 
uterine bleeding unresponsive to medical therapy, the 
therapeutic effect of the procedure usually is limited to 
the current bleeding episode. When D&C is performed 
for acute bleeding, it should be followed immediately by 
administration of cyclic exogenous estrogen and progestin 
to optimize long-term cycle control. 

It has been estimated that the blind technique of D&C 
misses the diagnosis of intrauterine lesions in 10–25% of 
patients. Several studies have indicated that hysteroscopy 
with directed biopsy is at least as accurate as D&C in 
detecting endometrial abnormalities. Difficulties with 
hysteroscopy include its cost, the skill required to perform 
the procedure and evaluate what is seen, and the fact 
that it is not useful as a simple screening procedure. 
Hysteroscopy is probably most useful in individuals with 
AUB (as well as women with menorrhagia) in whom no 
lesion is detected by other methods but in whom the 
abnormal bleeding persists. 

The use of surgery that attempts to destroy the 
endometrium selectively, called endometrial ablation, has 
been reported for decades. The technique is most appropriate 
for women with menorrhagia who have completed 
childbearing. Early approaches used thermocoagulation 
and irradiation. Hysteroscopic endometrial ablation can 
be conducted by using laser, electrical, or thermal energy 
to coagulate or vaporize the tissue or by resecting the 
endometrium with a loop electrode deployed via a 
modified urologic resectoscope (Video 2). Nonhysteroscopic 
endometrial ablation, involving blind destruction 
of the endometrium using computer-assisted energydelivery 
systems, is becoming increasingly popular 
because newly available approaches and those in development 
are less expensive than surgical approaches and 
require less training; also, some of these procedures can 
be performed in an office setting. Thermal balloon ablation 
systems are now available in the United States. 
Although trials comparing the various approaches are relatively 
uncommon, it appears that all the approved methods 
of endometrial ablation are equally effective (17–19). 
The reported incidence of complications with endometrial 
ablation is relatively low (18). A comprehensive survey 
of 87 Dutch hospitals indicates that half of all complications 
are related to entry into the endometrial cavity (uterine 
perforation and cervical trauma) (20). Other 
complications include those related to anesthesia, failed 
access, hemorrhage, and the systemic absorption of dis


tention media. (For repair of complications, see Video 3.) 
Complications are more commonly encountered early in 
the experience of a given surgeon. 

Data from several reported series suggest that 
endometrial ablation results in initial amenorrhea in 
50–75% of patients, acceptable reduction in blood loss in 
another 20–30%, and no significant reduction in blood 
loss in approximately 10% (17, 19). Repeating the procedure 
appears to be successful in more than half the 
patients initially experiencing treatment failure. 

There is good evidence that the use of GnRH agonists 
prior to endometrial ablation results in shorter procedures, 
easier surgery, a lower rate of postoperative dysmenorrhea, 
and a higher rate of postsurgical amenorrhea (21). Several 
randomized trials allowed a meta-analysis, which found that 
women undergoing hysteroscopic endometrial ablation had 
shorter hospital stays and fewer postoperative complications, 
and that they resumed activities earlier, than women 
undergoing hysterectomy for increased menstrual bleeding 
(22). However, there was a significant advantage to hysterectomy 
in the improvement in heavy menstrual bleeding 
and satisfaction rates up to 4 years after surgery compared 
with endometrial ablation. Moreover, rates of reoperation in 
women undergoing endometrial ablation increase steadily 
over time after the initial surgery, up to approximately 40% 
at 4 years (23). The direct costs of endometrial ablation may 
well be greater than hysterectomy if patients are followed up 
long enough after their initial procedure (23). Thus, currently 
endometrial ablation may be an appropriate alternative to 
hysterectomy for the rare case of AUB or menorrhagia that 
is unresponsive to conservative management in a woman 
who does not desire future childbearing. Ablation also may 
be very useful in women who are poor candidates for hysterectomy 
because of illness. 

The most common indication for myomectomy is 
menorrhagia, followed by pelvic pain or pressure and 
infertility. The reported effectiveness of myomectomy for 
menorrhagia is approximately 80%, but it is not clear 
what percentage of these patients have failed medical 
therapy. Although recurrence of myomas following 
myomectomy is observed in up to 50% of cases, reportedly 
only 10–15% of women undergoing myomectomy 
require subsequent surgery, such as hysterectomy. 

The effectiveness of hysterectomy for AUB (virtually 
100%) has contributed to its popularity as a primary treatment 
for this disorder. Unfortunately, the inefficiency of 
hysterectomy due to its greater morbidity, mortality, and 
cost makes it an inappropriate choice for management of 
the great majority of patients with AUB. Current data suggest 
that only 1–2% of women with abnormal bleeding ultimately 
require hysterectomy after an appropriate trial of 
nonsurgical management. Hysterectomy usually should be 
reserved for the patient with other indications, such as 
leiomyomas or uterine prolapse. Hysterectomy should be 
used to treat persistent AUB after all medical therapy has 
failed and an excessive amount of blood loss has been documented 
using direct measurement (eg, a fall in hematocrit). 


POSTMENOPAUSAL WOMEN—SPECIAL 
CONSIDERATIONS 

Any bleeding in postmenopausal women not taking 
exogenous estrogen must be investigated. Vaginal, cervical, 
and rectal bleeding must be distinguished from uterine 
bleeding. Endometrial sampling is warranted in all 
postmenopausal women with uterine bleeding who are 
not taking estrogen. The role of ultrasonography continues 
to evolve. Many clinicians find it acceptable to defer 
biopsy if the endometrial thickness is less than 5 mm in 
diameter. In women not taking estrogen, the most common 
cause of uterine bleeding is endometrial atrophy. 

Bleeding in postmenopausal women taking estrogen is 
more problematic. In women on sequential estrogen and 
progestogen therapy, bleeding should occur only near the 
end of, or following, the course of progestogen. If such is 
the case, endometrial sampling may never be indicated. 
An endometrial biopsy is warranted for bleeding at any 
other time. 

When to sample the endometrium of women on continuous 
estrogen and progestogen therapy is less clear. 
Sampling for bleeding occurring during the first 6 months 
of therapy is rarely necessary. After the initial 6 months, 
any bleeding warrants biopsy. Yearly biopsy would 
seem to be indicated for women on continuous estrogen 
and progestogen therapy who continue to have some 
bleeding. 

A recent systematic review concluded that irregular 
bleeding was more than twice as common with a continuous 
regimen than a sequential regimen, but with longer 
duration of treatment, continuous combined therapy was 
more protective than sequential therapy in preventing 
endometrial hyperplasia (24). There was also evidence of 
a higher incidence of hyperplasia with long-cycle sequential 
therapy (progestogen every 3 months) compared with 
monthly sequential therapy. 

HYPOTHALAMIC AMENORRHEA 

Appropriate GnRH drive is required for ovulation. 
Reduced hypothalamic GnRH input lowers pituitary LH 
and FSH secretion below the threshold needed to sustain 
full ovarian function and results in a spectrum of ovarian 
compromise, ranging from luteal insufficiency to chronic 
anovulation. Menstrual patterns that include amenorrhea, 
polymenorrhea, and oligomenorrhea reflect variable follicular 
activity. Various names have been used to describe 
the more extreme forms of this syndrome, including 

exercise amenorrhea, stress-related or stress-induced 
anovulation, functional hypothalamic chronic anovulation, 
hypothalamic hypogonadism, and psychogenic amenorrhea; 
the term functional hypothalamic amenorrhea 
(FHA) will be used here. Generally, FHA is secondary, but 
it can present as primary amenorrhea. The diagnosis of 
FHA or its variants is one of exclusion. 

Reduced GnRH drive rarely has an organic or congenital 
cause, such as a brain tumor or an insufficient num-

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

ber of GnRH neurons that migrated from the olfactory 
placode into the hypothalamus during fetal development 
(eg, Kallmann’s syndrome; see “Abnormalities of 
Puberty”). Typically, the cause is functional, ie, endocrine 
consequences of certain physical and psychologic states 
or behaviors. Anorexia nervosa provides the most dramatic 
example of the endocrine consequences of psychologic 
and behavioral dysfunction, but most women who 
develop functional hypothalamic amenorrhea do not meet 
the criteria for an eating disorder, nor do they develop one 
subsequently. 

The epidemiology of FHA is not well described. 
However, in one study of 262 consecutive cases of secondary 
amenorrhea, hypothalamic causes were the most 
common (25). There appears to be a dose–response relationship 
between the type and severity of stress and the 
proportion of individuals who develop amenorrhea. 
Intermittent or milder reductions in GnRH drive that 
cause anovulation or luteal insufficiency with preservation 
of menstrual interval are generally clinically occult 
(26). In men, oligoasthenospermia may sometimes be the 
male analogue of FHA, although men are susceptible to 
functional reductions in GnRH drive without obvious 
clinical manifestations (27). Available evidence suggests 
that extreme forms of hypothalamic hypogonadism, such 
as anorexia nervosa or bulimia, affect 3% of women (28), 
that FHA unrelated to an eating disorder affects roughly 
5% of college-aged women (29), and that recreational 
running is associated with an incidence of roughly 55% 
anovulatory cycles or cycles that display luteal insufficiency 
(26). 

Role and Regulation of the GnRH 
Pulse Generator 

Understanding the pathogenesis of FHA requires knowledge 
of the regulation of hypothalamic function by central 
and peripheral signals. The term GnRH pulse generator 
refers to the collective functioning of GnRH neurons 
residing in the mediobasal hypothalamus that secrete into 
the portal vasculature and thereby release LH and FSH 
from pituitary gonadotropes. The GnRH neurons are 
endogenously pulsatile. However, for the bolus of GnRH 
to be sufficient to trigger appropriate gonadotropin 
release, a group of GnRH neurons must secrete synchronously. 
Cross-talk or synchronicity is maintained by 
GnRH-to-GnRH synapses or appositions. The GnRH 
pulse generator is active during fetal life and is then 
inhibited or desynchronized by central processes until the 
onset of puberty (30). Slowing or desynchronization of 
the GnRH pulse generator may involve glial interposition 
into the synaptic cleft to reduce the number of appositions 
and therefore the effective GnRH-secreting cohort 
size (31). Other mechanisms could involve synaptic modulation 
of individual GnRH neurons by classic neurotransmitter 
systems. Evidence from animal studies 
implicates corticotropin-releasing hormone, endogenous 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

opioids, vasopressin, dopamine, neuropeptide Y, leptin, 
g -aminobutyric acid, excitatory amino acids, and norepinephrine. 


Overall, the primary function of the hypothalamus is 
to promote homeostasis and adaptation to life’s varied 
demands. To do this, the hypothalamus receives afferent 
neural information from many brain areas, including the 
hippocampus, the brain stem, and the frontal lobe. Also, 
peripherally derived metabolic signals and other signals 

may modulate the hypothalamus via fenestrations in the 
blood–brain barrier or through neurovascular regulatory 
processes. Altogether, the hypothalamus can be viewed as 
a dynamic brain center that integrates relevant central and 
peripheral input so that appropriate neuroendocrine 
responses can be generated to meet the needs of the 
organism. Thus, GnRH production by the hypothalamus 
is under the influence of multiple central and peripheral 
factors (Fig. 31). 

Psychogenic Challenge 
• Performance pressure 
• Unrealistic expectations of self and others 
• Negative attitudes 
Metabolic Challenge 
• Exercise 
• Undernutrition 
• Hyperactivity 
Central Neuromodulation 

• Dopamine 
• Endogenous opioid peptides 
• 5-Hydroxytryptophan 
• g -Aminobutyric acid 
• Norepinephrine 
Hypothalamic Adjustment 

• Prolactin 
• Thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
• Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
• Arginine vasopressin 
• Neuropeptide Y 
• Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 
Pituitary 
Glands 

Thyroid 
Parathyroid 
Adipocytes 
Pancreas 
Adrenal 
Gonads 


n FIG. 31. Diagram of the putative pathogenesis of functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) demonstrating that FHA is more 
than an isolated disorder of reduced gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) drive. Behavioral challenges evoke responses in 
the central nervous system. In turn, the hypothalamus transduces the neurotransmitter alterations into endocrine patterns that foster 
homeostasis. Candidate neurotransmitter systems include dopamine (DA), endogenous opioid peptides (EOP), serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptophan, 5HT), g -aminobutyric acid (GABA), and norepinephrine (NE). The transduction of neurotransmitter 
changes into endocrine secretory patterns is communicated by hypothalamic peptides such as prolactin (PRL), thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH), corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), arginine vasopressin (AVP), neuropeptide Y (NPY), and GnRH. Short 
and long feedback arcs permit fine-tuning of the homeostatic system and graded responses to internal and external challenges 
and perturbations. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Pathogenesis of Functional 
Hypothalamic Amenorrhea 

Functional hypothalamic anovulation and amenorrhea 
due to reduced GnRH drive are manifested in the circulation 
as reduced LH pulse frequency; the LH pulse frequency 
of amenorrheic women with FHA is about half 

that of women in the follicular phase (32, 33) (Fig. 32). 
Levels of FSH are also reduced in FHA, but immunoreactive 
FSH levels are less reduced than levels of LH; 
the ratio of LH to FSH is usually less than 1. Evidence in 
support of the concept that FHA results from an insufficient 
or inadequate GnRH drive is provided by the 
demonstration that the administration of GnRH in a nor-

FHA 
Lights out 
Lights out 
LH IU/L 
FHA 
15 
10 
5 
0 
LH IU/L 
15 
10 
5 
0 
LH IU/L LH IU/L

Ovulatory 
Lights out 
Lights out 
Ovulatory 
15 
10 
5 
0 
0900 1300 1700 2100 0100 0500 0900 
Clock hours 
0900 1300 1700 2100 0100 0500 0900 
Clock hours 
15 
10 
5 
0 
n FIG. 32. Luteinizing hormone pulse patterns in two women with functional hypothalamic amenorrhea (FHA) are shown in the 
top two panels and in two eumenorrheic, ovulatory women in the bottom two panels. The luteinizing hormone (LH) pulse patterns 
are the best in vivo surrogate for assessing gonadotropin-releasing hormone activity in humans. The eumenorrheic women display 
regularly regular LH pulses of even amplitude, whereas the women with FHA display irregular LH pulses with an overall slower 
frequency and variable amplitude. In general, the LH pulse frequency of women with FHA is approximately half that observed in 
ovulatory women. 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

mal pulsatile fashion can cause ovulation and conception 
in women with FHA. For folliculogenesis to result in 
ovulation, however, the GnRH drive must remain above 
(and below) critical thresholds for approximately 12–14 
days. Presumably, a premature arrest of GnRH drive can 
lead to early follicular demise, whereas intermittent but 
lesser reductions lead to poor follicular development and 
ovulation with subsequent luteal insufficiency. 

Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea is more than an 
isolated interruption of GnRH to the pituitary–ovarian 
axis. A constellation of other neuroendocrine secretory 
aberrations also may be present. For example, the 24hour 
secretory pattern of cortisol is amplified, being 
greatest during sleep. In fact, amplified cortisol secretion 
is specific to FHA (34). This association is not incidental, 
as clinical and animal data demonstrate a tightly related 
temporal link between activation of the HPA axis and 
decreased GnRH drive. Elevated cortisol levels have been 
observed in women with depression, anorexia nervosa, 
and exercise amenorrhea, but not bulimia. Athletes with 
amenorrhea displayed elevated cortisol levels and 
reduced LH pulse frequency, whereas eumenorrheic athletes 
with luteal phase insufficiency had modest reductions 
in LH pulse frequency and minimally increased 
cortisol concentrations. 

However, cortisol per se is not likely to be the cause of 
reduced GnRH pulse frequency in FHA. Whereas a high 
pharmacologic dose (>300% of the physiologic requirement) 
of cortisol reduces the GnRH drive, 24-hour hydrocortisone 
infusions that mimic moderate (136% above 
normal) and severe (197% above normal) stress levels 
had no acute impact on gonadotropin secretion. In fact, 
the link between hypercortisolemia and FHA appears to 
occur at the CNS level. For example, insulin-induced 
hypoglycemia (a significant stressor) in rhesus monkeys 
caused a comparable decline in LH levels, whether or not 
cortisol synthesis was blocked with pretreatment 
metyrapone (35). Similarly, an intravenous infusion of 
corticotropin-releasing hormone caused a decrease in 
gonadotropin in monkeys with and without adrenalectomy. 
Cortisol may serve as a marker of stress, but what 
suppresses GnRH pulsatility is the central neural concomitants 
of the stress response or concomitant metabolic 
signals rather than cortisol per se. 

Cortisol also dampens TSH release in response to thyrotropin-
releasing hormone and causes “hypothalamic 
hypothyroidism.” Women with FHA had reduced thyronine 
and thyroxine levels in the face of preserved TSH 
patterns, and they displayed large-magnitude increases in 
TSH during recovery (34). Other neurosecretory aberrations 
described in FHA include aberrations of melatonin, 
growth hormone, leptin, dopamine, opioids, adrenergic 
tone, g -aminobutyric acid, and corticotropin-releasing 
hormone. In summary, as the hypothalamus tries to 
achieve homeostasis in the face of an internal or external 
stress or challenge, it effects metabolic mobilization (eg, 

via hypercortisolemia) and reproductive quiescence (eg, 
via disruption of the GnRH pulse generator). This process 
actually represents an adaptation to stress and makes teleologic 
sense. Because the process of reproduction 
demands a significant amount of energy, when the availability 
of energy is reduced or energy is diverted, the inhibition 
of reproductive processes channels energy 
expenditure away from a process not immediately necessary 
for survival. 

The Role of Behavioral Factors 

Experimental paradigms are useful in helping to understand 
the pathways by which stressors desynchronize the 
GnRH pulse generator and thereby compromise reproductive 
function. However, in the clinical setting, it is 
more difficult to identify the actual stressors involved. 
Exercise, low weight and weight loss, affective and eating 
disorders, various personality characteristics, drug use, 
and a number of external and intrapsychic stressors have 
been associated with FHA. Given individual variation in 
metabolism, autonomic tone, habitus, aptitudes, and attitudes, 
what is stressful to one person may be more or less 
stressful to another. Therefore, it is not surprising to find 
behavioral heterogeneity in the pathogenesis of FHA. 

In clinical research, the trend has been to study single 
stressors and to partition as separate populations women 
with “exercise amenorrhea,” anorexia nervosa, and “idiopathic 
amenorrhea.” In general, however, women with 
FHA do not report an easily identified solitary stressor. 
Typically, there are multiple, seemingly minor stressors, 
such as a combination of job or school pressures, unrealistic 
expectations, poor eating habits, and increased energy 
expenditure. One study suggested that women with 
FHA had trouble relaxing and having fun, attributes that 
might further predispose them to value performance at 
the expense of psychologic needs (32). Although women 
with FHA do not typically meet criteria for an eating disorder, 
they display many attitudes and behaviors similar 
to women with eating disorders. What appears to separate 
women with undifferentiated FHA from those with an 
eating disorder is the degree of disturbance, including the 
degree of food restriction, weight loss, bingeing, and perfectionism. 


In short, attitudes and expectations engender behaviors, 
such as aberrant food intake and excessive exercise, that 
further challenge the hypothalamus to maintain homeostasis. 
No matter what the identifiable behavior, the end 
result is the same, ie, disruption of the GnRH pulse generator. 
It stands to reason, then, that the key to recovery is 
to change both the behaviors and the attitudes that initiated, 
and now sustain, reduced GnRH drive. Once the 
hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator has been disrupted, it 
may take prolonged energy balance and psychologic equilibrium 
for the chronic changes in hypothalamic function 
to reverse and for ovulatory function to return. 


Diagnosis of Functional Hypothalamic 
Amenorrhea 

The diagnosis of FHA involves excluding all other causes 
of amenorrhea and anovulation. As shown in Figure 
33, ovulatory dysfunction or anovulation is not always 
accompanied by amenorrhea. When the GnRH drive is 
sufficient to provoke partial follicular development, polymenorrhea 
or even eumenorrhea may ensue even in the 
presence of anovulation (26). The spectrum of reduced 
GnRH drive is accompanied by a spectrum of clinical 
findings, ranging from ovulation with luteal insufficiency 
to outright amenorrhea. To determine that the cause of 
reduced ovarian function is functional and hypothalamic 
in origin (ie, FHA), all other potential causes, including 
anatomic anomalies and pregnancy, must be excluded. 

Reduced GnRH drive should be suspected if the ratio 
of LH to FSH is less than 1 in the face of relatively low 
estradiol levels (<60 pg/mL). If the cause of compromised 
ovarian function is hypothalamic, a thorough 
search for organic causes must be conducted. Although 
focal neurologic signs would certainly raise suspicion of 
a central organic cause, such as a CNS tumor, conditions 
such as adult-onset hydrocephalus (36) may be accompanied 
by dizziness or vague symptoms rather than lateralizing 
symptoms. In most instances, suspected organic 
causes can be confirmed (or excluded) by MRI. 

Treatment Considerations 

As noted, FHA is more than an isolated disorder of 
GnRH input. A constellation of neuroendocrine secretory 
aberrations signals metabolic mobilization, as well as 
reproductive inhibition. Therapies aimed at correcting 
only reproductive compromise will not reverse the longterm 
effects of stress and metabolic mobilization (37). 
The main reason that it is so important to identify the 
behavioral antecedents of FHA is that recovery depends 
on reducing their endocrine effects. In some instances, 
the behavior may be modifiable. If the individual’s attitudes 
are the initiating or sustaining factors, then the goal 
of treatment is to alter the problematic attitudes. 
Nonpharmacologic therapies such as stress management, 
relaxation training, and psychoeducation empower individuals 
by fostering self-care and the development of 
realistic expectations of self and others. In this regard, 
nonpharmacologic therapies have the potential to produce 
long-term mental and physical health benefits extending 
beyond the resumption of ovulatory function. 

Having realistic expectations is crucial for setting 
behavioral goals. Conflicting aspirations may seem mundane 
to the clinician, but individuals having to choose 
among goals may perceive the decisions as life defining 
and therefore life threatening. Society might admire 
achievements made possible by unbridled ambition, but 
the endocrine system seems to reward moderation. 
Furthermore, chronic intrapsychic conflict may lead to a 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

sense of poor control. In turn, behaviors such as exercise 
and dieting may be instituted to afford a greater sense of 
control in the face of unresolvable conflict. The irony is 
that these same behaviors may serve as further metabolic 
challenges that actually sensitize the endocrine or autonomic 
system to ongoing or subsequent psychogenic 
stress. Although dieting may make the individual feel 
more in control, the adverse effect is greater endocrine or 
autonomic arousal and its consequences, including reproductive 
inhibition. Thus, addressing the behaviors and 
attitudes that fuel FHA are likely to yield the greatest 
chance for neuroendocrine recovery and resumption of 
ovulation. 

If pregnancy is desired, ovulation induction is possible. 
Generally, clomiphene therapy is ineffective in this setting 
because the hypothalamus is already “insensitive” to the 
reduced ovarian secretion of estrogen. It is interesting to 
note that women with FHA rarely report hot flashes even 
in the presence of profound hypoestrogenism. This is a 
clinical sign of hypothalamic insensitivity, and it has led to 
the clinical dictum that the presence of hot flashes in a 
woman with hypothalamic hypogonadism should engender 
a thorough search for an organic etiology. Strategies 
for ovulation induction include exogenous pulsatile 
administration of GnRH and exogenous administration of 
gonadotropins (38). Ovulation induction in FHA is associated 
with increased risks to both the mother and possibly 
the fetus. For example, ovulation induction in 
underweight women with FHA increased the risk of 
intrauterine growth restriction and preterm delivery (39). 

In patients with FHA who are not seeking immediate 
conception, clinicians may use oral contraceptives or 
exogenous hormone replacement regimens, particularly 
for the prevention of osteoporosis. In support of this 
approach, in one small study of amenorrheic athletes, oral 
contraceptive use led to a small gain in bone in comparison 
to that seen in individuals who received the placebo, 
whereas cyclic progestin exposure led to greater bone 
loss than was seen in individuals who received the placebo 
(40). If sex steroid therapy is instituted, it is a good 
idea to employ an oral contraceptive with a more androgenic 
progestin to maximize the anabolic effect of the 
medication on bone. Nonetheless, bone accretion requires 
more than sex steroid exposure. Nutrition factors are critical 
to bone health, and dietary intake is likely to be deficient 
in women with FHA. Furthermore, metabolic 
balance also is required, and excess cortisol reduces 
osteoblast activity and impairs bone formation. Thus, sex 
steroid therapy alone will not ameliorate ongoing 
metabolic compromise. For example, women with 
anorexia nervosa do not build bone in response to exogenous 
sex steroid administration alone (41), possibly 
because of concurrent nutrition deficits and ongoing 
metabolic compromise. Overall, bone density in FHA 
reflects a combination of genetic factors, length of amenorrhea, 
and extent of metabolic compromise. 


250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
0 
0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
400 
300 
200 
100 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
20 
15 
10 
5 
0 
n FIG. 33. Graph of three types of menstrual cycles: anovulatory, ovulatory, and luteal insufficiency. Blood samples were taken daily or nearly daily across a menstrual interval 
(from the first day of vaginal bleeding of one cycle to the first day of bleeding of the next cycle) in three women between ages 20 years and 30 years who reported regularly 
regular menstrual cycles. The top panels for each menstrual cycle type show the gonadotropins, luteinizing hormone (LH; closed circles), and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH; 
open circles). The bottom panels show estradiol (closed circles) and progesterone levels (open circles). In the anovulatory cycle (left two panels), gonadotropin levels were relatively 
low, indicating that the cause of the anovulation was not oocyte depletion or impending menopause. Late in the cycle, there was an elevation and then rapid decline in 
estradiol unaccompanied by any significant progesterone secretion. The decline in estradiol triggered withdrawal bleeding, leading to anovulatory cycling. In the ovulatory cycle 
(middle two panels), FSH was highest in the early follicular phase, and the LH surge occurred as expected at midcycle. There was the expected preovulatory exponential rise in 
estradiol and roughly 14 days of progesterone secretion higher than 1 ng/mL after the midcycle surge. In the cycle labeled luteal insufficiency (right two panels), there was an 
LH surge, but it occurred around day 22, and progesterone secretion occurred for only 6 days. None of these cycles was clinically distinguishable from the others, and the women 
assumed that they were having normal menstrual cycles. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Although psychopharmacologic approaches to 
improve unhelpful attitudes and behaviors in FHA have 
not been well studied, they probably could be used on an 
interim basis in special circumstances. Because the role 
of specific putative neuroregulators in FHA remains 
unclear, it is difficult to know which neurotropic agent to 
use. Benzodiazepines are contraindicated during pregnancy, 
so their use might carry the greatest risk were conception 
to occur during pharmacologic intervention. 
Antidepressants may reduce activation of the HPA axis, 
but it is not clear that their use will address the associated 
metabolic imbalances that might be particularly problematic 
should conception occur. Naltrexone has been 
employed with varying success (42). 

Theoretically, FHA is reversible, but few studies have 
documented the course of recovery or its likelihood. One 
study found that 72% of affected women recovered within 
6 years of initial presentation (43). Another report 
noted that 9 of 16 women with FHA who underwent ovulation 
induction and conceived became eumenorrheic 
postpartum (44). Roughly one half of women with 
anorexia nervosa or bulimia have a full recovery (28). 
Hypothalamic recovery likely involves a temporal pattern 
of readjustment—namely, restoration of normal function 
of the hypothalamic–pituitary axis followed by resumption 
of appropriate GnRH drive (34). To avoid disappointment 
and unrealistic expectations, patients should be 
counseled that reproductive recovery might not be immediate 
following lifestyle alterations. 

In summary, FHA is a clinical example of how the 
endocrine concomitants of attitudes, moods, and behaviors 
can cause reproductive compromise. Although a link 
between brain states and gonadal function has been 
hypothesized for a long time, it is only recently that we 
have been able to specify some of the mechanisms mediating 
this relationship. This understanding has concrete 
clinical implications and expands our appreciation of 
what it means to be healthy. In the context of psychoneuroendocrinology, 
health depends on achieving psychologic 
harmony through realistic expectations of self 
and others, along with metabolic harmony through balanced 
diet and energy expenditure. 

HYPERPROLACTINEMIA AND 
OTHER PITUITARY DISORDERS 

Hyperprolactinemia has a fivefold greater incidence in 
females than in males, attesting to the fact that estrogen 
stimulates the growth of the prolactin-secreting pituitary 
cells (chromophobes). There are four principal causes of 
hyperprolactinemia: idiopathic hyperprolactinemia or 
pituitary hyperplasia, microprolactinomas and macroprolactinomas, 
hypothyroidism, and drug intake. However, 
there are multiple other, less frequent causes of hyperprolactinemia 
that also need to be considered (Box F). 

BOX F 
Causes of Hyperprolactinemia 

Central nervous system 

Trauma 
Tumors and cysts (all types) 
Infections 
Neurofibromas 
Granulomas (tuberculosis and syphilis) 
Infiltrative disease (histocytosis X) 
Cavernous sinus thrombosis 
Temporal arteritis 


Pituitary 

Trauma 
Tumors 
Prolactinomas 
Functional disease 


Thyroid 

Hypothyroidism 

Body 

Chest trauma, surgery, or burn 
Herpes zoster 
Breast manipulation 
Renal failure 
Hysterectomy/oophorectomy 
Breast reduction or augmentation 
Pregnancy 


Medications (examples) 

Tranquilizers (major and minor) 
Antidepressants 
Steroid hormones 
Oral contraceptives 
Antihypertensives 
Histamine2 receptors 
Antituberculins 


Idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, which also can present 
as pituitary hyperplasia (ie, diffuse enlargement), is 
believed to result from a dysfunction in the regulation of 
prolactin secretion, either at the cellular level or in the 
hypothalamic–pituitary axis. The origin of prolactinomas 
is unknown, and it is possible that there are many causes 
for these tumors. It has been suggested that these lesions 
may develop a blood supply independent of the normal 
hypothalamic portal anatomy. In addition, errors of signal 
transduction have been demonstrated, tumors have been 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

found that lack dopamine receptors on their surfaces, and 
various gene mutations have been found in tumors. It is 
likely that similar defects in prolactin regulation may 
result in idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, pituitary hyperplasia, 
or overt prolactinomas. In fact, idiopathic hyperprolactinemia, 
hyperprolactinemic pituitary hyperplasia, 
microprolactinomas, and macroprolactinomas can be 
considered as a spectrum of similar disorders. 

Female patients with hyperprolactinemia may present 
with ovulatory dysfunction, galactorrhea, delayed 
pubescence, or signs of a polyendocrinopathy. The ovulatory 
dysfunction may be as subtle as a shortened luteal 
phase or, more commonly, complete amenorrhea. 
Intermittent hyperprolactinemia generally occurs in the 
periovulatory phase of the menstrual cycle and can be 
associated with infertility. It requires multiple prolactin 
measurements to detect. Initial symptoms also may be 
mild androgen excess, with acne and minimal hirsutism, 
because prolactin has a direct stimulatory effect on adrenal 
androgen production. Many patients with hyperprolactinemia 
also report headaches, although this symptom is more 
common in patients with a prolactinoma. Visual disturbances 
are much less frequent and are the result of compression 
of the optic chiasm by an expanding pituitary 
tumor. Although only approximately 20% of patients with 
galactorrhea actually have hyperprolactinemia, approximately 
50% of patients with hyperprolactinemia have 
galactorrhea. Hypogonadism frequently accompanies 
hyperprolactinemia and often is manifested clinically by 
amenorrhea or other ovulatory disorders. Because mean 
serum estradiol levels in amenorrheic women with hyperprolactinemia 
are comparable to the estradiol levels seen 
in the early follicular phase of normal women, hyperprolactinemic 
amenorrheic women often have absolute or relative 
estrogen deficiency. This estrogen deficiency can 
result in osteopenia in hyperprolactinemic amenorrheic 
women; prolactin itself does not appear to have an independent 
deleterious effect on bone density. 

Evaluation of the 
Hyperprolactinemic Patient 

The evaluation of patients with hyperprolactinemia 
should consist of the measurement of basal prolactin 
levels on multiple occasions, because hyperprolactinemia 
may be intermittent. Unfortunately, prolactin assays 
can be subject to great variation. Some of the contemporary 
chemoluminescence assays will show markedly 
elevated prolactin levels in patients who have normal 
prolactin levels according to several different radioimmunoassays. 


There are five distinct isoforms of prolactin, with variable 
biologic activity. The various isoforms are formed 
when monomeric prolactin molecules complex with IgG 
antibodies (forming macromolecular prolactin, such as 
big-big prolactin or macroprolactin) or when the pro


lactin molecule becomes glycosylated. Many commercial 
assays for prolactin measure macromolecular prolactin, 
which may result in falsely elevated prolactin levels. 

The evaluation of hyperprolactinemia is complicated 
further by the fact that prolactin is a dynamic hormone 
whose release is pulsatile, and its levels can be affected 
by breast examination, exercise, sex, and sleep. However, 
recent observations have indicated that breast examination 
in normally menstruating women fails to produce a 
significant elevation in prolactin levels. In addition, the 
oral intake of tryptophan, tyrosine, and arginine-containing 
foods or medications, which have been shown to elevate 
prolactin under experimental circumstances, fails to 
increase serum levels of this hormone in normally menstruating 
women. Thus, it is possible that prolactin levels 
are less affected by environmental factors in normal ovulatory 
patients, although they may still be a consideration 
when evaluating anovulatory patients. 

The laboratory evaluation of hyperprolactinemia 
would not be complete without assessment of thyroid 
function. It is assumed that the elevated thyroid-releasing 
hormone (TRH) levels secreted by the hypothalamus in 
primary hypothyroidism also can stimulate the secretion 
of prolactin. Hence, in addition to the measurement of 
prolactin, free thyroxine and thyroid-stimulating hormone 
levels should be determined to rule out compensated 
hypothyroidism. If signs of a polyendocrinopathy (ie, 
involving multiple endocrine systems) are present, 
growth hormone, corticotropin, and other hormones may 
be measured. 

Radiographic imaging is required when hyperprolactinemia 
is not secondary to untreated hypothyroidism 
and should consist of either computed tomography or 
MRI of the pituitary and hypothalamic regions. Each of 
these techniques is capable of detecting tumors approximately 
2 mm in diameter. 

A visual field examination is generally unnecessary 
except in patients with pituitary macroadenomas (tumors 
³ 1 cm). By definition, a microadenoma (tumors <1 cm) 
does not protrude out of the sella or involve the optic 
chiasm; therefore, it cannot produce alteration of visual 
fields. Macroadenomas produce superior bitemporal 
hemianopsia only 68% of the time. Prolactinomas often 
behave similarly to meningiomas, growing along dural 
planes and projecting into the cavernous sinus, without 
producing compression of the optic chiasm. 

Treatment of Hyperprolactinemia and 
Prolactinomas 

The treatment of patients with hyperprolactinemia hinges 
on several factors: 1) symptoms; 2) desire for pregnancy; 
3) whether there is a tumor and if so, whether it is a 
microadenoma or macroadenoma; and 4) whether the 
patient is hypoestrogenic. When the cause of hyperprolactinemia 
can be determined, specific therapy should be 


instituted. For instance, hyperprolactinemia secondary to 
hypothyroidism resolves in patients treated with thyroid 
replacement therapy. Patients who take a medication that 
induces hyperprolactinemia should stop taking it if medically 
feasible. 

The mainstays of the treatment of hyperprolactinemia 
are the dopamine agonists. The stimulation of prolactin 
secretion is normally under the inhibitory control of 
hypothalamically produced dopamine. Hence, the systemic 
administration of dopamine agonists results in suppression 
of prolactin levels and, frequently, a reduction in 
the growth of prolactinomas. 

Various preparations of dopamine agonists are used 
worldwide, but in the United States, only three are available: 
bromocriptine, cabergoline, and pergolide mesylate. 
Bromocriptine, an ergot-derivative D2 agonist, is 
the prototype dopamine agonist available in the United 
States. It acts on the dopamine D1 and D2 receptors. The 
therapeutic dosage is usually 5–7.5 mg/d, but it can 
range from 2.5 to 15 mg per day, although it is frequently 
started at an oral dosage of 1.25 mg/d. Over the course 
of several weeks, the dosage is gradually increased to 2.5 
mg twice daily. Additional increases may be necessary, 
to a maximum of 10 mg/d given in two or three divided 
doses. 

A third-generation dopamine agonist is cabergoline, a 
pure D2 receptor agonist. It is available in a dose of 0.5 
mg and is taken twice a week. The initial dosage is 0.25 
mg twice weekly, increased gradually over several weeks 
to a dosage of 0.5 mg twice weekly, to a maximum of 1.0 
mg twice weekly. It is purported to have fewer adverse 
effects than bromocriptine (45). 

Pergolide mesylate is approved by the FDA only for the 
treatment of Parkinson’s disease, although it is marketed 
worldwide for the treatment of hyperprolactinemia. 
Reported adverse effects are fewer than with bromocriptine. 
Tumors that are resistant to other dopamine agonists 
have been shown to respond to this form of therapy. In 
general, dopamine agonist dosage should be increased 
weekly until basal levels of prolactin are in the normal 
range. 

Adverse effects are common with dopamine agonist 
therapy and include nausea, nasal congestion, lethargy, 
and dysphoria. Several factors help improve patients’ tolerance 
of dopamine agonist therapy. First, the medication 
should be started at the lowest possible dose and slowly 
increased over the following weeks. Vaginal administration 
of the dopamine agonist bromocriptine can result in 
sustained levels of the drug and may minimize the 
adverse effects. Ingestion of dopamine agonists at bedtime 
also may minimize adverse effects. 

Prolactinomas also may be treated by transsphenoidal 
hypophysectomy. Surgery results in a failure to cure the 
underlying endocrine disorder in 50–70% of patients, 
although tumor recurrence is uncommon. Consequently, 
surgery is seldom used today; medical therapy is the 
mainstay. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Women with functional hyperprolactinemia or a microprolactinoma 
and who have slightly elevated levels and 
withdrawal bleeding after a progestogen challenge (ie, 
adequate endogenous estrogen production) may be treated 
with cyclic progestogens or an oral contraceptive 
agent alone as long as their pituitary status is monitored 
periodically. This monitoring can be accomplished by 
pituitary radiographic studies every 2–5 years if a prolactinoma 
is present, or by measurement of prolactin levels 
alone if a tumor is not present. Prolactin levels should 
be measured at least yearly in women not treated with 
dopamine agonists. 

Patients who are hypoestrogenic secondary to hyperprolactinemia 
also should be given some form of estrogen 
replacement therapy to prevent bone loss if a dopamine 
agonist is not used to correct the hyperprolactinemia. 
Bone loss has been shown to be reversible with the 
administration of a dopamine agonist. Overall, a number 
of retrospective and prospective studies have shown that 
patients with idiopathic hyperprolactinemia or microprolactinomas 
have a 0–22% incidence of tumor progression. 
Furthermore, prospective trials in patients with 
microadenomas who receive an oral contraceptive have 
demonstrated slight increases in their prolactin levels but 
no clinically significant alterations in tumor growth. 

Patients with macroadenomas generally are managed 
with dopamine agonists throughout their lifetime. 
Lesions that do not respond to dopamine agonists are best 
treated with either surgery or radiation therapy. As noted, 
transsphenoidal hypophysectomy results in as high as a 
70% failure rate to cure either the tumor or the underlying 
endocrine process. Dopamine agonists, although not 
tumoricidal, frequently result in long-term remission of 
hyperprolactinemia. Clinical studies have demonstrated 
that 10% of patients with macroadenomas followed up 
for 8–10 years in an untreated state show a slight increase 
in the size of their tumors, whereas 30% exhibit regression 
of the tumors. Therefore, it is unnecessary to repeat 
radiographic imaging for patients with macroadenomas 
who are maintained in a euprolactinemic state by 
dopamine agonists. 

The patient who desires pregnancy and is hyperprolactinemic 
is best treated with a dopamine agonist until 
prolactin levels are in the normal range. The vast majority 
of these patients will have a restoration of normal ovulatory 
function and achieve pregnancy in a relatively 
short time. When pregnancy is achieved, the medication 
can be discontinued in patients with functional hyperprolactinemia 
or microadenomas (because these tumors do 
not grow significantly during gestation). Patients with 
macroadenomas either may be treated with dopamine 
agonists throughout pregnancy or may be followed 
expectantly with visual field examinations every 2 
months. There is no point in obtaining routine radiographic 
studies during pregnancy, because the normal 
pituitary gland doubles in size during pregnancy, causing 
unnecessary concern. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Other Pituitary Tumors Relevant to 
Reproduction 

A number of other functioning pituitary tumors that 
secrete growth hormone, corticotropin, TSH, and FSH, 
may alter reproductive function. Children who have 
excess growth hormone production present with 
giantism, whereas adults show the clinical features of 
acromegaly and characteristic changes in the face and 
extremities. The patient with acromegaly after age 45 has 
twice the mortality of the normal population from cardiovascular, 
cerebrovascular, and respiratory diseases. 
Enlargement of the heart, liver, and kidneys are common. 
The growth hormone–secreting tumor is diagnosed by 
elevated basal serum growth hormone levels. Serum concentrations 
of growth hormone of more than 10 ng/mL 
are abnormal and occur in more than 90% of patients with 
the disorder. Growth hormone levels between 5 ng/mL 
and 10 ng/mL are inconclusive and require challenge 
testing. According to immunocytochemistry findings, 
tumors taken from patients with acromegaly also secrete 
prolactin 45% of the time. The treatment of growth hormone–
secreting tumors is primarily surgical; somatostatin 
suppression is used as adjunctive therapy. 

Corticotropin-secreting tumors give rise to Cushing’s 
syndrome. These tumors are characteristically small. The 
diagnosis is established by nonsuppression of cortisol 
after the administration of low-dose dexamethasone and 
by partial suppression following the administration of 
high-dose therapy (the so-called Liddle test). These findings 
are complemented by elevated plasma corticotropin 
levels and an abnormal computed tomography scan. The 
normal subject’s plasma corticotropin level is less than 
100 pg/mL; in patients with corticotropin-secreting 
tumors, the level may range from 50 pg/mL to 200 
pg/mL. These tumors frequently are treated by transsphenoidal 
removal. 

Tumors that secrete TSH are rare. Patients with these 
lesions have elevated TSH levels, blunted TSH response 
to TRH, and abnormal radiographic imaging. Likewise, 
FSH-secreting tumors are rare. A few isolated cases have 
been reported with increased serum LH or FSH or both. 
Gonadotropin-secreting tumors frequently are misdiagnosed 
as nonsecreting adenomas that sometimes can be 
diagnosed by the increased response of serum LH to TRH 
challenge. 

A variety of pituitary tumors that do not secrete hormones 
also can be encountered. These tumors generally 
grow slowly and insidiously, and clinical symptoms are 
associated with progressive enlargement and compression 
of adjacent tissues. In most cases the symptoms are 
recognized only after significant extrasellar tumor growth 
has occurred. The most common symptom is visual 
impairment or, usually, bilateral visual loss in the superior 
temporal quadrants. Thereafter, the inferior quadrants 
are involved, leading to bitemporal hemianopsia. Visual 
acuity also may be affected. Headache frequently is asso


ciated with large tumors, but there is no characteristic pattern 
of location or intensity. In rare instances, suprasellar 
extension of these tumors may affect hypothalamic function, 
causing diabetes insipidus, irregularities of sleep, 
temperature deregulation, or appetite deregulation. 
Amenorrhea occurs in approximately 50% of women 
with nonfunctioning pituitary tumors, primarily because 
of compression of surrounding tissue. 

A number of recently described tumors merit mention. 
The first is termed a silent subtype III adenoma, based on 
ultrastructural criteria. It is an aggressive pituitary adenoma, 
although a small number respond to bromocriptine 
therapy. A second type of adenoma, the “null cell” variety, 
constitutes about one third of the adenomas found in 
the pituitary when classified by ultrastructural, functional, 
and immunologic means. These adenomas are often 
large neoplasms that are diagnosed late because of the 
lack of hormone production. These tumors may be 
accompanied by modest hyperprolactinemia. Unfortunately, 
because of the tumor size, a significant number 
of patients with null cell pituitary adenomas experience 
visual loss and some hypopituitarism. 

At the other end of the spectrum is an entity described 
as the incidentaloma. These lesions usually are identified 
when radiography is carried out for evaluation of symptoms 
such as headaches, and when followed over time the 
lesions show no change in size. It should be recalled that 
in 1936 Costello evaluated 1,000 pituitary glands 
obtained from unselected autopsies and found the lesions 
in 22.5% of the glands and no correlation with tumors 
with clinical symptoms during the subject’s lifetime. 

Craniopharyngiomas, although not pituitary tumors 
per se, are the most common sellar neoplasms of childhood 
and adolescence, although one third of cases are 
adults. Craniopharyngiomas have been described in siblings. 
The tumors arise from remnants of Rathke’s pouch 
and are commonly seen as suprasellar cystic lesions with 
intrasellar tumors. The latter are radiologically indistinguishable 
from functional pituitary adenomas; however, 
suprasellar calcification is present in more than half the 
patients. Unlike the nonfunctional tumor, the craniopharyngioma 
demonstrates aggressive growth extending 
into the optic chiasm, hypothalamus, and third ventricle, 
causing visual defects, diabetes insipidus, and signs of 
increased intracranial pressure. These lesions frequently 
are treated surgically. Often, postoperative radiation therapy 
is employed as well. 

The Empty-Sella Syndrome 

The empty-sella syndrome is a frequent cause of sellar 
enlargement, particularly in middle-aged obese women 
who are hypertensive. Patients with empty-sella syndrome 
also may have modest elevations in prolactin levels. 
Headache is a common symptom. Associated 
conditions include those that result in increased intracranial 
pressure, such as pseudotumor cerebri. The empty 


DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

sella develops from a congenital defect of the sellar 
diaphragm through which herniation of the arachnoid 
membrane occurs. Consequently, cerebrospinal fluid 
pressure is transmitted into the sellar space, thus enlarging 
it. In general, sellar enlargement is uniform and symmetric, 
although symmetry suggestive of an intrasellar 
neoplasm may be observed. It has been speculated that a 
pituitary tumor that existed for an extended time underwent 
infarction and gave rise to the empty sella. In addition, 
antipituitary antibodies have been noted in some 
patients with empty-sella syndrome, although the significance 
of this finding is unclear. The diagnosis of this 
lesion is made radiographically, and management of these 
patients is conservative and expectant. 

POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME, 
HIRSUTISM, AND OTHER 
ANDROGEN EXCESS DISORDERS 

Signs and Symptoms of Androgen Excess 

Patients with androgen excess can present with a variety 
of symptoms, but it is skin manifestations, such as hirsutism, 
acne, and alopecia, that usually prompt medical 
treatment. Androgen excess disorders result from either 
the excessive production or the excess effect of androgens. 
Both the adrenal glands and ovaries contribute to 
the circulating androgen pool in women. The adrenal 

gland preferentially secretes weak androgens, such as 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) or its sulfated “depot” 
form, DHEAS (up to 90% is of adrenal origin). These 
hormones, in addition to androstenedione (which is often 
elevated in women with PCOS), may serve as prohormones 
for more potent androgens such as testosterone or 
dihydrotestosterone (DHT). The ovary is the preferential 
source of testosterone. It is estimated that 75% of circulating 
testosterone originates from the ovary (mainly 
through peripheral conversion of prohormones by liver, 
fat, and skin, but also through direct ovarian secretion). 
Androstenedione, of both adrenal (50%) and ovarian 
(50%) origin, is the only circulating androgen that is 
higher in premenopausal women than in men, yet its 
androgenic potency is only 10% of testosterone. 
Dihydrotestosterone is the most potent androgen, though 
it circulates in negligible quantities, and it results primarily 
from the intracellular 5a -reduction of testosterone. 

SKIN MANIFESTATIONS OF ANDROGEN EXCESS 

Hirsutism is defined medically as the presence of terminal 
hair in a male pattern distribution, but in the popular 
mind it often refers to any type of excess body hair in an 
undesirable location. Hirsutism should be viewed much 
as polycystic ovaries are—as a sign rather than a diagnosis. 
Most commonly, hirsutism is associated with androgen 
excess (androgen-dependent hirsutism). This type 
tends to be a midline-predominant hair growth (Fig. 34). 


n FIG. 34. Modified Ferriman-Gallwey Scale, a clinical tool for assessing the extent and distribution of hirsutism. (Reproduced 
from Hatch R, Rosenfield RL, Kim MH, Tredway D. Hirsutism: implications, etiology, and management. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1981;140:815–830 with permission from Mosby, Inc. Users may not print or otherwise reproduce copies without the written permission 
of the copyright holder.) 

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

The degree of androgen excess that can result in hirsutism 
most commonly has its source in the increased 
production (or intake) of androgens (Fig. 35). However, 
the potency of the androgen produced (DHT > testosterone 
> androstenedione > DHEA), the amount of 
androgen that is free or weakly bound in serum and thus 
bioavailable (sex hormone–binding globulin, or SHBG, 
preferentially binds more potent androgens than estro-
gens), and the peripheral metabolism of androgens (primarily 
the intracellular production of DHT from 
precursors) are all factors in determining the presence and 
degree of hirsutism. In the past, measurement of 3a androstenediol 
glucuronide, a peripheral metabolite of 
DHT, was used as a circulating marker of androgen 
excess in the skin (hirsutism and acne), but its clinical use 
today is negligible. 

Factors other than androgens may contribute to the 
development of hirsutism. Hyperinsulinemia, which 
accompanies many benign forms of virilization, also can 
stimulate the pilosebaceous unit both directly and indirectly 
by contributing to hyperandrogenemia. 

The pilosebaceous unit is the skin structure that gives 
rise to both hair follicles and sebaceous glands, and are 
found everywhere on the body except the palms of the 
hand, the soles of the feet, and the lips. The density is 
greatest on the face and scalp (400–800 glands per square 
centimeter) and lowest on the extremities (50 glands per 
square centimeter). The total number of pilosebaceous 
units does not increase after birth (about 5 million), but 
pilosebaceous units can become more prominent through 
activation and differentiation. Before puberty, the body 

Cholesterol 


1 
4 
Pregnenolone 


17a -OH pregnenolone 


2 
4 

2 

Progesterone 


17a -OH progesterone 


3 


3 

11-Deoxycorticosterone 11-Deoxycortisol 


5

5 


Corticosterone Cortisol 


Aldosterone 

hair is primarily fine, unpigmented vellus. After puberty 

and its increased androgen stimulation, some of these 

hairs (mainly midline hair) are transformed into coarser 

pigmented terminal hairs. A similar mechanism may 

explain the increase in acne with puberty that accompa


nies increased sebum production by the sebaceous 

glands. Hair in some regions of the body, such as the eye


brows, lashes, and scalp, undergoes conversion to termi


nal hair without androgen exposure. 

After a period of active growth (anagen), the hair fol


licle enters a resting phase (telogen) of varying length. 

The period of transition from anagen to telogen is some


times referred to as catagen. During this transition, the 

hair shafts separate from the dermal papillae at their base. 

The period of anagen varies from 3 years on the scalp to 

4 months on the face. For corresponding parts of the skin, 

men have longer anagens than women do, which in part 

may be a result of higher circulating androgen levels. 

Hirsutism occurs when androgens stimulate the trans


formation of fine, unpigmented vellus to coarse, pig


mented, thickened terminal hair. Paradoxically, androgens 

can exert opposite effects on hair follicles on the scalp, 

causing conversion of terminal follicles to velluslike fol


licles, leading to hair thinning and balding. The pattern in 

women of androgenic alopecia involves progressive thin


ning of the crown region (Fig. 36). The mechanism by 

which androgens may cause regression of a terminal hair 

follicle is unknown. Androgens also can cause increased 

sebum production and abnormal keratinization in the 

pilosebaceous unit, contributing to the development of 

acne. 

46 
DHEA 



Androstenediol 


2 


2 

6 
Androstenedione 



Testosterone 


7 

Dihydrotestosterone 

Key to enzymes 

1: Side chain cleavage (CYP11A) 
2: 3-b -hydroxysteroid reductase (3b HSD) 
3: 21 hydroxylase (CYP21) 
4: 17 hydroxylase, 17,20 lyase (CYP17) 
5: 11b hydroxysteroid reductase (11b HSD) 
6: 17b hydroxysteroid reductase (17b HSD) 
7: 5a -reductase (SRD5A) 
n FIG. 35. Androgen biosynthesis from cholesterol. Abbreviations: DHEA indicates dehydroepiandrosterone; DHT, dihydrotestosterone. 

n FIG. 36. Ludwig scale for grading androgenic alopecia 
in females. Note the pattern of thinning at the crown, which 
characterizes female balding. (Ludwig E. Classification of the 
types of androgenic alopecia [common baldness] occurring 
in the female sex. Br J Dermatol 1977;97:247–254) 
Patients with complete inactivation of the androgen 
receptor in type I androgen resistance syndrome do not 
develop hirsutism and acne. There are also ethnic and, 
presumably, genetic differences that can ameliorate the 
effects of androgen excess in the periphery, as demonstrated 
by Asian women with PCOS who do not have significant 
hirsutism (46). This may be mediated through 
differences in 5a -reductase activity. 

VIRILIZATION 

Virilization in an adult woman is a rare disorder and must 
be separated from more common and less severe causes 
of androgen excess in women, such as PCOS. 
Amenorrhea may occur in a premenopausal woman. A 
rapid presentation of the virilization often leads to a 
speedy evaluation and diagnosis, whereas the more lingering 
forms may be overlooked until masculinization is 
marked. Virilization is never idiopathic, and all cases 
need to be investigated until a cause is discovered. 
Polycystic ovary syndrome or the adult forms of nonclassic 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia rarely cause virilization. 


Virilization presents with a variety of peripheral 
effects. Acne and severe hirsutism are invariably present. 
Balding, especially with centripetal balding and frontal 
recession, is more characteristic of androgenic alopecia in 
men. With the more indolent presentation of androgenic 
alopecia in women, a generalized thinning of the crown 
region is common. A deepening of the voice has been 
reported in women with androgen-secreting tumors or 
women undergoing exogenous androgen treatment; it 
does not necessarily improve after removal of the androgen 
excess. Increase in the size of the larynx is one factor 
in the voice change. Clitoromegaly, a clitoral index 
greater than 35 mm2, also is reported. (The clitoral index 
is the product of the sagittal and transverse diameters of 
the glans of the clitoris. In normal women these diameters 
are in the range of 5 mm each.) The degree of clitoral 
enlargement correlates with the degree of androgen 
excess. Androgens can lead to body composition 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

changes, especially in the upper body, including 
increased muscle mass and decreased fat mass. These 
changes are accompanied by breast atrophy. 

Differential Diagnosis of Androgen 
Excess 

POLYCYSTIC OVARY SYNDROME 

Overview and Diagnosis. Polycystic ovary syndrome is 
probably the most common cause of androgen excess, 
affecting 4–6% of women in the developed world (47). 
Although there is no consensus as to the definition of 
PCOS, the diagnostic criteria from the 1990 National 
Institutes of Health, National Institute of Child Health 
and Development conference on PCOS can be used: 

• 
Hyperandrogenism or hyperandrogenemia or both 
• 
Oligo-ovulation 
• 
Exclusion of other potential causes, such as con-
genital adrenal hyperplasia, hyperprolactinemia, 
Cushing’s syndrome, and androgen-secreting 
tumors 
Thus, PCOS represents unexplained hyperandrogenic 
chronic anovulation and is a diagnosis of exclusion. It 
represents a heterogeneous disorder of unknown etiology. 

Elevation of circulating androgen levels can be used to 
document hyperandrogenemia. Testosterone, the major 
potent circulating androgen in women, often has been 
used in both clinical practice and clinical trials to identify 
women with PCOS. A variety of measurements of testosterone 
are available, including total testosterone, free 
testosterone, and bioavailable testosterone (which 
includes both the free component and testosterone weakly 
bound to other circulating serum proteins, such as 
albumin). Others have used the free androgen index 
derived from both testosterone and SHBG (testosterone ´ 
100/SHBG). 

Other diagnostic criteria have been proposed, including 
the polycystic ovary morphology found on ultrasonography, 
with multiple 2–8-mm subcapsular preantral 
follicles forming a black “pearl necklace” sign (Fig. 37). 
Polycystic ovaries are distinct from PCOS. As many as 
25% of an unsolicited population may have polycystic 
ovaries on ultrasonographic examination, and many are in 
women with normal androgen levels and regular menstrual 
cycles. 

Women with PCOS appear to be uniquely insulin 
resistant, although this is not part of the diagnostic criteria 
(48). Insulin resistance in the periphery—primarily 
skeletal muscle, which uses approximately 85–90% of 
circulating insulin—is compensated for by excess insulin 
secretion by the beta cells of the pancreas. The compensatory 
hyperinsulinemia may contribute to androgen 
excess by directly stimulating androgen production in the 
adrenal glands and ovaries, as well as suppressing production 
of key binding globulins such as SHBG (with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 37. Characteristic transvaginal ultrasonographic appearance of a polycystic ovary with the “pearl necklace” sign. 
corresponding increased bioactivity of circulating androgens) 
or IGF-binding globulins (leading to increased IGF 
action in key target tissues such as the ovary). Insulin also 
has myriad effects on cellular metabolism, including 
transporting amino acids and electrolytes, stimulating 
lipogenesis, and serving as a mitogenic factor. Overall, 
the net effects are increased storage of energy in the form 
of carbohydrate, protein, and fat. 

Unfortunately, there is no accurate, inexpensive, 
reproducible test for assessing insulin sensitivity clinically. 
Tests for assessing insulin sensitivity are dynamic tests 
such as the euglycemic clamp (the gold standard) and the 
frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test 
(Table 5). These tests primarily determine insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake (mostly in the skeletal muscle, the 
primary user of circulating insulin). Insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake, however, is just one aspect of insulin’s 
protean actions. Although these methods are the most 
accurate for determining decreased sensitivity to insulin 
(insulin resistance), they are too laborious and expensive 
to use in the routine clinical evaluation of insulin resistance. 


A ratio of fasting glucose to insulin levels that is less 
than 4.5 may be a good marker of insulin resistance in 
obese white women with PCOS (49), and a fasting insulin 
level may be useful in investigating suspected cases of 
stromal hyperthecosis. However, in other populations, 
insulin levels (either fasting or postprandial) have only a 
moderate correlation with findings in more detailed studies 
of insulin action and are less useful in patients with 
impaired glucose tolerance or frank diabetes caused by 
deficiencies in insulin secretion. There is a wide range of 

insulin sensitivity in normal populations and substantial 
overlap of even the most precise measure of insulin action 
between insulin-resistant and control populations. 
Approximately 50% of obese women with PCOS may 
not have clinically recognizable insulin resistance on the 
basis of either fasting values or more dynamic tests. On 
an individual basis, therefore, it often is not possible to 
diagnose insulin resistance. 

Clinical Features of PCOS. Polycystic ovary syndrome 
tends to develop shortly after menarche and lasts for most 
of the reproductive life, although questions persist about 
its natural history during the reproductive years. It has 
been proposed that premature pubarche may be the earliest 
recognizable PCOS phenotype; affected girls display 
hyperinsulinemia and elevated DHEAS levels and, after 
menarche, become oligomenorrheic (50). At the other 
end of the reproductive spectrum, both menstrual irregularity 
(51) and hyperandrogenemia (52) appear to normalize 
as women with PCOS approach their late 30s or 
early 40s. The benefits of treatment on sequelae of PCOS, 
especially destructive ovarian interventions such as 
wedge resection or ovarian drilling, have been suggested 
but not proven. 

Inappropriate gonadotropin secretion has been one of 
the characteristic signs of PCOS since assays have been 
available to characterize gonadotropins, and many practitioners 
have used elevated ratios of LH to FSH of 2:1 or 

3:1 as diagnostic criteria for PCOS. Although some early 
studies suggested a decreased secretion of FSH from the 
pituitary, most subsequent studies have demonstrated 
normal or low normal amounts of FSH production by 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

n TABLE 5. Tests to Consider Administering in Women with Polycystic Ovary Syndrome 
Blood Tests Normal Range* Purpose 
Total testosterone (consider also free 
or bioavailable measures) 
<60 ng/dL* Determine extent of androgen excess 
Fasting blood tests 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone <2 ng/mL Evaluate for nonclassic congenital adrenal 
hyperlasia; use <4 ng/mL for random sample, 
corticotropin stimulation test if abnormal 
Prolactin <20 ng/mL Evaluate for prolactin excess 
Glucose <126 mg/dL Screen for diabetes 
Insulin <20 mU/mL* Screen for insulin resistance 
Glucose to insulin ratio >4.5 Screen for insulin resistance 
Cholesterol <200 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
HDL >35 mg/dL (and preferably 
>45 mg/dL) 
Identify cardiovascular risk 
LDL <130 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
Triglycerides <200 mg/dL Identify cardiovascular risk 
Dynamic blood tests 
Oral glucose tolerance test, give 75 g 
glucose in AM after overnight fast 
2-h glucose ³ 140–<200 mg/dL* Identify or diagnose diabetes, 
impaired glucose tolerance, repeat if abnormal 
2-h glucose ³ 200 mg/dL 
type 2 diabetes mellitus 

*Greater variation may be seen, depending on laboratory or assay.*Greater variation may be seen, depending on laboratory or assay. 

women with PCOS. However, ratios of LH to FSH tend 
to normalize with increasing body mass index, and 
gonadotropin level appears to be an insensitive marker of 
PCOS in an obese population. 

In addition to reporting peripheral manifestations of 
androgen excess (primarily hirsutism and acne), women 
with PCOS present to the gynecologist with infertility 
resulting from chronic anovulation. These women are not 
absolutely infertile but rather are subfertile as a result of 
the low frequency and unpredictability of their ovulatory 
cycles. As a general rule, it is difficult to induce ovulation 
both successfully and safely in women with PCOS. Many 
of these women are unresponsive to clomiphene citrate 
and human menopausal gonadotropins, a situation that is 
exacerbated by underlying obesity. On the other end of the 
spectrum are women with PCOS who overrespond to both 
these medications. Women with PCOS are at especially 
increased risks of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome, a 
syndrome of massive enlargement of the ovaries and transudation 
of ascites into the abdominal cavity that can lead 
to rapid and symptomatic enlargement of the abdomen, 
intravascular contraction, hypercoagulability, and systemic 
organ dysfunction. They are also at increased risk 
for multiple pregnancy. Polycystic ovaries provide a plentiful 
source of preantral follicles that contribute to these 
complications. There is also emerging evidence that baseline 
hyperinsulinemia may contribute to the increased risk 
of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (53). 

Long-term Sequelae of PCOS. Long-term sequelae of 
PCOS relate primarily to the presence of ovulatory dysfunction 
and insulin resistance in the syndrome. They 
include an increased risk for endometrial cancer, type 2 
diabetes, and cardiovascular disease. 

Many gynecologic cancers, including ovarian, breast, 
and endometrial cancers, have been reported to be more 
common in women with PCOS. The best case of an association 
between PCOS and cancer can be made for 
endometrial cancer. Many risk factors for endometrial 
cancer, including obesity, chronic anovulation, hypertension, 
and type 2 diabetes, overlap with the PCOS phenotype 
(54). It is not yet known how many induced 
withdrawal bleeds per year are necessary for adequate 
prophylaxis of the development of uterine cancer in the 
PCOS population. 

Women with PCOS have been found to be profoundly 
insulin resistant at the level of the skeletal muscle and 
adipose tissue. The mechanism is unknown. This baseline 
insulin resistance, combined with the worsening effect of 
obesity (which may affect up to 50% of the U.S. PCOS 
population), places these women at increased risk for 
impaired glucose tolerance and type 2 diabetes. 
Approximately 30–40% of obese women of reproductive 
age with PCOS have been found to have impaired glucose 
tolerance, and approximately 10% have type 2 diabetes 
based on a 2-hour glucose level greater than 200 mg/dL 
(55). Of note is that only a small fraction of women with 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PCOS with either impaired glucose tolerance or type 2 
diabetes display fasting hyperglycemia consistent with 
the definition of type 2 diabetes according to the 1997 
American Diabetes Association criteria (fasting glucose 
³ 126 mg/dL) (56). 

Given the high prevalence of abnormalities in glucose 
tolerance, women with PCOS should be screened for glucose 
intolerance with an oral glucose tolerance test: 75 mg 
of glucose are given after an overnight fast and a fasting 
and 2-hour glucose level are obtained. Impaired glucose 
tolerance (2-hour glucose from 140 mg/dL to 199 mg/dL 
by the criteria of the World Health Organization [57]) is a 
clear risk factor for developing type 2 diabetes and may 
also be an independent risk factor for cardiovascular 
events, such as myocardial infarction and stroke. The 
development of glucose intolerance heralds beta cell dysfunction 
with inadequate insulin secretion for the degree 
of reduced peripheral insulin sensitivity. The conversion 
rate to glucose intolerance over time is unknown, which 
makes recommendations for frequency of screening for 
glucose intolerance and diabetes difficult. A conservative 
estimate would be to screen every 5 years or less. 

Many of the studies suggesting an increased incidence 
of cardiovascular disease for women with PCOS are inferential 
based on risk factor models. Women with PCOS 
appear to form a subset of the insulin resistance syndrome 
that consists of insulin resistance, hypertension, and lipid 
abnormalities (58). Hyperinsulinemia represents a homeostatic 
response to insulin resistance, which may develop as 
a consequence of a variety of factors, including advancing 
age, obesity, hypertension, and type 2 diabetes. The clinical 
consequences of these factors and their resultant 
hyperinsulinemia include lipid abnormalities, atherosclerosis, 
and coronary heart disease. 

In individuals with essential hypertension, insulin resistance 
results from impairment of insulin action in peripheral 
tissues, primarily muscle. Several reasons have been 
suggested to account for this relationship between hyperinsulinemia 
and hypertension, including sodium retention, 
overactivity of the sympathetic nervous system, impairment 
of membrane transport, and stimulation of vascular 
smooth muscle cells. Other effects of hyperinsulinemia 
and insulin resistance include the development of an 
atherogenic plasma lipid profile resulting from insulin 
enhancement of synthesis of very low density lipoproteins 
and hypertriglyceridemia. Insulin also causes the proliferation 
of smooth muscle cells in arterioles, as well as 
stimulation of collagen synthesis. These effects, in combination 
with insulin-induced growth factor elaboration and 
inhibition of regression of lipid plaques, contribute to 
atherosclerosis and its resultant coronary vascular disease. 

Many women with PCOS have significant dyslipidemia. 
Studies have shown that these women have lower 
high-density lipoprotein levels and higher triglyceride 
and low-density lipoprotein levels than do age-, sex-, and 
weight-matched control subjects (59). This elevation in 
low-density lipoprotein levels is not one of the character


istic findings of the insulin resistance syndrome, but it 
contributes to increased cardiovascular risk (60). Longterm 
follow-up of women with PCOS may reveal an 
increased incidence of hypertension compared with ageand 
weight-matched controls, because this may represent 
a later sequela of prolonged insulin resistance. Recent 
studies have documented other interim risk factors (eg, 
increased carotid artery intimal thickness) that suggest 
that these women have earlier and more advanced 
atherosclerotic disease than do appropriate control 
women (61). Studies confirming this idea that are based 
on actual cardiovascular events (such as stroke or 
myocardial infarction) in women with PCOS have not 
been published. 

Establishing risk factors for the insulin resistance syndrome 
is critical to the long-term health of the women. A 
family history of diabetes and cardiovascular disease 
(especially first-degree relatives with premature onset, in 
males younger than 55 years and in females younger than 
65 years) is notable. Lifestyle factors such as smoking 
and alcohol consumption, as well as diet and exercise histories, 
should be recorded. Signs of insulin resistance on 
physical examination, such as obesity, a centripetal fat 
distribution, and the presence of acanthosis nigricans 
(Image 32), should be recorded. 

Weight should be corrected for height by using the body 
mass index (kilograms per square meters). However, the 
pattern of fat distribution, rather than body mass index, 
seems to be most predictive of morbidity and mortality. 
Centrally distributed fat giving women an apple shape is 
referred to as an android distribution. This characteristic 
has been associated with women who have an increased 
risk for cardiovascular disease, especially myocardial 
infarction, and with index of death from all causes. Fat also 
may be distributed mainly in the hips, giving the patient a 
pear shape, often referred to as gynoid obesity. This pattern 
is best detected by measuring a circumference both at the 
umbilicus and at the hips around the level of the symphysis 
pubis and creating a fraction known as the waist-to-hip 
ratio. Values greater than 0.72 (primarily android fat distribution) 
are considered abnormal, but increased morbidity 
and mortality become more noticeable at values greater 
than 1.0. The android pattern of obesity has been associated 
with abnormal lipid profiles and increased insulin resistance 
compared with the gynoid pattern. 

ANDROGEN-SECRETING TUMORS 

The differential diagnosis of androgen excess leading to 
virilization, especially combined with a sudden onset and 
rapid progression, begins and ends with evaluation for 
tumors or dysfunctional states, usually of the ovary and 
less commonly of the adrenal gland. Androgen-secreting 
tumors are invariably accompanied by elevated circulating 
androgen levels. However, there is no absolute level 
that is pathognomonic for a tumor, just as there is no minimum 
androgen level that excludes a tumor. In the past, 
testosterone levels greater than 2 ng/mL (200 ng/dL) and 


DHEAS levels greater than 700 m g/dL were regarded as 
suggestive of a tumor of ovarian and adrenal etiology, 
respectively, but these cutoffs display poor sensitivity and 
specificity. However, in one study, less than 10% of 
patients with a total testosterone finding greater than 2.50 
ng/mL had a tumor (62). 

The most common androgen-producing tumor in a premenopausal 
woman is a Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor. Other 
common tumors are thecomas and hilus cell tumors. Hilus 
cell tumors are often small and can be less than 1 cm in 
diameter—theoretically below the range of imaging visualization 
by ultrasonography. Tumors also may have a 
more indolent history, such as granulosa cell tumors, 10% 
of which primarily secrete androgens instead of estrogens. 
Any large ovarian tumor can produce androgens indirectly 
by causing hyperplasia of the surrounding normal stroma 
(eg, benign cystic teratomas, dysgerminomas, and 
epithelial tumors). 

The vast majority of ovarian androgen-secreting 
tumors are benign. Adrenal tumors are rare, with an estimated 
incidence of two cases per 1 million persons per 
year, which are divided equally among adenomas and 
carcinomas. The age of onset in adults peaks in the fifth 
decade. Virilization can accompany both tumors primarily 
producing androgens and tumors primarily producing 
cortisol (Cushing’s syndrome). A pelvic examination 
should be performed, because 90% of ovarian tumors 
have unilateral enlargement. A transvaginal ultrasonographic 
examination, increasingly an office-based examination, 
should be able to identify ovarian masses greater 
than 1 cm in diameter, although physiologic follicular and 
cystic developments throughout the normal menstrual 
cycle, especially a corpus luteal cyst, can masquerade as 
more serious pathology. 

A long history of symptoms, as may be the case with an 
ovarian tumor, does not exclude the presence of an adrenocortical 
neoplasm. A physician who suspects the presence 
of an androgen-secreting tumor can use a computed topography 
scan or MRI to detect adrenal nodules less than 5 
mm in diameter; these imaging techniques provide a 
greater resolution than ultrasonography and can detect 
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia in the case of a corticotropinsecreting 
tumor. However, approximately 2% of the population 
harbors a clinically insignificant adrenal adenoma 
(ie, incidentaloma), such that localization is not diagnostic 
for an androgen-secreting adrenal tumor. Functional radiologic 
techniques, such as selective venous catheterization 
or scintigraphy with 131iodomethylnorcholes-terol, rarely 
are used in the initial screening for such tumors. 

OTHER CAUSES OF OVARIAN DYSFUNCTION 

Dysfunctional states of the ovary, primarily hyperthecosis, 
also may result in marked androgen excess. In stromal 
hyperthecosis, most of the ovarian androgen overproduction 
results from hyperplasia of the ovarian stroma and not 
from the accumulation of small follicles, as is the case with 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

PCOS. Most women with stromal hyperthecosis have 
severe hyperinsulinemia, which may be the stimulus for 
stromal androgen overproduction. It has been reported in 
both premenopausal and postmenopausal women, often 
with coexisting sequelae of the insulin resistance syndrome, 
such as dyslipidemia and glucose intolerance. 

Although rare, extreme elevations in insulin levels 
occur in individuals with insulin receptor defects. A substantial 
number of such defects have been identified. They 
are sometimes caused by single-base-pair substitutions or 
deletions in the gene encoding the insulin receptor, resulting 
in truncated or modified receptors with markedly deficient 
function. In such individuals, the elevated insulin 
levels may stimulate excess ovarian androgen production, 
resulting in what has been described as the hyperandrogenism, 
insulin resistance, and acanthosis nigricans 
(HAIR-AN) syndrome. 

Acanthosis nigricans is a dermatologic condition 
marked by velvety, mossy, verrucous, hyperpigmented skin 
(Image 32). It has been noted on the back of the neck, in the 
axillae, underneath the breasts, and even on the vulva. It is, 
however, a nonspecific finding and is common in other conditions, 
such as PCOS. The HAIR-AN syndrome represents 
the extreme manifestation of the association of 
hyperandrogenism and hyperinsulinism and affects only a 
small number of women in whom severe elevations of 
androgens and insulin occur concomitantly. Presumably, 
mutations in a number of genes may cause this phenotype. 

CUSHING’S SYNDROME 

Coexisting signs of Cushing’s syndrome, including a 
moon facies, buffalo hump, abdominal striae, centripetal 
fat distribution, and hypertension, should be documented 
and lead to further screening (Image 33). In rare instances 
the patient may present with low back pain due to vertebral 
compression fracture or to a long-bone fracture 
caused by steroid-induced osteoporosis. Cortisol excess 
can be screened for with a 24-hour urine test for free cortisol 
(which better quantifies excess cortisol production 
than do random spot blood levels; normal values <100 
m g/24 h) or a 1-hour overnight dexamethasone suppression 
test. Dexamethasone given orally at 11 PM is followed 
with a test of serum cortisol on blood obtained at 

8:00 AM. A suppressed value less than 5 m g/dL makes the 
diagnosis of Cushing’s syndrome extremely unlikely. 
Overall, Cushing’s syndrome is an extremely rare cause 
of clinically evident androgen excess. 
NONCLASSIC CONGENITAL ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA 

Nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia, also referred 
to as late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia, generally 
is caused by an inherited defect of 21-hydroxylase activity. 
Patients may have clinical characteristics similar to 
those of women with PCOS, although they frequently 
have a milder presentation. The condition is estimated to 
be present in 1–2% of unselected U.S. women with hir



REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

sutism (63, 64). The frequency of nonclassic congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia appears to be highest in Ashkenazi 
Jews (65). 

Patients with 21-hydroxylase–deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia are homozygous for a mutation of 
CYP21, the gene encoding for P450c21, which is the 
enzyme with 21-hydroxylase activity. In nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (and the classic form of the disorder), 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone, the immediate precursor for 
P450c21, accumulates in excess. Theoretically, because of 
the lack of cortisol synthesis, corticotropin levels 
increase, resulting in an overproduction and accumulation 
of cortisol precursors. These, in turn, can be shunted 
to androgen biosynthetic pathways, which causes excessive 
production of androgens, resulting in virilization. A 
vicious circle can arise in classic forms, with increased 
corticotropin levels persisting because of lack of cortisol 
production. The phenotype is largely due to the amount of 
functional enzymatic activity of the allelic variants, and 
those with nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia have 
10–20% activity. However, because of enzymatic activity, 
patients with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia generally 
do not have elevated circulating corticotropin levels or 
hyperresponsiveness of corticotropin to corticotropinreleasing 
hormone stimulation. 

Nonclassic congenital adrenal hyperplasia screening 
involves determining a fasting 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
in the morning. A value of less than 2 ng/mL is normal, 
and recently cutoffs as high as 4 ng/mL have been proposed 
if obtained in the morning and during the follicular 
phase (66). Patients with androgen excess who have 17a hydroxyprogesterone 
screening values above the cutoff 
should undergo a corticotropin stimulation test. This test 
is performed by intravenously administering 250 m g of 
cosyntropin, a synthetic form of corticotropin, after a 
baseline 17a -hydroxyprogesterone level has been 
obtained. A second blood sample for 17a -hydroxyprogesterone 
measurement is obtained 30–60 minutes later. 
Stimulated 17a -hydroxyprogesterone values above 10–15 
ng/mL can be considered to be diagnostic of 21-hydroxylase–
deficient nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (64). 

OTHER CAUSES OF ANDROGEN EXCESS 

A prolactin level can identify prolactinomas that secrete 
massive amounts of prolactin. Hyperprolactinemia can 
cause oligo-ovulation and may stimulate adrenal androgen 
production, but this cause of androgen excess is 
extremely rare. Approximately 5–10% of women with 
PCOS have a coexisting mild elevation in circulating prolactin 
levels. A serum TSH determination is also useful, 
given the high incidence of thyroid disorders in women 
and their association with menstrual disorders. The use of 
exogenous androgens (eg, anabolic steroid use by a 
bodybuilder) or an overdose of androgens in a postmenopausal 
woman also can cause clinically evident 
androgen excess. Severe hirsutism, and even virilization, 
that occurs during pregnancy has a unique differential 

diagnosis. This diagnosis includes benign ovarian sources 
such as hyperreactio luteinalis (ie, gestational ovarian 
theca–lutein cysts), or luteomas, and extremely rare fetoplacental 
sources such as aromatase deficiency, resulting 
in androgen excess due to the placental inability to convert 
precursor androgens into estrogens. 

IDIOPATHIC HIRSUTISM 

The term idiopathic hirsutism was coined to identify the 
presence of hirsutism in a eumenorrheic women with normal 
circulating androgens, but this may reflect our limited 
ability to assess androgen action in the peripheral 
compartment. When thoroughly investigated for androgen 
excess, most cases are found not to be idiopathic 
(67). Androgen-independent hirsutism may be a familial 
tendency (familial hypertrichosis) or be due to medications 
such as cyclosporin, diazoxide, or minoxidil. These 
medications often result in hypertrichosis, a generalized 
increase in body hair rather than the midline development 
of marked terminal hair growth. 

Treatment of Androgen Excess 

ANDROGEN-SUPPRESSIVE THERAPIES 

Women with documented hyperandrogenemia theoretically 
would benefit most from androgen-suppressive therapies. 
Suppressing the ovary has been achieved through the 
use of oral contraceptive, depot progestin, or GnRH analogue 
treatment. Oral contraceptives 1) inhibit ovarian 
steroid production by lowering gonadotropin levels and 
2) increase SHBG as a result of their estrogen effect, 
further lowering the level of bioavailable testosterone. 
They also may inhibit dihydrotestosterone binding to the 
androgen receptor and 5a -reductase activity, as well as 
increase hepatic steroid clearance (because of stimulation 
of the P450 system). These myriad actions contribute to 
improving stigmas of androgen excess. There are theoretical 
reasons for choosing an oral contraceptive that uses a 
less androgenic progestin, but few studies show a clinical 
difference among different types of progestins. 

A GnRH agonist may lower the level of circulating 
androgens more, but comparative trials with other agents 
and combined-agent trials have been mixed and have not 
shown a greater benefit to one or the other or combined 
treatment (68–71). A GnRH agonist given alone results in 
unacceptable bone loss (71). The primary therapy in nonclassic 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia is corticosteroid 
suppression of the HPA axis, and it can result in improved 
acne and ovulatory function. However, significant hirsutism 
in the patient with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia 
will respond best to antiandrogen therapy. 

Corticosteroid suppression of the adrenal gland also 
offers theoretic benefits in the treatment of PCOS, but 
deterioration in glucose tolerance is problematic, and 
long-term effects such as osteoporosis are of significant 
concern. This treatment may be useful as adjunctive ther



apy in inducing ovulation with clomiphene citrate. 
Ketoconazole inhibits the P450 enzyme system and thus 
inhibits androgen biosynthesis, but it is hepatotoxic. 

HIRSUTISM THERAPY 

Most medical methods that improve hirsutism do not produce 
the dramatic results that patients desire. In general, 
combination therapies appear to produce better results 
than single-agent approaches, although it often takes 3–6 
months for medical therapy to produce noticeable 
improvement, and adjunctive mechanical removal methods 
are often necessary. 

The majority of women will experience improvement 
in their hirsutism. Unfortunately, there are no universally 
accepted techniques for assessing hirsutism and its 
response to treatment. Some of the depilatory treatments 
used by patients are so effective that it is difficult to 
determine baseline hirsutism and response to treatment, 
and thus the patient’s subjective assessment guides therapy. 
Hirsutism scales are often used, but they remain problematic 
in both research and clinical practice. The most 
commonly used grading system is the modified 
Ferriman-Gallwey scoring system (see Fig. 34). It is 
heavily influenced by peripheral hair on the extremities 
and, like other grading systems, is highly subjective. 
Other assessments of hirsutism have included measurement 
of hair shaft diameter, hair follicle density, growth 
rate, and weight of shaved hair from a given area. Some 
investigators have conducted pilot studies of the use of 
prostate-specific antigen as a serum marker of response to 
therapy, but results have been mixed. 

Lifestyle Modifications. For obese patients with hirsutism, 
weight loss is frequently recommended. Increases in 
SHBG through improved insulin sensitivity from weight 
loss may lower bioavailable androgen levels. In one 
study, approximately 50% of the women who lost weight 
experienced improvement in their hirsutism (72). 

Ornithine Decarboxylase Inhibitors. Ornithine decarboxylase 
is necessary for the production of polyamines, the 
proteins that stimulate and regulate the growth of hair follicles 
and other organs. Ornithine decarboxylase is also a 
sensitive and specific marker of androgen action in the 
prostate. Inhibition of this enzyme limits cell division and 
function. Recently, a potent inhibitor of this enzyme, 
eflornithine hydrochloride, has been tested in a facial 
cream and found to be effective against hirsutism; it has 
been approved by the FDA for the treatment of unwanted 
facial hair. It is available as a 13.9% cream and is applied 
to affected areas twice a day for a minimum of 4 hours 
each. In clinical trials, 32% of patients showed marked 
improvement after 24 weeks compared with 8% of 
women treated with placebo, and benefit was first noted 
at 8 weeks. It is pregnancy category C and appears to be 
well tolerated. A variety of minor adverse skin conditions 
occurred in 1% of subjects. 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Mechanical Methods of Hair Removal. Mechanical hair 
removal (shaving, plucking, waxing, using depilatory 
creams, electrolysis, and laser vaporization) can control 
hirsutism and often is the frontline treatment used by 
women. Laser vaporization is receiving increasing attention. 
Hair is damaged using the principle of selective 
photothermolysis with wavelengths of light well 
absorbed by follicular melanin and pulse durations that 
selectively thermally damage the target without damaging 
surrounding tissue. Patients with dark hair and light 
skin are ideal candidates. It appears to be most effective 
during anagen. 

ANTIANDROGEN THERAPY 

Androgen-Receptor Antagonists. Androgen-receptor 
antagonists antagonize the binding of testosterone and 
other androgens to the androgen receptor. As a class, 
therefore, they are teratogenic and pose risk of feminization 
of the external genitalia in a male fetus, should the 
patient conceive. Spironolactone, a diuretic and aldosterone 
antagonist, also binds to the androgen receptor 
with 67% of the affinity of dihydrotestosterone. It has 
other mechanisms of action, including inhibition of ovarian 
and adrenal steroidogenesis, competition for androgen 
receptors in hair follicles, and direct inhibition of 
5a -reductase activity. There is a dose–response effect and 
a long period of onset (6 months or more). Because 
approximately 20% of women undergoing this therapy 
experience increased menstrual frequency, it often is 
combined with the oral contraceptive. Other adverse 
effects include polyuria, orthostatic hypotension, nausea, 
and fatigue. Because it can cause and exacerbate hyperkalemia, 
it should be used cautiously in patients with 
renal impairment. The medication also has potential teratogenicity, 
as does any antiandrogen, although exposure 
has rarely resulted in ambiguous genitalia in male infants. 
Acne also has been successfully treated with spironolactone. 
Thus, much of the treatment basis is empiric. 

Cyproterone acetate, which is not available commercially 
in the United States, is a progestogen with antiandrogen 
properties. It frequently is combined in an oral 
contraceptive. Recently, an oral contraceptive containing 
drospirenone, another progestin with antiandrogenic 
properties, was approved for use in the United States as a 
contraceptive. Flutamide is another nonsteroidal antiandrogen 
that has been shown to be effective against hirsutism. 
The most common adverse effect is dry skin; its 
use has rarely been associated with hepatitis. Because 
there is greater risk of teratogenicity with this compound, 
contraception should accompany its use. 

Antiandrogens: 5a -Reductase Inhibitors. There are two 
forms of the enzyme 5a -reductase: type 1, which is 
predominantly found in the skin, and type 2, which is predominantly 
found in the prostate and reproductive tissues. 
Both forms are found in the pilosebaceous unit and 
may contribute to hirsutism, acne, and balding. 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Finasteride inhibits both forms and is available as a 5-mg 
tablet for the treatment of prostate cancer and a 1-mg 
tablet for the treatment of male alopecia. It has been 
found to be effective for the treatment of hirsutism in 
women. Finasteride is better tolerated than other antiandrogens, 
but it has the highest and clearest risk for teratogenicity 
in a male fetus, and adequate contraception 
must accompany its use. Randomized trials have found 
that spironolactone, flutamide, and finasteride all have 
similar efficacy in improving hirsutism (73, 74). 

TREATMENT OF ACNE AND ANDROGENIC ALOPECIA 

Many of the treatments previously discussed have been 
adapted to treat acne and androgenic alopecia. Although 
two triphasic oral contraceptives (containing norgestimate 
and norethindrone acetate) have been shown to 
improve acne and have received an FDA indication for 
this purpose, other pills may offer similar results. Other 
agents for the treatment of acne include topical cleansing 
agents, as well as topical and systemic antibiotics and 
retinoids. Oral isotretinoin, a retinoid, requires careful 
monitoring because it is both hepatotoxic and teratogenic 
(category X). 

The treatment of androgenic alopecia in women is primarily 
empiric. Minoxidil in a 2% or 5% solution is 
approved for the treatment of androgenic alopecia. It is 
thought to increase the recruitment and development of 
pilosebaceous units in the scalp through its peripheral 
vasodilatory actions. It has shown mild efficacy in 
increasing hair growth in women with alopecia. 

IMPROVING INSULIN RESISTANCE IN POLYCYSTIC 
OVARY SYNDROME 

The treatment of PCOS tends to be symptom based, and 
the number and variety of treatment options are proportional 
to our ignorance of the true pathophysiology of the 
syndrome. No treatments used as monotherapy consistently 
improve all aspects of the syndrome. Multiple studies 
have shown that improving insulin sensitivity, be it 
through lifestyle modifications or pharmacologic intervention, 
can result in lowered circulating androgen levels 
(primarily mediated through increased SHBG and less 
bioavailable androgen, but also through decreased total 
testosterone), spontaneous ovulation, and spontaneous 
pregnancy. However, long-term studies documenting 
decreases in sequelae such as diabetes or endometrial cancer 
that accompany improvements in insulin sensitivity 
are lacking. Although improving insulin sensitivity is a 
promising goal, it should not be viewed as the “cure” for 
PCOS. The published studies of insulin-sensitizing agents 
also show a substantial nonresponse rate, so improvements 
in insulin sensitivity alone may not produce clinical 
improvements in all women with PCOS. 

Medications that worsen insulin sensitivity, such as 
corticosteroids, should be used on a long-term basis with 
caution in women with PCOS. There has been some evi


dence in the literature that oral contraceptives can worsen 
insulin resistance and glucose tolerance in women with 
PCOS. However, in the larger population, there is no evidence 
that the effects of oral contraceptives on glucose 
metabolism increase the risk for developing type 2 diabetes, 
and their use should not be limited by this concern. 

The standard for improving insulin sensitivity in obese 
women with PCOS should be weight loss, diet, and exercise. 
Obesity has become epidemic in our society and 
contributes substantially to reproductive and metabolic 
abnormalities in PCOS. Unfortunately, there are no effective 
treatments that result in permanent weight loss, and 
it is estimated that 90–95% of patients who experience a 
weight decrease will relapse. Multiple studies in women 
with PCOS have shown that weight loss can improve the 
fundamental aspects of the endocrine syndrome of 
PCOS; it can lower circulating androgen levels and cause 
spontaneous resumption of menses (75–78). These 
changes have been reported with a weight loss as small as 
5% of the initial weight. Other benefits that have been 
reported include decreased circulating insulin levels. The 
decrease in unbound testosterone levels after weight loss 
may be largely mediated through increases in SHBG. 

There have been few studies on the effect of exercise 
alone on insulin action in women with PCOS, unfortunately, 
and one limited study with only a short period of 
exercise displayed little benefit (77). It is reasonable to 
assume that exercise would have the same beneficial 
effects in women with PCOS as in women with type 2 
diabetes. The preliminary results of the diabetes prevention 
trials also underline the importance of lifestyle interventions 
of diet and exercise in reducing the risk for 
developing diabetes by more than 50% in high-risk individuals. 
The beneficial effects on insulin sensitivity of 
diets of varying composition are touted, with many popular 
sources advocating a high-protein diet as the diet of 
choice in women with PCOS. Few studies support this 
recommendation, and there are theoretical concerns 
about the adverse effects of a high-protein diet on renal 
function in a population at high risk for diabetes, as well 
as the adverse effects of the increased fat composition of 
these diets on dyslipidemia. 

Drugs developed initially to treat type 2 diabetes also 
have been used to treat PCOS. None of these agents are 
currently approved by the FDA for the treatment of PCOS 
or related symptoms such as anovulation, hirsutism, or 
acne. These drugs include metformin (79), thiazolidinediones, 
and the experimental insulin-sensitizer drug 
D-chiro-inositol (80). 

Metformin has been examined in a number of small 
studies, including several randomized controlled trials. 
Metformin was approved for the treatment of type 2 diabetes 
by the FDA in 1994, but it was used clinically for 
close to 20 years before that in other parts of the world. 
Metformin is a biguanide that works primarily by suppressing 
hepatic gluconeogenesis, but it also improves 
insulin sensitivity in the periphery. Gastrointestinal symp



toms (diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, abdominal bloating, flatulence, 
and anorexia) are the most common reactions to 
metformin. They are approximately 30% more frequent 
than in placebo-treated patients. There is a small risk of lactic 
acidosis among women taking this medication, which 
may be triggered by exposure to intravenous iodinated 
radiocontrast agents in susceptible individuals. This most 
commonly occurs in patients with poorly controlled diabetes 
and impaired renal function. Metformin is pregnancy 
category B, with no known human teratogenic risk and no 
known embryonic lethality in humans. There have been no 
reported abnormalities associated with its use during pregnancy 
in women with diabetes, to women with marked 
hyperandrogenism during pregnancy, or to the small number 
of women with PCOS who have conceived during 
treatment. Some clinicians advocate its use during early 
pregnancy to reduce the miscarriage rate, but the documentation 
for this claim is poor. Studies of longer use of metformin 
for PCOS suggest long-term improvement in 
ovulatory function in about half the patients (81). 

Thiazolidinediones are peroxisome proliferator–activating 
receptor agonists and are thought to improve 
insulin sensitivity through a postreceptor mechanism. In 
the largest multicenter randomized trial of an insulin-sensitizing 
agent in women with PCOS, troglitazone has been 
shown to have a dose–response effect in improving ovulation 
and hirsutism (82). This effect appeared to be mediated 
through decreases in hyperinsulinemia and free 
testosterone levels. Troglitazone subsequently has been 
removed from the market because of the risk of hepatotoxicity. 
Newer thiazolidinediones such as rosiglitazone 
and pioglitazone appear to be safer in terms of hepatotoxicity, 
but they also have been associated with embryotoxicity 
in animal studies (both are pregnancy category C), 
and little has been published on their effects in women 
with PCOS. Women using these medications should have 
their liver function monitored on a regular basis. 

It is difficult to separate the effects of improving insulin 
sensitivity from the effects of lowering serum androgen 
levels, because any “pure” improvement in insulin sensitivity 
can raise SHBG and thus lower bioavailable androgen. 
Given the long onset of action for improving 
hirsutism, longer periods of observation are needed. In the 
largest and longest randomized trial of these agents to 
date, troglitazone administered in a dose–response fashion 
was found to significantly improve hirsutism in women 
with PCOS without lowering total testosterone levels (a 
benefit presumably achieved through significantly lowering 
free testosterone levels) (82). 

SURGICAL OPTIONS 

The role of ovarian drilling, if any, in the treatment of hirsutism 
is uncertain. Many argue that the best monotherapy 
results for the endocrine abnormalities in PCOS 
can be obtained through surgical destructive processes of 
the ovary, wedge resection, or ovarian drilling. The value 
of laparoscopic ovarian drilling as a primary treatment for 

DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

subfertile patients with anovulation (failure to ovulate) 
and PCOS is undetermined, according to a Cochrane 
review (83). There is insufficient evidence to determine if 
ovulation or pregnancy rates improve more with ovarian 
drilling than with gonadotropin therapy as a secondary 
treatment for clomiphene-resistant women. None of the 
various drilling techniques appear to offer obvious advantages 
(83). Furthermore, in some cases the results of the 
ovarian drilling may be temporary. Surgery consisting of 
total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingooophorectomy 
is not a usual treatment option for androgen 
excess, but it may be indicated in some cases of 
refractory ovarian hyperandrogenism. 

PREMATURE OVARIAN FAILURE 

Premature ovarian failure (POF) or premature menopause 
generally is defined as consisting of the triad of amenorrhea, 
hypergonadotropinism, and hypoestrogenism in 
women younger than 40 years. Several studies have confirmed, 
however, that the use of these terms is inappropriate. 
In 50% of cases, women with spontaneous POF 
have follicles remaining in the ovaries that function intermittently 
even many years after diagnosis. Sometimes 
these follicles proceed to ovulation. In 5–10% of patients, 
spontaneous pregnancy can occur many years after the 
initial diagnosis of POF (84, 85). Consequently, it might 
be more appropriate to refer to this disorder as primary 
hypogonadism or primary ovarian insufficiency. 
Unfortunately, the term premature ovarian failure is well 
rooted in the literature. 

Etiology 

Premature ovarian failure is clearly a heterogeneous disorder 
(Box G). In some cases, the ovarian insufficiency is 
due to depletion of functional primordial follicles (Fig. 
38). However, in approximately 50% of cases, the ovarian 
insufficiency is a result of follicle dysfunction (84, 85). 
In perhaps half of all cases, follicles remain in the ovary, 
but some pathophysiologic process prevents them from 
functioning normally. 

Defects in genes that influence primordial follicle formation 
and their rate of expenditure would be expected to 
result in POF on the basis of ovarian follicle depletion. A 
study of cases with chromosomal deletions and translocations 
that interrupt gene function provides insight into 
this type of genetic pathogenesis. Two independent loci 
on the X chromosome have been identified at Xq26–28 
(POF1) and Xq13.3–q22 (POF2). One gene in the POF2 
region has homology to the DIA allele, mutants of which 
in Drosophila cause male and female infertility. A breakpoint 
in the last intron of the DIAPH2 gene (the second 
homologue of the Drosophila diaphanous gene) has been 
associated with familial POF in women (86). 
Undoubtedly, other genes in these loci eventually will be 
identified as causes of POF. The FOXL2 gene at map 
locus 3q23 has been associated with POF in a familial 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX G 
Causes of Premature Ovarian Failure 

Ovarian follicle depletion 

Low initial follicle number 
Pure gonadal dysgenesis 
Thymic aplasia/hypoplasia 
Idiopathic 


Accelerated follicle atresia 

X chromosome related 
Turner’s syndrome 
X chromosome deletions 


Galactosemia 
Viral oophoritis* 
Autoimmunity* 
Environmental toxins* 
Idiopathic 


Ovarian follicle dysfunction 

Steroidogenic enzyme defects 
17a -hydroxylase deficiency 
17–20 desmolase deficiency 
20,22 desmolase deficiency 


Autoimmunity 
Lymphocytic oophoritis 
Gonadotropin receptor antibodies* 


Signal defects 
Abnormal gonadotropin receptor 
Abnormality in the G-protein signaling pathway 


Idiopathic (resistant ovary syndrome) 

* Theoretical possibilities that have not been proved. 
syndrome that includes the eyelid defects blepharophimosis, 
ptosis, and epicanthus inversus (87). Fragile X 
premutations also have been demonstrated in a small percentage 
of women with POF, but the significance of this 
association is unclear (88). Galactosemia, deficiency of 
the enzyme galactose-1-phosphate uridyltransferase, also 
causes POF. 

Follicle-stimulating hormone receptor mutations 
(gene map locus 2p21–p16) have been reported as a cause 
of POF in Finland; however, these mutations appear to be 
an uncommon cause of this disorder in North America 
(89, 90). Partial loss of function of the FSH receptor also 
has been associated with POF. A woman with POF was 
found to carry compound heterozygotic mutations 
(Ile160Thr and Arg573Cys substitutions) located in the 

n FIG. 38. Premature ovarian failure. Note the absence of 
follicles. (Tulandi T, Kinch RAH. Premature ovarian failure. 
Obstet Gynecol Surv 1981;36:521–527) 
extracellular domain and in the third intracellular loop of 
the FSH receptor, respectively (21). Deficiencies of 
enzymes such as 17,20-desmolase and 17-hydroxylase 
are also causes of ovarian follicle dysfunction. 

Inappropriate luteinization of graafian follicles is 
another demonstrated mechanism of follicle dysfunction 
in women with karyotypically normal POF (85). Antral 
follicles have been imaged by ultrasonography in more 
than 40% of patients with this condition, and serum estradiol 
levels are significantly greater when an antral follicle 
is present. However, when compared with normal women, 
patients with POF have poor correlations between follicle 
diameter and serum estradiol. In other words, graafian 
follicles may be present, but in most instances they are not 
functioning normally. Based on histologic evidence, 
luteinized graafian follicles account for at least 60% of the 
antral structures imaged in these patients. Thus, inappropriate 
luteinization of graafian follicles appears to be one 
pathophysiologic mechanism of follicle dysfunction in 
patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous POF. 

It is well recognized that autoimmune lymphocytic 
oophoritis is associated with POF (92). This disorder was 
initially described in association with autoimmune 
adrenal insufficiency and is characterized by lymphocytic 
infiltration of the theca interna of developing follicles. 
Primordial follicles are spared the autoimmune attack. In 
established disease, the cellular infiltrate includes 
macrophages, NK cells, T lymphocytes, B cells, and plasma 
cells. Follicle development may progress to the 
graafian stage, and markedly enlarged ovaries containing 
luteinized cysts may be present. Local lymphokine production 
likely impairs follicle steroidogenesis; this situation 
has been reported in animal studies. Theoretically, 
the development of antibodies against FSH or LH receptors 
could cause ovarian follicle dysfunction, but this 
mechanism appears to be rare (93). 

Physical examination may reveal atrophic vaginitis or 
absence of cervical mucus as a result of estrogen deficiency, 
but these physical signs have poor sensitivity in 


detecting ovarian endocrine insufficiency. Patients with 
POF often produce estrogen intermittently. Therefore, 
finding evidence of estrogen effect on physical examination 
should not be considered evidence against the diagnosis 
of ovarian insufficiency or POF. The progestin 
challenge test can be misleading and delay the diagnosis 
for the same reason. Indeed, one half of women with this 
condition will experience withdrawal bleeding in 
response to a progestin challenge test despite the presence 
of clearly elevated serum gonadotropin levels (84). 
A search should be made for the physical stigmata of 
Turner’s syndrome (45,X) (see Fig. 22). However, 
patients may develop POF as a result of abnormalities of 
the X chromosome without manifesting these signs. In 
some patients, interstitial deletions or translocations will 
be detected only by karyotype analysis. A search also 
should be made for the physical findings of potentially 
associated autoimmune disorders such as hypothyroidism 
and primary adrenal insufficiency. Several laboratory 
studies are indicated in women with POF, including measurement 
of thyroid-stimulating hormone; adrenal antibodies; 
fasting glucose, electrolytes, and creatinine; and 
bone density by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry examination; 
as well as analysis of karyotope and fragile X 
premutation screening if there is a family history of mental 
retardation. 

Women with X-chromosomal abnormalities have 
delivered normal children and subsequently developed 
POF after age 35 years. Thus, neither age nor parity rules 
out the possibility of a chromosomal abnormality as the 
etiology. Unexpected karyotype findings that may be 
inherited have important implications for other family 
members. Also, by finding an explanation for the POF, 
patients with normal karyotypes may be reassured, and 
the few patients found to have abnormal karyotypes will 
be helped. 

Management 

Young women who experience spontaneous POF are 
unprepared for the diagnosis. They feel as if a part of their 
life has been taken away. These patients fare best when 
the clinician is prepared to meet their special needs with 
care and understanding. This approach involves several 
aspects of management: 

• 
Make the diagnosis promptly and accurately. 
Inform the patient of the diagnosis in a sensitive 
and supportive manner. 
• 
Counsel the patient so as to validate her emotional 
concerns and help her to maintain control of her 
physical and emotional health. 
• 
Provide cyclic estrogen and progestin replacement 
therapy. 
• 
Assess, and continue to reassess at intervals of 
1–2 years, for the presence of other disorders 
related to POF. 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Patients who desire fertility may feel an urgent need to 
achieve a pregnancy immediately. It is important to stress 
that there are no prospectively proven treatments that will 
restore ovulation. Gonadotropin therapy carries a theoretical 
risk of exacerbating unrecognized autoimmune ovarian 
failure. Prednisone therapy for suspected autoimmune 
ovarian failure is unproven and carries a risk of osteonecrosis 
of the hip, requiring joint replacement (92). 
Also, although it is rarely considered, unproven therapies 
carry a real risk of interfering with the development of a 
spontaneous conception that would have occurred except 
for the fact that the system had been perturbed by the 
intervention. 

Some couples prefer to avoid high-technology intrusion 
into their private lives and choose adoption or a 
change of their life goals to deal with the infertility associated 
with POF. Other couples are satisfied to accept the 
low, but real, chance for subsequent spontaneous conception. 
Ovum donation is a successful solution for some 
couples. Although couples may feel an urgency to proceed 
to ovum donation, in reality there is no rush. Ovum 
donation success rates depend primarily on the age of the 
ovum donor. 

Young women with POF need full replacement doses 
of estrogen, not the lower doses used for osteoporosis 
prophylaxis in normally menopausal women. Evidence 
suggests that the lower doses of estrogen do not maintain 
bone density as effectively in younger women (94). To 
further help maintain bone mass, patients should be 
advised to follow a regular weight-bearing exercise program 
and be instructed on methods to ensure an adequate 
calcium and vitamin D intake. The need for androgen 
replacement therapy is currently under investigation. 

Young women with POF should be given cyclic estro-
gen and progestin replacement therapy that will induce 
regular menses. This is important because 5–10% of 
these patients will experience a spontaneous and unexpected 
pregnancy. If the patient misses a menses on this 
regimen, a pregnancy test should be performed and the 
hormone replacement therapy stopped. In most cases, 
spontaneous pregnancies progress normally in these 
patients, and there appears to be no need for exogenous 
hormone supplementation during early pregnancy. 

Replacement therapy includes the administration of 
100 m m of estradiol per day by a skin patch, combined 
with 10 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate given for 12 
days each calendar month. The skin patch delivers a constant 
infusion of estradiol, avoids the “first pass” effect on 
the liver, and will maintain regular menses and be well 
tolerated by most women. It is important to note that 
pregnancies have been reported even in women taking 
combined oral contraceptive agents. 

Women with POF are at risk for developing other 
endocrine gland insufficiencies. One series evaluated 119 
patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous POF 
and found that 32 patients had hypothyroidism (27%), 
and 3 patients had adrenal insufficiency (2.5%) (95). 


REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

When the diagnosis of spontaneous primary ovarian failure 
is first established, patients should undergo laboratory 
screening for hypothroidism and adrenal insufficiency 
and then be followed annually. Hypothyroidism can be 
detected by measuring serum-free thyroxine and TSH. 
Measuring adrenal antibodies may be an effective screening 
process for autoimmune adrenal insufficiency (96). 
Patients should be forewarned about the early symptoms 
of adrenal insufficiency, a potentially fatal disorder that is 
readily treated once identified. 

References 

1. Kaplowitz PB, Oberfield SE. Reexamination of the age 
limit for defining when puberty is precocious in girls in the 
United States: implications for evaluation and treatment. 
Drug and Therapeutics and Executive Committees of the 
Lawson Wilkins Pediatric Endocrine Society. Pediatrics 
1999;104:936–941 
( ) 
2. Rebar RW, Connolly HV. Clinical features of young women 
with hypergonadotropic amenorrhea. Fertil Steril 1990;53: 
804–810 
( ) 
3. Owings MF, Kozak LJ. Ambulatory and inpatient procedures 
in the United States, 1996. National Center for Health 
Statistics. Vital Health Stat 1998;13:1–119 
( ) 
4. Gambone JC, Reiter RD, Lench JB, Moore JB. The impact 
of a quality assurance process on the frequency and confirmation 
rate of hysterectomy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1990;163:545–550 
( ) 
5. Lepine LA, Hillis SD, 
Marchbanks PA, Koonin LM, 
Morrow B, Kieke BA, et al. Hysterectomy surveillance— 
United States, 1980–1993. Morb Mortal Wkly Rep CDC 
Surveil Summ 1997;46(SS-4):1–15 
( ) 
6. Falcone T, Desjardins C, Bourque J, Granger L, Hemmings 
R, Quiros E. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding in adolescents. 
J Reprod Med 1994;39:761–764 
( ) 
7. Kjerulff KH, Erickson BA, Langenberg PW. Chronic gynecological 
conditions reported by US women: findings from 
National Health Interview Survey, 1984 to 1992. Am J 
Public Health 1996;86:195–199 
( ) 
8. deVries LD, Dijkhuizen FB, Mol BW, 
Brolmann HA, 
Moret E, Heintz AP. Comparison of transvaginal sonography, 
saline infusion sonography, and hysteroscopy in premenopausal 
women with abnormal uterine bleeding. J Clin 
Ultrasound 2000;28:217–223 
( ) 
9. Widrich T, 
Bradley LD, Mitchinson AR, Collins RL. 
Comparison of saline infusion sonography with office hysteroscopy 
for the evaluation of the endometrium. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1327–1334 
( ) 
10. Saidi MH, Sadler RK, Theis VD, Akright BD, Farhart SA, 
Villanueva GR. Comparison of sonography, sonohysterography, 
and hysteroscopy for evaluation of abnormal uterine 
bleeding. J Ultrasound Med 1997;16:587–591 
( ) 
11. Davis A, Godwin A, Lippman J, Olson W, Kafrissen M. 
Triphasic norgestimate-ethinyl estradiol for treating dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. Obstet Gynceol. 2000;96: 
913–920 
( ) 
12. Lethaby A, Augood C, 
Duckitt K. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs for heavy menstrual bleeding. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2):CD000400 
( ) 
13. Crosignani PG, Vercellini P, Mosconi P, Oldani S, Cortesi I, 
DeGiorgi O. Levonorgestrel-releasing intrauterine device 
versus hysteroscopic endometrial resection in the treatment 
of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. Obstet Gynecol 1997;90: 
257–263 
( ) 
14. Bonnar J, Sheppard BL. Treatment of menorrhagia during 
menstruation: randomized controlled trial of ethamsylate, 
mefenamic acid, and tranexamic acid. BMJ 1996;313: 
579–582 
( ) 
15. Lethaby A, Farquhar C, Cooke I. Antifibrinolytics for heavy 
menstrual bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(4): 
CD000249 
( ) 
16. Thomas EJ, Okuda KJ, and Thomas NM. The combination 
of a depot gonadotrophin releasing hormone agonist and 
cyclical hormone replacement therapy for dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1991;98:1155–1159 
(button) 
17. Vercellini P, Oldani S, Yaylayan L, Zaina B, De Giorgi O, 
Crossignani PG. Randomized comparison of vaporizing 
electrode and cutting loop for endometrial ablation. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;94:521–527 
( ) 
18. Overton C, Hargreaves J, Maresh M. A national survey of 
the complications of endometrial destruction for menstrual 
disorders: the MISTLETOE study. Minimally Invasive 
Surgical Techniques—Laser, Endothermal, or Endoresection. 
Br J Obstet Gynecol 1997;104;1351–1359 
( ) 
19. Meyer WR, Walsh BW, Grainger DA, Peacock LM, Loffler 
FD, Steege JF. Thermal balloon and rollerball ablation to 
treat menorrhagia: a multicenter comparison. Obstet Gynecol 
1998;92:98–103 
( ) 
20. Jansen FW, Vredevoogd CB, Van Ulzen K, Hermans J, 
Trimbos JB, Trimbos-Kemper TC. Complications of hysteroscopy: 
a prospective multicenter study. Obstet Gynecol 
2000;96:266–270 
( ) 
21. Sowter MC, Singla AA, Lethaby A. Pre-operative endometrial 
thinning agents before hysteroscopic surgery for heavy 
menstrual bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2): 
CD00124 
( ) 
22. Lethaby A, Sheppard S, Cooke I, Farquhar C. Endometrial 
resection and ablation versus hysterectomy for heavy menstrual 
bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;2:CD00329 
(button) 
23. A randomized trial of endometrial ablation versus hysterectomy 
for the treatment of dysfunctional uterine bleeding 
outcome at four years. Aberdeen Endometrial Ablation 
Trials Group. Br J Obstet Gynaecol 1999;106:360–366 
( ) 
24. Lethaby A, Farquhar C, Sarkis A, Roberts H, Jepson R, 
Barlow D. Hormone replacement therapy in postmenopausal 
women: endometrial hyperplasia and irregular 
bleeding. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2000;(2):CD000402 
(button) 
25. Reindollar RH, Novak M, Tho SP, McDonough PG. Adultonset 
amenorrhea: a study of 262 patients. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1986;155:531–543 
( ) 
26. De Souza MJ, Miller BE, 
Loucks AB, Luciano AA, 
Pescatello LS, Campbell CG, et al. High frequency of luteal 
phase deficiency and anovulation in recreational women 

runners: blunted elevation in follicle-stimulating hormone 
observed during luteal-follicular transition. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1998;83:4220–4232 


( ) 
27. Nachtigall LB, Boepple PA, Pralong FP, Crowley WF Jr. 
Adult-onset idiopathic hypogonatropic hypogonadism—a 
treatable form of male infertility. N Engl J Med 1997; 
336:410–415 
( ) 
28. Becker AE, Grinspoon SK, Klibanski A, Herzog 
DB. 
Eating disorders. N Engl J Med 1999;340:1092–1098 
(button) 
29. Drew FL. The epidemiology of secondary amenorrhea. J 
Chronic Dis 1961;14:396–407 
30. Terasawa E. Control of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone 
pulse generation in nonhuman primates. Cell Mol 
Neurobiol 1995;15:141–164 
( ) 
31. Witkin JW, 
O’Sullivan H, Miller R, Ferin M. GnRH 
perikarya in medial basal hypothalamus of pubertal rhesus 
macaque are ensheathed with glia. J Neuroendocrinol 
1997;9:881–885 
( ) 
32. Berga SL, Mortola JF, Girton L, Suh B, Laughlin G, Pham 
P, et al. Neuroendocrine aberrations in women with functional 
hypothalamic amenorrhea. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1989;68:301–308 
( ) 
33. Perkins RB, Hall JE, Martin KA. Neuroendocrine abnormalities 
in hypothalamic amenorrhea: spectrum, stability, 
and response to neurotransmitter modulation. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1905–1911 
( ) 
34. Berga SL, Daniels TL, Giles DE. Women with functional 
hypothalamic amenorrhea but not other forms of anovulation 
display amplified cortisol concentrations. Fertil Steril 
1997;67:1024–1030 
( ) 
35. Van Vugt DA, Piercy J, Farley AE, Reid RL, Rivest S. 
Luteinizing hormone secretion and corticotropin-releasing 
factor gene expression in the paraventricular nucleus of rhesus 
monkeys following cortisol synthesis inhibition. 
Endocrinology 1997;138:2249–2258 
( ) 
36. Lowry DW, Lowry DL, Berga SL, Adelson PD, Roberts 
MM. Secondary amenorrhea due to hydrocephalus treated 
with endoscopic ventriculocisternostomy. Case report. J 
Neurosurg 1996;85:1148–1152 
( ) 
37. McEwen BS. Protective and damaging effects of stress 
mediators. N Engl J Med 1998;338:171–179 
( ) 
38. Martin KA, 
Hall JE, Adams JM, Crowley WF Jr. 
Comparison of exogenous gonadotropins and pulsatile 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone for induction of ovulation 
in hypogonadotropic amenorrhea. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1993;77:125–129 
( ) 
39. van der Spuy ZM, Steer PJ, McCusker M, Steele SJ, Jacobs 
HS. Outcome of pregnancy in underweight women after 
spontaneous and induced ovulation. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed) 
1988;296:962–965 
( ) 
40. Hergenroeder AC, Smith EO, Shypailo R, Jones LA, Klish 
WJ, Ellis K. Bone mineral changes in young women with 
hypothalamic amenorrhea treated with oral contraceptives, 
medroxyprogesterone, or placebo over 12 months. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;176:1017–1025 
( ) 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

41. Miller KK, Klibanski A. Clinical review 106: amenorrheic 
bone loss. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:1775–1783 
(button) 
42. Wildt L, Leyendecker G, Sir-Petermann T, Waibel-Treber S. 
Treatment with naltrexone in hypothalamic ovarian failure: 
induction of ovulation and pregnancy. Hum Reprod 
1993;8:350–358 
( ) 
43. Hirvonen E. Etiology, clinical features, and prognosis in 
secondary amenorrhea. Int J Fertil 1977;22:69–76 
( ) 
44. Lewinthal D, 
Corenblum B, Brooks JH, Taylor PJ. 
Spontaneous return of menstruation in hypothalamic amenorrhea 
following gonadotropin-releasing hormone-induced 
pregnancy. Fertil Steril 1987;47:870–871 
( ) 
45. Paoletti AM, Depau GF, Mais V, Guerriero S, Ajossa S, 
Melis GB. Effectiveness of cabergoline in reducing folliclestimulating 
hormone and prolactin hypersecretion from 
pituitary macroadenoma in an infertile woman. Fertil Steril 
1994;62:882–885 
( ) 
46. Carmina E, Koyama T, Chang L, Stanczyk FZ, Lobo RA. 
Does ethnicity influence the prevalence of adrenal hyperandrogenism 
and insulin resistance in polycystic ovary syndrome? 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:1807–1812 
( ) 
47. Knochenhauer ES, Key TJ, Kahsar-Miller M, Waggoner W, 
Boots LR, Azziz R. Prevalence of the polycystic ovary syndrome 
in unselected black and white women of the southeastern 
United States: a prospective study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1998:83:3078–3082 
( ) 
48. Dunaif A. Insulin resistance and the polycystic ovary syndrome: 
mechanism and implications for pathogenesis. 
Endocr Rev 1997;18:774–800 
( ) 
49. Legro RS, Finegood D, Dunaif A. A fasting glucose to 
insulin ratio is a useful measure of insulin sensitivity in 
women with polycystic ovary syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1998;83:2694–2698 
( ) 
50. Ibanez L, de Zegher F, Potau N. Anovulation after precocious 
pubarche: early markers and time course in adolescence. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metabol 1999;84:2691–2695 
(button) 
51. Elting MW, Korsen TJ, Rekers-Mombarg LT, Schoemaker 
J. Women with polycystic ovary syndrome gain regular 
menstrual cycles when ageing. Hum Reprod 2000; 
15:24–28 
( ) 
52. Winters SJ, Talbott E, Guzick DS, Zborowski J, McHugh 
KP. Serum testosterone levels decrease in middle age in 
women with the polycystic ovary syndrome. Fertil Steril 
2000;73:724–729 
( ) 
53. Fulghesu AM, Villa P, Pavone V, Guido M, Apa R, Caruso 
A, et al. The impact of insulin secretion on the ovarian 
response to exogenous gonadotropins in polycystic ovary 
syndrome. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82: 644–648 
(button) 
54. Dahlgren E, Friberg LG, Johansson S, Lindstrom B, Oden 
A, Samsioe G, et al. Endometrial carcinoma; ovarian dysfunction—
a risk factor in young women. Eur J Obstet 
Gynecol Reprod Biol 1991;41:143–150 
( ) 
55. Legro 
RS, Kunselman AR, Dodson WC, Dunaif A. 
Prevalence and predictors of risk for type 2 diabetes melli

REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

tus and impaired glucose tolerance in polycystic ovary syndrome: 
a prospective, controlled study in 254 affected 
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:165–169 


( ) 
56. Anonymous. American Diabetes Association: clinical practice 
recommendations 1997. Diabetes Care 1997;20 Suppl 
1:S1–70 
( ) 
57. Modan M, Harris MI, Halkin H. Evaluation of WHO and 
NDDG criteria for impaired glucose tolerance. Results 
from two national samples. Diabetes 1989;38:1630–1635 
(button) 
58. Reaven GM. Banting lecture 1988. Role of insulin resistance 
in human disease. Diabetes 1988;37:1595–1607 
(button) 
59. Talbott E, Clerici A, Berga SL, Kuller L, Guzick D, Detre 
K, et al. Adverse lipid and coronary heart disease risk profiles 
in young women with polycystic ovary syndrome: 
results of a case-control study. J Clin Epidemiol 1998;51; 
415–422 
( ) 
60. Legro RS, Kunselman AR, Dunaif A. Prevalence and predictors 
of dyslipidemia in women with polycystic ovary 
syndrome. Am J Med 2001;111:607–613 
( ) 
61. Talbott EO, Guzick DS, Sutton-Tyrrell K, McHugh-Pemu 
KP, Zborowski JV, Remsberg KE, et al. Evidence for association 
between polycystic ovary syndrome and premature 
carotid atherosclerosis in middle-aged women. Arterioscler 
Thromb Vasc Biol 2000;20;2414–2421 
( ) 
62. Waggoner W, Boots LR, Azziz R. Total testosterone and 
DHEAS levels as predictors of androgen-secreting neoplasms: 
a populational study. Gynecol Endocrinol 1999; 
13:394–400 
( ) 
63. Chetkowski RJ, DeFazio J, Shamonki I, Judd HL, Chang 
RJ. The incidence of late-onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
due to 21-hydroxylase deficiency among hirsute 
women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1984;58:595–598 
(button) 
64. Azziz R, Dewailly D, Owerbach D. Clinical review 56: 
Nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia: current concepts. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1994;78:810–815 
( ) 
65. New MI, Speiser PW. Genetics of adrenal steroid 21hydroxylase 
deficiency. Endocr Rev 1986;7:331–349 
(button) 
66. Azziz R, Hincapie LA, Knochenhauer ES, Dewailly D, Fox 
L, Boots LR. Screening for 21-hydroxylase-deficient nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia among hyperandrogenic 
women: a prospective study. Fertil Steril 1999;72:915–925 
67. Azziz R, Waggoner WT, Ochoa T, Knochenhauer ES, Boots 
LR. Idiopathic hirsutism: an uncommon cause of hirsutism 
in Alabama. Fertil Steril 1998;70:274–278 
( ) 
68. Azziz R, Ochoa TM, Bradley EL Jr, Potter HD, Boots LR. 
Leuprolide and estrogen versus oral contraceptive pills for 
the treatment of hirsutism: a prospective randomized study. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:3406–3411 
( ) 
69. Heiner JS, Greendale GA, Kawakami AK, Lapolt PS, 
Fisher M, Young D, et al. Comparison of a gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonist and a low dose oral contraceptive 
given alone or together in the treatment of hirsutism. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:3412–3418 
( ) 
70. Elkind-Hirsch KE, Anania C, Mack M, 
Malinak R. 
Combination gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist and 
oral contraceptive therapy improves treatment of hirsute 
women with ovarian hyperandrogenism. Fertil Steril 
1995;63:970–978 


( ) 
71. Carr BR, Breslau NA, Givens C, Byrd W, Barnett-Hamm C, 
Marshburn PB. Oral contraceptive pills, gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonists, or use in combination for treatment 
of hirsutism: a clinical research center study. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:1169–1178 
( ) 
72. Pasqual R, Antenucci D, Casimirri F, et al. Clinical and hormonal 
characteristics of obese amenorrheic hypoandrogenic 
women before and after weight loss. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1989;68:173–179 
73. Moghetti P, Tosi F, Tosti A, Negri C, Misciali C, Perrone F, 
et al. Comparison of spironolactone, flutamide, and finasteride 
efficacy in the treatment of hirsutism: a randomized, 
double blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2000;85:89–94 
( ) 
74. Wong IL, Morris RS, Chang L, Spahn MA, Stanczyk FZ, 
Lobo RA. A prospective randomized trial comparing finasteride 
to spironolactone in the treatment of hirsute women. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:233–238 
( ) 
75. Rosenbaum M, Leibel RL, Hirsch J. Obesity. N Engl J Med 
1997;337:396–407 
( ) 
76. Okajima T, 
Koyanagi T, Goto M, Kato K. [Hormonal 
abnormalities were improved by weight loss using very low 
calorie diet in a patient with polycystic ovary syndrome]. 
[Japanese]. Fukuoka Igaku Zasshi 1994;85:263–266 
( ) 
77. Jaatinen TA, Anttila L, Erkkola R, Koskinen P, Laippala P, 
Ruutiainen K. Hormonal responses to physical exercise in 
patients with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Fertil Steril 
1993;60:262–267 
( ) 
78. Clark AM, Ledger W, Galletly C, Tomlinson L, Blaney F, 
Wang X, et al. Weight loss results in significant improvement 
in pregnancy and ovulation rates in anovulatory obese 
women. Hum Reprod 1995;10:2705–2712 
( ) 
79. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Evans WS, Pasquali R. Effects 
of metformin on spontaneous and clomiphene-induced ovulation 
in the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1998;338:1876–1880 
( ) 
80. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Reamer P, Gunn RD, Allan G. 
Ovulatory and metabolic effects of D-chiro-inositol in the 
polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
1314–1320 


(button) 
( ) 
81. Moghetti P, Castello R, Negri C, Tosi F, Perrone F, Caputo 
M, et al. Metformin effects on clinical features, endocrine 
and metabolic profiles, and insulin sensitivity in polycystic 
ovary syndrome: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
6-month trial, followed by open, long-term clinical 
evaluation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2000;85:139–146 
( ) 
82. Azziz R, Ehrmann D, Legro RS, Whitcomb RW, Hanley R, 
Fereshetian AG, et al. Troglitazone improves ovulation and 
hirsutism in the polycystic ovary syndrome: a multicenter, 
double blind, placebo-controlled trial. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2001;86:1626–1632 
( ) 
83. Farquhar C, 
Vandekerckhove P, Lilford R. Laparoscopic. 
“drilling” by diathermy or laser for ovulation induction 

in anovulatory polycystic ovary syndrome. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2000;4:CD001122 


( ) 
84. Rebar RW, Connolly HV. Clinical features of young women 
with hypergonadotropic amenorrhea. Fertil Steril 
1990;53:804–810 
( ) 
85. Nelson LM, Anasti JN, Kimzey LM, Defensor RA, Lipetz 
KJ, White BJ, et al. Development of luteinized graafian follicles 
in patients with karyotypically normal spontaneous 
premature ovarian failure. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1994;79:1470–1475 
( ) 
86. Bione S, Sala C, Manzini C, Arrigo G, Zuffardi O, Banfi S, 
et al. A human homologue of the Drosophila melanogaster 
diaphanous gene is disrupted in a patient with premature 
ovarian failure: evidence for conserved function in oogenesis 
and implications for human sterility. Am J Hum Genet 
1998;62(3):533–541 
( ) 
87. Crisponi L, Deiana M, Loi A, Chiappe F, Uda M, Amati P, 
et al. The putative forkhead transcription factor FOXL2 is 
mutated in blepharophimosis/ptosis/epicanthus inversus 
syndrome. Nat Genet 2001;27:159–166 
( ) 
88. Conway GS, Hettiarachchi S, Murray A, Jacobs PA. Fragile 
X premutations in familial premature ovarian failure. 
Lancet 1995;346:309–310 
( ) 
89. Aittomaki K, 
Lucena JL, Pakarinen P, Sistonen P, 
Tapanainen J, Gromoll J, et al. Mutation in the follicle-stimulating 
hormone receptor gene causes hereditary hypergonadotropic 
ovarian failure. Cell 1995;82:959–968 
( ) 
90. Layman LC, Amde S, Cohen DP, Jin M, Xie J. The Finnish 
follicle-stimulating hormone receptor gene mutation is rare 
in North American women with 46,XX ovarian failure. 
DISORDERS OF OVULATION AND MENSTRUATION 

Fertil Steril 1998;69:300–302 


( ) 
91. Beau I, Touraine P, Meduri G, Gougeon A, Desroches A, 
Matuchansky C, et al. A novel phenotype related to partial 
loss of function mutations of the follicle stimulating hormone 
receptor. J Clin Invest 1998;102:1352–1359 
( ) 
92. Kalantaridou SN, Braddock DT, Patronas NJ, Nelson LM. 
Treatment of autoimmune premature ovarian failure. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1777–1782 
( ) 
93. Anasti JN, Flack MR, Froehlich J, Nelson LM. The use of 
human recombinant gonadotropin receptors to search for 
immunoglobulin G-mediated premature ovarian failure. J 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1995;80:824–828 
( ) 
94. Sugimoto AK, Hodsman AB, 
Nisker JA. Long-term 
gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist with standard 
postmenopausal estrogen replacement failed to prevent vertebral 
bone loss in premenopausal women. Fertil Steril 
1993;60:672–674 
( ) 
95. Kim TJ, Anasti JN, Flack MR, Kimzey LM, Defensor RA, 
Nelson LM. Routine endocrine screening for patients with 
karyotypically normal spontaneous premature ovarian failure. 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;89:777–779 
( ) 
96. Bakalov 
V, Kalantaridou SN, Godoy H, Vanderhoof V, 
Papanicolaou DA, Bondy CA, et al. Anti-adrenal antibodies 
are an effective screenting test for autoimmune adrenal 
insufficiency in young women with premature ovarian failure. 
The Endocrine Society’s 82nd Annual Meeting, June 
2000, Toronto, Canada 2001 Ref Type: Abstract 

100 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Other Endocrine Problems 


THYROID DISEASES 

Women commonly have thyroid disorders, as well as 
potentially misleading clinical and laboratory findings 
that falsely suggest thyroid diseases. There also are 
important interrelationships between thyroid dysfunction 
and female reproductive disorders. Consequently, knowing 
how to diagnose and manage thyroid diseases is vital 
for obstetricians and gynecologists. 

Clinical Physiology 

Thyroid hormones act in target tissues by binding to 
nuclear receptors, which ultimately induce changes in 
gene expression. Triiodothyronine (T3) binds the receptor 
with higher affinity and is the more biologically active 
thyroid hormone; thyroxine (T4), the main product of the 
thyroid gland, provides a stable hormonal reservoir for 
extrathyroidal conversation to T3. Pituitary TSH is the 
principal regulator of thyroid growth and hormone production. 
In turn, TSH is regulated by hypothalamic thyrotropin-
releasing hormone and thyroid hormone 
negative feedback. Thyroid-stimulating hormone stimulates 
thyroid cells by binding to a membrane receptor, 
which acts via the cAMP second messenger system. 
Thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins that bind this 
same receptor are the cause of hyperthyroid Graves’ disease. 
Activating mutations of the TSH receptor itself can 
cause toxic adenomas. 

More than 99% of circulating T4 and T3 is bound by 
plasma proteins, predominantly thyroxine-binding globulin. 
Changes in levels of these plasma proteins alter the 
serum total, but not the free, thyroid hormone levels; 
therefore, these changes do not affect patients’ clinical 
status. In women, an excess of thyroxine-binding globulin 
is common because estrogens (in oral contraceptives, 
in postmenopausal replacement therapy, and during pregnancy) 
increase hepatic glycosylation of thyroxine-binding 
globulin, decreasing its rate of clearance and 
elevating its plasma concentration. 

Thyroid function tests may be misleading in women 
with systemic illnesses or in women taking certain drugs. 
Conversion of T4 to T3 is decreased in a variety of illnesses 
(eg, sepsis, malignancy, and hyperemesis gravidarum) 
and with the administration of propranolol and 
amiodarone. Severe nonthyroidal illnesses also can cause 
low serum T4 and TSH concentrations. In healthy women, 
puberty, menopause, and aging do not alter thyroid hormone 
concentrations. At the end of the first trimester of 
pregnancy, levels of serum TSH are subnormal in approximately 
18% of normal women, with 9% being subnormal 
but detectable and an additional 9% being 

undetectable. The timing of the subnormal TSH level 
coincides with peak serum hCG concentrations, which 
acts as a thyroid stimulator because of its molecular similarity 
to TSH. This suggests a likely physiologic role for 
hCG in stimulating thyroidal hormone production in 
early pregnancy. The stimulatory effects of hCG are magnified 
in patients with hyperemesis gravidarum, as discussed 
later. 

Fetal thyroid development begins late in the first 
trimester and is independent of the mother (1). There is 
minimal transplacental passage of maternal thyroid hormones, 
but they are probably important in fetal brain 
development before the appearance of the fetal thyroid 
gland. Maternal immunoglobulins causing autoimmune 
thyroid diseases cross the placenta and can cause transient 
thyroid dysfunction in the fetus and neonate. The 
fetus also is exposed to the drugs commonly used to treat 
hyperthyroidism. 

Hypothyroidism 

Overt hypothyroidism occurs in 2% of women; mild 
hypothyroidism (also called subclinical hypothyroidism), 
which is evidenced only by an elevated serum TSH level, 
affects 5–15% of women older than 40 years. 
Furthermore, transient hypothyroidism affects approximately 
5% of postpartum women. 

CAUSES 

The principal cause of hypothyroidism is autoimmune 
(Hashimoto’s) thyroiditis. Although there is a familial 
predisposition, the specific genetic and environmental 
factors that trigger this condition are unknown. 
Autoimmune thyroiditis is increasingly prevalent with 
age, affecting approximately 15% of women older than 
65 years. Most have mild hypothyroidism, which can 
cause mild symptoms and hypercholesterolemia that can 
be reversed by administration of thyroid hormone. 

Patients with underlying autoimmune thyroiditis usually 
have a diffuse, firm, and painless goiter; however, the 
gland may be nonpalpable in the atrophic variant of the 
disease. Autoimmune thyroiditis may be associated with 
other endocrine disorders (eg, type 1 diabetes, primary 
ovarian failure, adrenal insufficiency, or hypoparathyroidism) 
and nonendocrine diseases (eg, vitiligo or pernicious 
anemia). 

Hypothyroidism also occurs frequently after surgical 
or radioactive iodine therapy for hyperthyroidism. 
Thyroid gland irradiation in the course of treatment for 
head and neck tumors also can cause hypothyroidism. All 
patients who have received these therapies should be 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 101 

monitored yearly for the possible development of 
hypothyroidism. Thyroid gland inflammation causes 
spontaneously resolving hypothyroidism in postpartum 
thyroiditis and subacute thyroiditis. Hypothyroidism is 
rarely the result of pituitary or hypothalamic diseases 
causing TSH deficiency. Finally, although congenital 
hypothyroidism is a rare disorder, affecting one in 4,000 
infants, it is vital that obstetricians recognize its clinical 
features (Fig. 39). 

CLINICAL FEATURES 

Manifestations of hypothyroidism include fatigue, lethargy, 
cold intolerance, dry skin, hair loss, constipation, 
myalgia, carpal tunnel syndrome, and weight gain, which 
is typically less than 5–10 kg (Box H). Common neuropsychiatric 
symptoms include impaired memory, depression, 
irritability, and dementia. Many of the classic 
symptoms and signs are difficult to distinguish from complaints 
associated with normal pregnancy. Menstrual dysfunction 
is common; menorrhagia is most frequent, but 
amenorrhea also occurs. Anovulation related to mild 
hypothyroidism may cause infertility, but thyroid hormone 
therapy is not useful for anovulatory euthyroid 
women. Hypothyroidism does not cause PMS, and thyroid 
hormone therapy for PMS is no more effective than 
placebo. Hypothyroidism in childhood can cause precocious 
or delayed puberty. Hyperprolactinemia and galactorrhea 
are unusual manifestations of hypothyroidism. In 
patients with amenorrhea, galactorrhea, and modest 

hyperprolactinemia, it is vital to distinguish primary 
hypothyroidism from a prolactin-secreting pituitary adenoma 
by measuring the serum TSH level. 

DIAGNOSIS 

Clinical diagnosis of hypothyroidism requires laboratory 
confirmation. Hypothyroidism can be classified as primary, 
in which thyroid function is directly impaired, or 
secondary, in which hypothalamic–pituitary dysfunction is 
the fundamental cause. Overt primary hypothyroidism is 
characterized by a low serum free T4 or free T4 index and 
an elevated serum TSH level. During pregnancy, the serum 
total T4 level may remain normal because of the increased 
level of thyroxine-binding globulin; accurate diagnosis of 
primary hypothyroidism can be ensured by serum TSH 
measurement. Diagnosis of autoimmune thyroiditis can be 
confirmed by the presence of serum antithyroid peroxidase 
antibodies (formerly called antimicrosomal antibodies). 
For unclear reasons, circulating antithyroid antibodies may 
be associated with recurrent abortion. 

THERAPY 

Levothyroxine is the treatment of choice for hypothyroidism 
(2). Its conversion to T3 provides a stable hormonal 
milieu. Levothyroxine is well absorbed, unless 
there is coadministration of ferrous sulfate, calcium carbonate, 
cholestyramine, aluminum hydroxide, or sucralfate. 
The levothyroxine dose requirement is weight 


n FIG. 39. Congenital hypothyroidism. (Fisher DA. The thyroid. In: Kaplan SA, ed. Clinical pediatric endocrinology. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1990:101) 

102 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX H 
Common Symptoms and Signs of 
Hypothyroidism and Hyperthyroidism 


Hypothyroidism 

Fatigue 
Somnolence 
Weight gain 
Cold intolerance 
Dry skin, brittle nails, hair loss 
Constipation 
Muscle cramps, stiffness, and aching 
Impaired memory 
Depression 
Dementia, delirium, and coma 


Hyperthyroidism 

Fatigue 
Insomnia 
Weight loss (although 25% gain weight) 
Heat intolerance and increase sweating 
Hair loss 
Hyperdefecation 
Muscle weakness, proximal 
Palpitations 
Dyspnea and atypical chest pain 
Anxiety 
Tremor 


related (approximately 1.8 mg/kg), decreases in elderly 
women, and should be adjusted to maintain the serum 
TSH within the lower one half of the normal range. In 
approximately one half of pregnant women, the levothyroxine 
dose requirement is increased by 25–100% (3). 
Consequently, serum TSH levels should be reassessed 
every 4–6 weeks during the pregnancy. Postpartum, the 
prepregnancy levothyroxine dose usually can be resumed. 
An increased thyroxine dose requirement has also recently 
been shown to occur in one third of postmenopausal 
women receiving estrogen (4). 

Treatment of mild hypothyroidism may be justified 
under five circumstances: 

• 
The presence of antithyroid antibodies, which 
predict progression to overt hypothyroidism 
• 
Symptoms consistent with mild hypothyroidism 
• 
An elevated serum LDL cholesterol concentration, 
which may improve with levothyroxine therapy 
• 
Significant goiter 
• 
Pregnancy, because thyroid hormone deficiency 
has been associated with increased fetal loss and 
subtly impaired subsequent childhood neuropsychologic 
development. 
Administration of excessive levothyroxine doses 
should be avoided. Even mild T4 excess, which is recognizable 
solely by a suppressed serum TSH, has been associated 
with bone loss and atrial fibrillation, particularly in 
older women. In women with known or suspected 
ischemic heart disease, which can be exacerbated by 
levothyroxine therapy, a low levothyroxine dosage should 
be used initially and the dose increased slowly. 

Hyperthyroidism 

Hyperthyroidism affects 2% of women during their lifetime. 
It often affects women during their childbearing 
years. 

CAUSES 

Graves’ disease, by far the most common underlying disorder 
in hyperthyroidism, is caused by immunoglobulins 
that bind to and activate the TSH receptor. In addition to 
hyperthyroidism, Graves’ disease is associated with 
orbital inflammation and a characteristic dermopathy 
(pretibial myxedema; Fig. 40). The environmental factors 
that trigger the onset of Graves’ disease in genetically 
susceptible women are as yet unidentified, but stress and 
cigarette smoking may be risk factors. Graves’ disease 
often develops in the postpartum period. 

Less commonly, hyperthyroidism may result from 
autonomously functioning benign thyroid neoplasia: 
toxic adenoma and toxic multinodular goiter. Transient 
thyrotoxicosis also results from the unregulated glandular 
release of thyroid hormone in subacute (painful) thyroiditis 
and in postpartum (painless, silent, or lymphocytic) 
thyroiditis. Rarely, thyroid gland overactivity is caused by 
a choriocarcinoma that secretes hCG or a pituitary 
adenoma that secretes TSH. Ovarian teratomas (struma 
ovarii) can produce thyroid hormones ectopically. 
Thyrotoxicosis also is caused by the iatrogenic prescription 
or factitious ingestion of T4 or T3, a possibility to be considered, 
particularly in patients with eating disorders. 

CLINICAL FEATURES 

Classically, thyrotoxic patients report fatigue, heat intolerance, 
palpitations, dyspnea, nervousness, and weight 
loss, although as many as one fourth of younger women 
actually gain weight because of increased appetite. 
Patients with thyrotoxicosis may present with vomiting, 
particularly pregnant women, in whom the vomiting may 
be confused with hyperemesis gravidarum. On examination, 
tachycardia; lid lag; tremor; proximal muscle weakness; 
and warm, moist skin are often present. Elderly 
women may lack these typical symptoms and signs, and 


n FIG. 40. Neonatal Graves’ disease. (LaFranchi S. 
Disorders of the thyroid. In: Behrman RE, Kliegman RM, 
Jenson HB, eds. Nelson textbook of pediatrics. 16th ed. 
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2000;1711) 
they present with unexplained weight loss, atrial fibrillation, 
or angina pectoris. Hyperthyroidism can cause or 
exacerbate osteoporosis. Most patients with hyperthyroidism 
have regular menses with lighter flow. In a recent 
series of 214 women with thyrotoxicosis, 78% had regular 
menses, and 22% had irregular cycles (5). No patient 
was amenorrheic, an observation that differs from older 
data in which amenorrhea was reported in as many as 
10% of patients. Anovulatory menses and associated 
infertility are common and are related to the severity of 
the thyroid hyperfunction. Goiter is present in most 
younger women with Graves’ disease, but it is absent in 
50% of affected older patients. 

Ophthalmologic signs of Graves’ disease, including lid 
retraction, periorbital edema, and proptosis, occur in 
fewer than one third of women with hyperthyroidism; 
more severe ophthalmologic complications (eg, corneal 
ulceration, extraocular muscle dysfunction, and vision 
loss) occur in fewer than 5%. Rarely, orbital inflammation 
(euthyroid Graves’ disease) can occur in patients 
without hyperthyroidism. 

Toxic nodular goiter is associated with inhomogeneous 
gland enlargement. In subacute thyroiditis, the 
gland is tender, hard, and enlarged. In postpartum or painless 
thyroiditis, it is minimally enlarged and nontender. 

DIAGNOSIS 

Most patients with thyrotoxicosis have elevated total and 
free T4 and T3 concentrations. However, as has been discussed, 
high serum total T4 or T3 levels are not pathognomonic 
of hyperthyroidism. In individuals with 
euthyroidism, elevations of thyroid hormone concentrations 
can be caused by increased protein binding, 
decreased peripheral conversion of T4 to T3, or, rarely, 
congenital tissue resistance to thyroid hormones. 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 103 

In all common forms of thyrotoxicosis, the serum TSH 
concentration is undetectable or very low in sensitive 
assays (ie, assays with detection limits of £ 0.1 mU/L). 
Consequently, serum TSH measurement is an extremely 
accurate way to exclude the diagnosis of hyperthyroidism. 
Patients with a low TSH concentration despite 
normal free T4 and T3 concentrations may have subclinical 
hyperthyroidism, which is associated with increased 
risk of osteoporosis and atrial tachyarrhythmias in older 
postmenopausal women. 

It is essential to differentiate accurately among the causes 
of hyperthyroidism, because different forms of treatment 
often are indicated. The radioiodine uptake 
measurement and scanning are useful in the differential 
diagnosis of chemically established hyperthyroidism. 
There is homogeneously increased uptake in patients with 
Graves’ disease, heterogeneous tracer distribution in 
patients with toxic nodular goiter, and diminished radioisotope 
concentrations in the thyroid glands of patients with 
the various forms of thyroiditis and in medication-induced 
thyrotoxicosis. In patients with Graves’ disease, serum 
immunoglobulins that mimic TSH-mediated adenylate 
cyclase activation (thyroid-stimulating immunoglobulins) 
or compete with TSH for receptor binding (thyroid-binding 
inhibitory immunoglobulins) can be detected but seldom 
are required for diagnosis. High levels of maternal thyroid-
stimulating immunoglobulins predict a greater likelihood 
of neonatal hyperthyroidism in pregnant women 
with Graves’ disease, including those who may themselves 
be euthyroid after previous thyroid ablation therapy. 
The erythrocyte sedimentation rate is increased in 
patients with subacute thyroiditis. The serum TSH level is 
inappropriately elevated or normal in rare patients with 
TSH-secreting pituitary adenomas. 

THERAPY 

The treatments of choice for women with hyperthyroid 
Graves’ disease are widely considered to be either the 
antithyroid medications (methimazole or propylthiouracil) 
or radioiodine (6). The antithyroid drugs block 
thyroid hormone biosynthesis and may have additional 
immunosuppressive effects. Although propylthiouracil 
also partially inhibits conversion of extrathyroidal T4 to 
T3, this benefit is outweighed in most patients by the 
longer half-life of methimazole, a drug that can be administered 
in a single daily dose. Euthyroidism is typically 
restored in 3–10 weeks, and treatment usually is continued 
for 6–24 months. Although continued antithyroid 
medication is effective in controlling hyperthyroidism, 
remissions are sustained in less than one half of patients 
after a course of drug therapy. All patients should be cautioned 
about the drugs’ minor adverse effects (eg, fever, 
rash, and arthralgias), which are infrequent (5%), and 
particularly about major drug toxicities (eg, hepatitis, 
vasculitis, and agranulocytosis), which are rare 
(0.2–0.5%). If a remission is achieved, lifelong monitor



104 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ing is warranted. Relapses are common, particularly in 
the postpartum period. 

Iodine I131 therapy leads to a permanent cure of hyperthyroidism 
in 75% of patients within 2–6 months. The 
principal drawback to radioactive iodine therapy is the 
high incidence of postablative hypothyroidism, which 
occurs in at least 50% of patients within 1 year and continues 
to develop at a rate of 3% per year. Obviously, 
radioactive iodine never should be given to a woman during 
pregnancy or nursing. However, large retrospective 
surveys have failed to demonstrate infertility or any 
increased carcinogenic or teratogenic risk for the children 
of women previously treated with radioactive iodine, 
regardless of age at treatment. The estimated ovarian 
radiation in the course of radioactive iodine therapy for 
hyperthyroidism is 0.2 rad/mCi administered or approximately 
1–2 rad (0.01 Gy) total, which is similar to the 
dose in widely used diagnostic procedures (eg, barium 
enema with fluoroscopy and hysterosalpingography). The 
radioiodine will have been excreted or decayed within 1 
month, but pregnancy probably should be avoided for 4–6 
months after radioiodine therapy, until most patients have 
become euthyroid or are receiving T4 replacement therapy. 
Because hyperthyroidism may be temporarily exacerbated 
by radioactive iodine therapy, pretreatment with 
methimazole is advisable in some individuals with severe 
thyrotoxicosis, older patients, and those with intrinsic 
cardiopulmonary disease. 

b -Adrenergic blocking drugs are a useful adjunctive 
therapy for control of sympathomimetic symptoms in 
patients with hyperthyroidism. b -Blockers are usually the 
sole treatment for patients with spontaneously resolving 
hyperthyroidism caused by thyroiditis. Patients with subacute 
thyroiditis also are treated with aspirin or other nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs for relief of thyroid 
pain. In 20% of patients, a 2–8-week course of glucocorticoids 
is required. In the rare instance of a woman with 
thyrotoxicosis resulting from primary trophoblastic, ovarian, 
or pituitary disease, surgical excision of the responsible 
tumor is indicated. 

Hyperthyroidism in Pregnancy 

Hyperthyroidism affects 1 of every 1,000 pregnant 
women. The treatment of thyroid disease in pregnancy is 
straightforward: achieve and maintain maternal euthyroidism. 
Uncontrolled thyrotoxicosis is associated with 
high rates of fetal loss and possible malformations. 
Consequently, prompt treatment is essential despite any 
minimal risks associated with maternal antithyroid drug 
and b -blocker therapy. Radioactive iodine scanning and 
treatment are absolutely contraindicated in women who 
are pregnant or breastfeeding. Antithyroid medication is 
the treatment of choice. Propylthiouracil is preferred 
because it has no known teratogenic effects (7, 8). The 
notion that it crosses the placenta less readily than methimazole, 
however, has been questioned recently. Although 

methimazole has been anecdotally associated with a con-
genital scalp anomaly, aplasia cutis, as well as more 
severe fetal anomalies, it also has been used widely and 
safely in pregnant women. The lowest dose of drug 
required to maintain the free T4 concentration at the upper 
limit of normal should be used. As pregnancy progresses, 
the activity of Graves’ disease often wanes, and the 
antithyroid medication dose can be reduced or discontinued. 
Long-term follow-up studies have documented that 
children exposed to antithyroid drugs in utero grow and 
develop normally. Concurrent levothyroxine therapy will 
not protect the fetus from hypothyroidism, because 
levothyroxine crosses the placenta poorly. Following 
delivery, antithyroid drugs are safe to use in lactation. 

b -Blockers may be used for short-term relief of symptoms, 
although neonatal bradycardia and hypoglycemia 
can occur when these agents are used at the time of delivery. 
Thyroid surgery is indicated in pregnant women only 
if they have a major adverse effect from an antithyroid 
drug or do not follow instructions for therapy. 

Neonates with Graves’ disease have failure to thrive, 
irritability, tachycardia, goiter, heart failure, and craniosynostosis 
(see Fig. 40). However, neonatal thyrotoxicosis 
occurs in only 1% of infants of mothers with Graves’ 
disease. If the mother received antithyroid medication 
during the pregnancy, the child may not develop hyperthyroidism 
until 7–10 days postpartum. Antithyroid drug 
therapy should be continued for 6–8 weeks, until the passively 
transferred antibodies have been cleared from the 
infant’s circulation. 

Some women with hyperemesis gravidarum develop 
concomitant mild biochemical hyperthyroidism (9). This 
phenomenon is thought to be due to the extremely high 
serum levels of hCG that often are observed in hyperemesis. 
Serum free T4 levels correlate with serum hCG 
concentrations, as well as the severity of nausea and vomiting. 
Although more than half the patients with so-called 
gestational thyrotoxicosis have suppressed serum TSH 
levels and elevated free T4 levels, they rarely display the 
clinical features of hyperthyroidism, including goiter and 
eye findings. In general, the hyperthyroidism resolves 
without specific therapy as the hyperemesis wanes, usually 
by 20 weeks of gestation. If it persists beyond this 
point, the patient probably has true thyrotoxicosis due to 
mild Graves’ disease and should be treated with antithyroid 
drugs. 

Postpartum Thyroid Disease 

A spectrum of autoimmune thyroid dysfunction is common 
during the postpartum period, occurring in approximately 
5–10% of women (10). The classic sequence of 
events is transient hyperthyroidism followed by transient 
hypothyroidism, with the onset 1–8 months after delivery 
and each phase lasting 2–12 weeks. Other common patterns 
include transient hyperthyroidism (due either to 
Graves’ disease or transient hyperthyroidism with low 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 105 

radioiodine uptake) or transient hypothyroidism alone. 
When patients present with postpartum hyperthyroidism, 
it may be difficult to distinguish postpartum thyroiditis 
from recurrent or new-onset Graves’ disease. The thyroid 
uptake of radioiodine is an important diagnostic tool, 
because it is elevated in Graves’ disease and low in postpartum 
thyroiditis. Although this test is contraindicated in 
women who are breastfeeding, it can be performed safely 
with iodine I123 or technetium Tc99m pertechnetate if 
breastfeeding is suspended for several days until radioactivity 
above the background level is no longer detectable 
in the breast milk. The presence of orbital involvement or 
serum anti-TSH receptor antibodies also favors the diagnosis 
of Graves’ disease. 

Most women with postpartum thyroiditis have detected 
antimicrosomal antibodies before pregnancy or in the 
first trimester, but it has not been shown to be cost-effective 
to screen all pregnant women for the presence of 
these antibodies. Because 25% of women with type 1 diabetes 
develop postpartum thyroiditis (11), screening this 
patient population does seem to be indicated. Such 
screening should be performed either in the first trimester 
or at the 6-week postpartum visit. Women with previous 
episodes of postpartum thyroiditis are likely to have 
recurrences after subsequent pregnancies. 

Women with postpartum transient hypothyroidism 
have higher incidences of fatigue and depression than 
women with euthyroidism. These symptoms may be ame


liorated with thyroid replacement therapy. If thyroid 
replacement treatment is instituted, it should be discontinued 
after approximately 12–18 months to assess 
whether recovery of endogenous thyroid function has 
occurred. Long-term follow-up studies have documented 
that women with postpartum thyroid dysfunction have a 
25% chance of developing permanent hypothyroidism. 

ADRENAL GLAND DISORDERS 
Adrenal Structure: Function and 
Development 

The adrenal glands are paired, suprarenal organs that consist 
of two distinct regions: the cortex and the medulla. 
The cortex is divided into three zones, each with unique 
steroid products. The outermost zone, the zona glomerulosa 
(15% of the cortex), is under the control of the 
renin–angiotensin system and secretes the mineralocorticoid 
aldosterone. The middle zone, the zona fasciculata 
(75% of the cortex), is under the control of corticotropin 
and secretes the corticosteroid cortisol. The inner zone, the 
zona reticularis (10% of the cortex), secretes the androgen 
DHEAS. The medulla is part of the sympathetic nerve system 
and produces epinephrine (Fig. 41). 

The cortex is derived from the coelomic cavity from 
cells adjacent to the urogenital ridge. At 2 months of gestation, 
the cortex is invaded by neuroectodermal cells that 


n FIG 41. Histology of the adrenal gland. The adrenal gland consists of the cortex and the medulla. The cortex is divided into 
three zones, according to the type and arrangement of cells. These are designated the zona glomerulosa (ZG), the zona fasciculata 
(ZF), and the zona reticularis (ZR). Abbreviations: BV indicates blood vessels; Cap, capsule. (Reith EJ, Ross MH, eds. 
Atlas of descriptive histology. 2nd ed. New York: Harper and Row, 1977:213) 

106 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

will develop into the medulla. The fetal adrenal cortex 
develops normally in anencephalic fetuses up to 15 weeks 
of gestation (12). After 15 weeks of gestation, further 
development of the adrenal cortex is under the control of 
corticotropin and IGF-II (13). In the second trimester, the 
adrenal gland grows into an organ larger than the kidney 
and has a prominent inner, fetal zone that secretes large 
amounts of DHEAS. After birth, the fetal zone regresses 
and is gone by 1 year of age. Levels of DHEAS are high 
in cord blood, fall rapidly after birth, and remain low until 
the onset of adrenarche. For girls, adrenarche begins at 
approximately age 8 years, and DHEAS secretion reaches 
a peak at approximately 20 years of age. Levels of 
DHEAS then fall throughout the remainder of life, reaching 
a nadir between ages 60 years and 80 years 
(adrenopause) (Fig. 42) (14). 

Adrenal Steroid Secretion 

Cholesterol is the substrate for the synthesis of all steroid 
hormones. The cells in the adrenal cortex can obtain 
cholesterol from circulating LDL cholesterol, circulating 
HDL cholesterol, or de novo synthesis of cholesterol 
from acetate. Cholesterol is converted to pregnenolone 
by cholesterol side-chain cleavage enzyme. Pregnenolone 
is converted to 17-hydroxypregnenolone and then DHEA 
by the 17-hydroxylase–17,20-lyase enzyme. Pregnenolone 
can be converted to aldosterone by the sequential 
action of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase, 
21-hydroxylase, 11-hydroxylase, and aldosterone syn


n FIG. 42. Concentrations of serum dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate (DHEAS) as a function of age in females and 
males. Values are high in cord blood; fall rapidly immediately 
after birth, in the first month of life; and remain low until the 
onset of adrenarche. (Miller WL, Styne DM. Female puberty 
and its disorders. In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. 
Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, 
and clinical management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB 
Saunders, 1999:391) 
thetase. 17-Hydroxypregnenolone is converted to cortisol 
by the sequential action of 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-
isomerase, 21-hydroxylase, and 11-hydroxylase. 
Dehydroepiandrosterone is converted to androstenedione 
by the 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase and to 
DHEAS by a sulfokinase (Fig. 43). 

Adrenal Steroid Pharmacology and 
Treatment 

The daily secretion of cortisol is approximately 20 mg. 
Under maximal stress, the adrenal gland can increase the 
daily production of cortisol to 300 mg. Corticosteroids 
can be chemically synthesized to enhance either corticosteroid 
properties (antiinflammatory, regulation of central 
metabolism) or mineralocorticoid properties (electrolyte 
metabolism). The relative potencies of five commonly 
used corticosteroids are presented in Table 6. High-dose 
corticosteroid treatment may be associated with 1) 
cushingoid features, including weight gain, central obesity, 
moon facies, and abdominal striae; 2) osteoporosis; 3) 
glucose intolerance and diabetes mellitus; 4) an increased 
risk of infections; and 5) psychiatric disorders, including 
psychosis. 

Corticosteroids at doses equivalent to 7.5 mg of prednisone 
daily or greater are known to induce osteoporosis 
in women (15). Women on long-term corticosteroid treatment 
should have their bone mineral density measured by 
a technique such as dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry. 
The administration of alendronate at doses of 5 mg (for 
euestrogenic women) and 10 mg (for hypoestrogenic 
women) is approved for the prevention and treatment 
of corticosteroid–induced osteopenia and osteoporosis 
(16). 

Adrenal Androgen Excess 

The most common causes of adrenal androgen excess are 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency), 
adrenal adenomas, and adrenal carcinomas. Adrenal 
carcinomas and adenomas that secrete androgens typically 
are accompanied by virilization and can be diagnosed 
with a combination of measurement of blood androgen 
levels (testosterone, DHEA, and DHEAS) and imaging of 
the adrenal glands. 

Mutations in the genes that code for the 21-hydroxylase 
and 11-hydroxylase enzymes can be associated with 
hyperandrogenism and menstrual irregularity. Mutations 
in the 21-hydroxylase enzyme are far more common than 
mutations in the 11-hydroxylase enzyme; thus, the spectrum 
of disease associated with 21-hydroxylase mutations 
will be covered in greater depth. Pituitary 
corticotropin secretion stimulates the conversion of 
cholesterol to cortisol. Cortisol exerts negative feedback 
on the hypothalamus and pituitary to suppress corticotropin 
secretion. Mutations in the 21-hydroxylase gene 
can result in decreased activity of the enzyme step that 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 107 
COLUMN 1 COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 
Mineralocorticoids Glucocorticoids Sex Steroids 

Dehydroepiandrosterone17-HydroxypregnenoloneCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OProgesteronePregnenoloneCholesterolHOHOHOO12323232OOOHOHOAndostenedione17a-HydroxyprogesteroneHOO
4
4
CH3-OH

CH3-OH 


C=O

C=O 



Deoxycortisol

Deoxycorticosterone 



OH 


O

O 


5
CH2-OH 


5
CH2-OH 
C=O 
C=O 
Cortisol 


HO 


Corticosterone 



OH 


HO 


6
OO 



Aldosterone 


n FIG. 43. Steroid synthesis in the adrenal gland. Enzyme 1: cholesterol side-chain cleavage. Enzyme 2: 17-hydroxylase–17,20lyase. 
Enzyme 3: 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase. Enzyme 4: 21-hydroxylase. Enzyme 5: 11-hydroxylase. Enzyme 6: 
aldosterone synthetase. Column 1 leads to the production of mineralocorticoids. Column 2 leads to the production of corticosteroids. 
Column 3 leads to the production of the adrenal androgens. 

108 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 6. Commonly Used Corticosteroids 
Relative Relative 
U.S. Pharmacopeia Approximate Antiinflammatory Mineralocorticoid 
Name Structure Equivalent Dose (mg) Potency Potency 

Hydrocortisone Cortisol 30 1.0 1.0 
Cortisone 11-Keto-cortisol 25 0.8 0.8 
Prednisone Delta-1-cortisone 7.5 3.0 0.8 
Dexamethasone 9-Fluoro-16-alpha-methyl 

prednisolone 0.5 20 0 
Betamethasone 9-Fluoro-16-beta-methyl 

prednisolone 0.5 20 0 

converts 17a -hydroxyprogesterone to deoxycortisol. This 
results in a decrease in cortisol production, decreased 
negative feedback to the hypothalamic–pituitary unit, and 
increased corticotropin secretion, which drives more 
cholesterol into the steroidogenic pathway (Fig. 44). 
Although more cholesterol is driven into the steroidogenic 
pathway by corticotropin, the steroids cannot be 
converted to cortisol efficiently because of the relative 
block in 21-hydroxylase. This leads to a marked accumulation 
of the substrate for the 21-hydroxylase, 17a hydroxyprogesterone, 
and a relative overproduction of 
DHEA and androstenedione, two adrenal androgens. If 
the defect in the 21-hydroxylase gene is severe (eg, gene 
deletion), adrenal androgen overproduction will be 
markedly elevated in utero, and the phenotype will be 
classic adrenal hyperplasia (clitoromegaly, labioscrotal 
fusion, abnormal course of the urethra, and virilization) 
(Fig. 45) with an external structure similar to male genitalia 
(Fig. 46). If the defect in the 21-hydroxylase gene is 
mild (a mutation resulting in a change in one amino acid), 
the phenotype will be nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia (hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, and infertility). Additional 
terms used to describe nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia 
include late onset, attenuated, or acquired. A review of 
the genetics of the 21-hydroxylase gene can help practitioners 
understand the possible range of mutations and 
phenotypes. 

Genetic mutations have a marked effect on enzyme 
activity; for example, gene deletions result in nearly complete 
loss of 21-hydroxylase activity and are associated 
with the most severe phenotype: classic adrenal hyperplasia. 
Classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency occurs in about 1 in 
14,000 live births. With complete loss of 21-hydroxylase 
activity, adrenal androgen overproduction is marked and 
begins in utero. In severe forms of 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 
the conversion of progesterone to mineralocorticoids 
also is reduced, resulting in “salt wasting.” The 
salt-wasting form of the disease is associated with low 
aldosterone production, hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and 
death in the neonatal period if undetected and untreated. 
Seventy-five percent of cases of classic 21-hydroxylase 

deficiency are salt wasting; 25% present with virilization 
but are not salt wasting. For the obstetrician evaluating a 
newborn with ambiguous genitalia, the most important 
disease to exclude is 21-hydroxylase deficiency associated 
with salt wasting. Failure to recognize this disease can 
result in dehydration and death of the newborn. 

Many cases of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia are due 
to gene conversion. In addition to the active 21-hydroxylase 
gene, there is also an inactive pseudogene. This pseudogene 
contains mutations that render it inactive. During 
gametogenesis, crossing over during meiosis can result in 
the transfer of genetic material from the pseudogene into 
the active gene, reducing the enzymatic activity of the 
active gene. Crossing over is the exchange of genetic 
material between homologous chromosomes during meiosis. 
In many cases of nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, gene 
conversion has resulted in the substitution of one amino 
acid. In nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia the most common 
amino acid substitution, occurring in 60% of cases, is the 
replacement of the normal valine at codon 281 with a 
leucine. This replacement results in a 50% decrease in 21hydroxylase 
enzyme activity. Twenty percent of the cases 
are due to a proline-to-serine substitution (codon 453), 
and 10% are due to a proline-to-leucine substitution 
(codon 10). Although 21-hydroxylase nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia is a homozygous recessive disorder, in most 
cases the same mutation is not present on both alleles. 
Many women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia are 
compound heterozygotes and carry one allele associated 
with only mild impairment of enzyme activity and a second 
allele associated with a marked reduction in enzyme 
activity. In nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, enough 
21-hydroxylase activity is present in utero to result in only 
modest increases in adrenal androgens, elevations that are 
not sufficient to alter the normal development of the external 
genitalia. However, at puberty, the increased capability 
of the adrenal gland to produce androgens (adrenarche) 
and the modest decrease in 21-hydroxylase activity results 
in an excess production of adrenal androgens. The excess 
adrenal androgens can result in hirsutism, oligo-ovulation, 
oligomenorrhea, and infertility. 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 109 
COLUMN 1 COLUMN 2 COLUMN 3 
Mineralocorticoids Glucocorticoids Sex Steroids 

Dehydroepiandrosterone17-HydroxypregnenoloneCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OCH3C=OProgesteronePregnenoloneCholesterolHOHOHOO12323232OOOHOHOAndostenedione17a-HydroxyprogesteroneHOO
21-Hydroxylase block 


4
4
CH3-OH

CH3-OH 


C=O

C=O 



Deoxycortisol

Deoxycorticosterone 



OH 


O

O 



5
CH2-OH 


5
CH2-OH 
C=O 
C=O 



Cortisol 


HO 


Corticosterone 



OH 


HO 


6
O

O 


Aldosterone 


n FIG. 44. In 21-hydroxylase deficiency, a relative or complete block in the 21-hydroxylase enzyme results in an increase in the precursor 
steroid 17a -hydroxyprogesterone, as well as overproduction of adrenal DHEA and androstenedione. Enzyme 1: cholesterol 
side-chain cleavage. Enzyme 2: 17-hydroxylase–17,20-lyase. Enzyme 3: 3-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-isomerase. Enzyme 4: 21hydroxylase. 
Enzyme 5: 11-hydroxylase. Enzyme 6: aldosterone synthetase. Column 1 leads to the production of mineralocorticoids. 
Column 2 leads to the production of corticosteroids. Column 3 leads to the production of the adrenal androgens. 

110 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 45. Genitalia of a severely virilized 2-week-old, 
46,XX female with severe salt-wasting 21-hydroxylase deficiency. 
At birth, the infant was assigned a male gender and 
was thought to have undescended testes and mild hypospadias. 
When re-admitted to the hospital, the infant had vomiting 
and dehydration. Serum sodium level was 107 mEq/L; 
potassium, 10.1 mEq/L. (Miller WL, Tyrrell JB. The adrenal 
cortex. In: Felig P, Baxter JD, Frohman L. eds. Endocrinology 
and metabolism. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1995: 
555–717. Copyright © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.) 
Women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia usually 
develop hyperandrogenism and oligo-ovulation as 
teenagers and present to their clinicians to report hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, infertility, or a combination. 
Women with 21-hydroxylase nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia have a clinical presentation identical to that 
of women with PCOS. Consequently, hormone testing 
must be performed to differentiate between these two disorders. 
Serum testosterone, androstenedione, and 
DHEAS levels are commonly elevated in women with 
nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia or PCOS. However, 
women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia due to a 
21-hydroxylase disorder typically have a fivefold elevation 
of serum 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels (follicular 
phase, 8 AM level) compared with women with PCOS or 
normal women. 

An important issue is the incidence of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency in women presenting to gynecologists for hirsutism, 
menstrual irregularity, or both. In most studies, 
less than 3% of women with this presentation have nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (17). The majority have 
PCOS. The highest incidence of nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia occurs in Ashkenazi Jews and Eskimos. 

The best laboratory method for diagnosing 21hydroxylase 
deficiency is either measurement of 8 AM 


n FIG. 46. Embryonic development of male and female 
external reproductive structures from common anlagen. 
Excess adrenal androgen in a female can result in an abnormally 
large genital tubercle (resulting in clitoromegaly) and 
in genital folds and genital swelling that fuse (resulting in 
labioscrotal fusion). The appearance is much like that of the 
male external structure. (Fig. 28-1, p. 810 from Human anatomy 
and physiology, 3rd ed. by Alexander P. Spence and 
Elliott B. Mason. Copyright © 1987 by The Benjamin/ 
Cummings Publishing Company, Inc. Reprinted by permission 
of Pearson Education, Inc.) 
follicular-phase serum 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels 
(levels >4 ng/mL suggest the diagnosis of nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia) or 17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels 
measured 60 minutes after the intravenous injection of 
synthetic corticotropin (cosyntropin, 250 m g) (levels >10 
ng/mL are diagnostic). Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate is 
of no value in screening for nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia, 
because DHEAS levels overlap in women with nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia and those with PCOS. 

The conventional treatment of hirsutism in women 
with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia is low-dose corticosteroid 
therapy (dexamethasone 0.25–0.5 mg nightly). 
Dexamethasone will suppress corticotropin secretion and 
decrease adrenal androgen secretion. However, dexamethasone 
has the disadvantage of being associated with 
the development of iatrogenic Cushing’s syndrome, 
including central obesity, striae, osteopenia, and newonset 
diabetes. It is important to note that antiandrogen 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 111 

therapy may be more effective than the use of corticosteroids 
in the treatment of hirsutism caused by nonclassic 
adrenal hyperplasia (18). Based on these findings, an 
alternative to dexamethasone treatment is to treat these 
patients with a combination of an oral contraceptive plus 
an antiandrogen, such as spironolactone. This combination 
can induce regular uterine withdrawal bleeding and 
reduce hirsutism in women with nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia. 

For women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia and 
infertility, conventional treatment is to use dexamethasone 
to reduce adrenal androgen secretion and induce 
ovulation. Because treatment is continued only until a 
pregnancy is achieved, the likelihood of developing iatrogenic 
Cushing’s syndrome is low. However, recent case 
reports also indicate that women with nonclassic adrenal 
hyperplasia can respond to treatment with clomiphene 
citrate used without corticosteroids. In a recent case 
report, a woman with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia was 
treated with clomiphene citrate (150 mg daily for cycle 
days 5–9). The patient ovulated, became pregnant, and 
delivered at term (19). There are no randomized prospective 
studies that directly compare the effectiveness of corticosteroids 
with clomiphene in the induction of 
ovulation in women with nonclassic adrenal hyperplasia. 

Adrenal Androgen Deficiency 

In menopausal women, decreases in adrenal production 
of DHEAS and androstenedione, as well as decreases in 
ovarian production of androstenedione and testosterone, 
contribute to decreased androgen bioactivity. The 
adrenopause (decrease in adrenal DHEAS and 
androstenedione secretion) may contribute to symptoms 
of decreased sexual activity and orgasm reported by some 
menopausal women (20). This usually is not present until 
several years postmenopause. 

Adrenal Cortisol Excess 

The most common cause of corticosteroid excess is the 
use of potent corticosteroids for the treatment of nonendocrine 
disorders. The nonpharmacologic causes of 
Cushing’s syndrome are 1) Cushing’s disease (pituitary 
tumor secreting corticotropin, causing adrenal oversecretion 
of cortisol), 2) ectopic corticotropin syndrome (corticotropin 
secretion by nonpituitary tumors, such as a 
bronchial carcinoid tumor), and 3) adrenal tumors (adenoma 
or carcinoma). 

The clinical signs and symptoms of Cushing’s syndrome 
include central obesity with moon facies and a 
“buffalo hump,” facial plethora, violaceous striae (see 
Image 33), easy bruising, proximal muscle weakness, hirsutism, 
and menstrual disorders. Photographs from before 
the patient’s illness can help to establish a baseline. 

Corticosteroid excess can occur with both long- and 
short-term administration of steroids. An important clinical 
issue is how to best discontinue corticosteroid treat


ment. The HPA axis can be suppressed by dosages of 
prednisone of 7.5 mg daily or greater. Suppression can 
occur within 3 weeks, especially with doses of prednisone 
of 40 mg or greater (21). One standard tapering 
regimen is to reduce the corticosteroid dosage by the 
equivalent of 5 mg of prednisone every 2 weeks until a 
dosage of 5 mg daily is achieved. The treatment then can 
be discontinued (22). 

Cushing’s disease is 10 times more common in women 
than in men, and its incidence peaks between ages 20 and 
40 years. The evaluation of patients for Cushing’s disease 
continues to evolve. A current multistep diagnostic protocol 
begins with a measurement of 24-hour urinary free 
cortisol. If the 24-hour urinary free cortisol level is consistently 
greater than 250 m g, Cushing’s syndrome is present. 
Values between 100 m g and 250 m g can be caused by 
Cushing’s syndrome, depression, alcoholism, or stress. 

If the 24-hour urinary cortisol level is elevated, measurement 
of plasma corticotropin levels and assessment 
of corticotropin response to corticotropin-releasing hormone 
(CRH) usually can pinpoint the cause of the 
Cushing’s syndrome. The key concept, which is the foundation 
of this approach, is that if corticotropin is measurable 
in the circulation of a patient with elevated urinary 
cortisol levels, then the cortisol overproduction is due to 
corticotropin stimulation (pituitary or extrapituitary). If 
the corticotropin is undetectable, then the cause of the 
cortisol overproduction is an adrenal tumor that is secreting 
cortisol, independent of corticotropin. The CRH stimulation 
test (using an intravenous bolus of 1 m g/kg ovine 
CRH over 2 minutes) also can help differentiate pituitary 
versus ectopic sources of corticotropin secretion. In 90% 
of cases of corticotropin–secreting pituitary tumors, the 
administration of CRH results in a marked increase in 
plasma corticotropin levels. Corticotropin-releasing hormone 
will stimulate plasma corticotropin in only 10% of 
cases of ectopic corticotropin secretion (23). 

A test that helps to confirm the presence of a corticotropin-
secreting pituitary tumor, and also helps to 
determine the half of the pituitary containing the tumor, 
is the inferior petrosal sinus sampling test. In almost all 
patients with a corticotropin-secreting pituitary tumor, 
there is at least two times more corticotropin in the inferior 
petrosal sinus (because of secretion from the pituitary 
gland) than in the peripheral circulation. In almost all 
patients with an extrapituitary source of corticotropin, 
there is less than two times more corticotropin in the inferior 
petrosal sinus than in the peripheral circulation. The 
test has the added benefit of helping to localize the corticotropin-
secreting pituitary tumor to the right or left half 
of the pituitary, which can help the neurosurgeon localize 
and resect the tumor. Computed tomographic or magnetic 
resonance imaging of the adrenals and lung can help identify 
adrenal cancer, adrenal adenomas, and lung processes 
that are secreting corticotropin. In most cases, pituitary 
tumors that secrete corticotropin are too small to be 
detected reliably by available neuroimaging modalities. 


AB 

n FIG. 47. Diagrammatic depiction of hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF)–pituitary corticotropin–adrenal axis in 
normal subjects (
((A) 
)) and in patients with primary adrenal insufficiency (
((B) 
)) in which inadequate secretion of corticosteroids, mineralocorticoids 
(ie, aldosterone, or ALDO), and androgens results in the disruption in negative feedback regulation with marked 
increase in CRF/arginine vasopressin and corticotropin (thick lines). The loss of aldosterone activates the renin-angiotensin system 
resulting in hypotension, hyponatremia, and hyperkalemia. (Yen SS. Chronic anovulation caused by peripheral endocrine 
disorders. In: Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL, eds. Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, pathophysiology, and clinical management. 
4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:498) 
112 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Cushing’s disease is best treated with transsphenoidal 
surgery to resect the pituitary tumor (24, 25). When 
surgery is not possible, radiation therapy combined with 
the administration of mitotane can be effective (26). If 
neither approach is effective, bilateral adrenalectomy can 
be performed to control the excess cortisol secretion (27). 
The best approach to the treatment of an ectopic source of 
corticotropin oversecretion is to detect the tumor by 
imaging studies and resect it surgically. 

The primary treatment for adrenal adenoma is surgery, 
and it is usually curative. The primary treatment for 
adrenal carcinoma is surgery if resection or debulking is 
possible. Mitotane can be used for medical treatment of 
adrenal carcinoma that cannot be resected (28). 

Adrenal Cortisol Deficiency 

Adrenal insufficiency is caused by destruction of the 
adrenal cortex (Addison’s disease—primary adrenal 
insufficiency) or by corticotropin deficiency (secondary 
adrenal insufficiency). When corticotropin deficiency is 
present, mineralocorticoid secretion is preserved because 
the zona glomerulosa is predominantly stimulated by the 
renin–angiotensin system, not corticotropin (Fig. 47). 

More than 90% of the adrenal cortex must be 
destroyed before Addison’s disease is clinically manifested. 
The most common cause of Addison’s disease is 

autoimmune destruction of the adrenal gland, which can 
be associated with failure of the thyroid or endocrine pan-
creas. Nonautoimmune causes of Addison’s disease 
include granulomatous diseases (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, 
or histoplasmosis) or infiltrative diseases (lymphoma, 
hemochro- matosis, or metastatic cancer). Addison’s disease 
is present in some patients with advanced HIV disease. 


The symptoms of adrenal insufficiency include weakness, 
fatigue, decreased appetite, nausea, vague abdominal 
pain, and vomiting. Signs include weight loss, 
hypotension, and hyperpigmentation. The increased pigmentation 
is caused by an increase in pituitary secretion 
of pro-opiomelanocortin and melanin. 

The diagnosis of adrenal insufficiency can be confirmed 
by administering synthetic corticotropin (cosyntropin, 
250 m g) as an intravenous bolus and measuring 
plasma cortisol levels 60 minutes later. A cortisol level 
higher than 20 m g/dL indicates that the adrenal gland is 
present and responsive to corticotropin. A cortisol level 
lower than 20 m g/dL suggests the presence of adrenal 
insufficiency (29). An elevated plasma corticotropin level 
is consistent with primary adrenal insufficiency (autoimmune 
destruction of the adrenal gland). A plasma corticotropin 
level that is undetectable is consistent with 
secondary adrenal insufficiency and indicates hypothalamic 
or pituitary disease (30). 


The treatment for adrenal crisis in patients with 
adrenal insufficiency who were previously treated with 
corticosteroids involves administering maximal stress 
dosages of cortisol in the range of 300–400 mg daily. A 
large-diameter intravenous tube should be used to 
administer 2 L of dextrose 5%–normal saline over 2 
hours. One hundred milligrams of hydrocortisone succinate 
is administered as an immediate intravenous bolus, 
and a continuous intravenous drip is initiated to provide 
100 mg every 6 hours. After the first 24 hours, if the 
patient is stable, the dose can be tapered by 50–100 mg 
each day. The administration of mineralocorticoids is not 
needed, because at a cortisol dosage of 150 mg daily or 
greater, sufficient mineralocorticoid activity is present in 
the cortisol to provide complete replacement. For 
patients with adrenal insufficiency or chronically suppressed 
adrenal function who require major surgery, a 
continuous intravenous drip of hydrocortisone succinate, 
administered at a dosage of 100 mg every 6 hours, 
provides complete corticosteroid and mineralocorticoid 
replacement. The dosage can be tapered rapidly after 
surgery when the patient can return to oral corticosteroid 
replacement. 

When a patient is in a nonstressed state, hydrocortisone 
typically is prescribed at a dosage of 20–30 mg 
daily, usually 20 mg in the morning (7–8 AM) and 10 mg 
in the early evening (4–6 PM). Fludrocortisone (0.1 mg 
daily) is prescribed as it is for patients with primary adrenal 
insufficiency who need mineralocorticoid replacement. 

Adrenal Medulla Pheochromocytoma 

Pheochromocytomas produce excessive quantities of catecholamines. 
Pheochromocytoma is a rare disease, occurring 
in no more than 0.2% of hypertensive patients. The 
most common symptoms and signs associated with 
pheochromocytoma are headache, excessive perspiration, 
palpitations, nervousness, and hypertension. Paroxysmal 
episodes may be provoked by exercise or abdominal palpation. 
About 10% of pheochromocytomas are familial 
and occur as simple familial pheochromocytoma or as 
part of the multiple endocrine neoplasia syndrome type 
IIa or IIb. Neurofibromatosis and café au lait spots can be 
associated with pheochromocytomas. Ninety-five percent 
of pheochromocytomas are in the abdomen, and 10% are 
malignant. 

The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma cannot be made 
clinically alone. The diagnosis requires biochemical evidence 
of catecholamine overproduction. A 24-hour urine 
analysis for catecholamines, metanephrine, and vanillylmandelic 
acid (a catecholamine metabolite) is the standard 
diagnostic test. Metanephrine measurements are the 
least likely to be falsely elevated because of diet or drugs. 
A metanephrine level higher than 1.2 mg/d strongly suggests 
pheochromocytoma. Biochemical confirmation 
should be followed by imaging studies to localize the 
tumor. The treatment of pheochromocytoma is surgical 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 113 

removal of the catecholamine-producing tumor after 
inducing catecholamine blockade (phenoxybenzamine) 
to prevent a hypertensive crisis during surgery. 

PROSTAGLANDINS AND 
DYSMENORRHEA 

Prostaglandins 

Prostaglandins are 20-carbon-atom fatty acids. They are 
intracellular mediators and are catabolized in the same 
cell. Occasionally, prostaglandins act as local hormones, 
but when secreted into the circulation, they are rapidly 
metabolized by the lung, kidney, and liver. There are at 
least 14 different types of naturally occurring prostaglandins, 
designated by the letters A through I. Each letter 
denotes the location of specific combinations of 
hydroxyl groups, ketone groups, and unsaturated carbon 
atoms on the cyclopentane ring of the molecule. The 
subscript 1, 2, or 3 after the alphabetic designation indicates 
the number of double bonds in the aliphatic side 
chains. Each of the more familiar types—PGE2 and 
PGF2a —has two double bonds (Fig. 48). 

Prostaglandins are synthesized from arachidonic 
acid. Hydrolysis of cell membrane phospholipids by the 

Prostanoic acid 
9 87 
65 
4 
3 
2 COOH 
1 
10 
CH3 
12 14 16 18 20 
11 13 15 17 19 

Prostaglandin E2 
O 
CO2H 

OH OH 

Prostaglandin F2a 
OH 

CO2H 

OH OH 

n FIG. 48. Structures of prostanoic acid, prostaglandin E2, 
and PGF2a . 

114 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

lysosomal enzyme phospholipase A2 generates arachidonic 
acid, which is then converted via the cyclooxygenase 
or the lipoxygenase pathway (Fig. 49). Through the 
cyclooxygenase pathway, arachidonic acid is converted 
into cyclic endoperoxides (prostaglandin G and prostaglandin 
H), and subsequently into PGE2 and PGF2a ,or 
prostacyclin or thromboxane A2. There are two isoforms 
of the cyclooxygenase gene. The Cox-1 gene is located on 
chromosome 9 and is constitutively expressed. Located 
on chromosome 1, Cox-2 is not constitutively expressed 
but is highly inducible by mitogenic factors and 
cytokines. Table 7 summarizes the similarities and differences 
between Cox-1 and Cox-2. 

Mechanism of Action 

Prostaglandins exert their action through specific receptors 
found in cell membranes. There are multiple subtypes 
of prostaglandin receptors; each differs in its 

potency toward prostaglandins and in its signal transduction 
pathway (Table 8). Therefore, prostaglandins may 
stimulate or inhibit adenylate cyclase or stimulate phospholipase 
C to generate inositol triphosphate. A single 
prostaglandin may have multiple effects on the same cell 
type, depending on PGE2 concentrations and the relative 
presence of the separate subtypes of prostaglandin E 
receptors. For example, PGF2a stimulates phospholipase 
C to generate inositol triphosphate and inhibits calcium 
binding to cytoplasmic membrane protein, leading to 
increased intracellular free calcium. Hence, the 
myometrium contracts in response to PGF2a . 

Some of the adverse effects of prostaglandins (uterine 
cramps, nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) are due to the 
induced contraction or relaxation of the smooth muscle of 
different organ systems. Both PGF2a and PGE2 stimulate 
uterine actions. However, intrauterine administration of 
PGE2 during menstruation relaxes the uterus. 
Prostacyclin relaxes smooth muscle (including the 

PGI2 
TxA2

Cyclic 
endoperoxide PGF2a 

PGE2

Phospholipase 

Arachidonic

Phospholipids 

acid 

Leukotriene A 
5-HPETE Leukotriene B 
Leukotriene C 

n FIG. 49. Biosynthesis of prostaglandins (PGI2; thromboxane A2, or TxA2; PGF2a ; and PGE2) through the cyclooxygenase pathway 
and of leukotrienes through the lipoxygenase pathway. Abbreviation: 5-HPETE indicates 5-hydroperoxyeicosatetraenoic acid. 
n TABLE 7. Similarities and Differences Between Human Cox-1 and Cox-2 Genes 
Cox-1 Gene Cox-2 Gene 
Ubiquitous 
Constitutive 
Not ubiquitous 
Inducible 
On chromosome 9 On chromosome 1 
Gene, ~22 kilobases and 11 exons 
mRNA, 2.7 kilobases 
Many transcription start sites 
No TATA 
Gene,~8 kilobases and 10 exons 
mRNA, 4-0–4.5 kilobases 
Only one transcription start site identified 
Canonical TATA 

Abbreviation: mRNA indicates messenger RNA. 


OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 115 

n TABLE 8. Common Prostaglandins, Their Receptors, and Respective Signal Transduction 
Prostaglandins Receptor Type/Subtypes Signal Transduction 
PGE2 EP — 
EP1 
EP2 
EP3 
Phospholipase C 
cAMP ­ 
cAMP ¯ 
PGF2a 
PGI2 
FP 
IP 
Phospholipase C 
cAMP ­ 
TxA2 TP Phospholipase C 

Abbreviations: TxA2 indicates thromboxane A2; cAMP, cyclic adenosine monophosphate;­ = stimulates; ¯ = inhibits. 

uterus) to cause vasodilation, and is antiaggregatory to 
platelets, thus slowing down clotting and prolonging 
bleeding. Thromboxane A2 induces smooth muscle contraction, 
is vasoconstrictive, and is proaggregatory to 
platelets and thus clotting. Prostaglandins are involved in 
many aspects of human reproduction (see Box I). 

Dysmenorrhea 

The literal translation of dysmenorrhea is “difficult menstrual 
flow.” The pain usually begins at the start of menstruation 
and lasts for several days. It is a common cause 
of absenteeism from work or school and often interferes 
with quality of life and well-being (31). 

Dysmenorrhea is characterized as primary or secondary. 
Primary dysmenorrhea exists in the absence of 
known pelvic pathologic causes. Secondary dysmenorrhea 
is due to pelvic pathologic causes. Almost any condition 
that affects the pelvic viscera can cause cyclic 
pain. 

Secondary dysmenorrhea results from pelvic conditions 
such as endometriosis, pelvic inflammatory disease, uterine 
leiomyomata, congenital müllerian anomalies, and 
intrauterine contraceptive devices (32). A thorough history 
should be obtained and a physical examination performed. 
Other helpful studies include cervical cultures, pelvic ultrasonography, 
sonohysterography, or hysterosalpingography. 
Laparoscopy may be the most helpful diagnostic test and 
should be considered when endometriosis is suspected. 
This is especially true in adolescents whose dysmenorrhea 
does not respond to treatment with oral contraceptives and 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs. 

The cause of dysmenorrhea is believed to be hypercontractility 
of uterine smooth muscle. The evidence 
implicating arachidonic acid metabolites in the pathophysiology 
of primary dysmenorrhea is compelling. 
Menstrual fluid and endometrium of adolescents with 
dysmenorrhea have increased levels of PGE2 and PGF2a 
(33). Women with primary dysmenorrhea have elevated 
endometrial PGF2a /PGE ratios. Increased uterine contractility 
and dysmenorrhea-like pain is induced by intrauter-

BOX I 
Prostaglandin’s Role in Human 
Reproduction 


Mediation of the midcycle preovulatory luteinizing hor


mone surge at the hypothalamus 
Induction of ovarian muscle contractions, follicle rupture, 
and oocyte release 

Luteolysis 

Relaxation and contraction of the fallopian tube to promote 
synchronized tubal transport of the ovum to the uterus 
Implantation-related effects at multiple sites in both the 

embryo (hatching of blastocysts and fluid accumulation) 
and the endometrium (increase in capillary permeability 
and inflammatory changes) 

Fetal lung development 

Maintenance of ductus arteriosus patency in utero and 
subsequent postnatal changes by prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) 
Production and release of PGF2a and PGE2 by fetal mem


branes, the decidua, and the placenta to stimulate uterine 
contractions during spontaneous labor and parturition 

ine administration of PGF2a . Other possible related causes 
of dysmenorrhea include vasopressin, outflow tract 
obstruction, and psychologic factors. 

The incidence of primary dysmenorrhea ranges from 
8% to 90% (34, 35). The wide range probably is a result 
of differences in the method of pain assessment. 

A prospective 1-year study of college students in the 
United States aged 17–19 years found that 72% of the 
nearly 1,400 periods monitored were painful. At least one 
episode of “severe” pain occurred in 60% of women, and 
13% reported severe pain one half of the time (36). A 
Swedish study found a similar 72% incidence, and another 
study of adolescents found a 60% rate. In both studies, 


116 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

approximately 15% of the individuals limited their daily 
activity or missed school (37). 

Primary dysmenorrhea usually is described as midline 
cyclic pelvic cramping beginning with menstruation. Pain 
may begin prior to menstrual bleeding. Associated symptoms 
include headache, vertigo, nausea and vomiting, 
diarrhea, depression, irritability, and insomnia (38). Pain 
may be exacerbated by stress, caffeine, and loss of sleep. 
Risk factors include early menarche, long menstrual periods, 
smoking, alcohol, and obesity. The incidence is higher 
in nulliparous than in parous women. 

Patients with the symptoms just described should have 
a thorough history and physical examination, including a 
pelvic examination. Transvaginal ultrasonography is 
helpful to confirm pelvic pathologic conditions. Normal 
findings on pelvic examination and ultrasonography suggest 
a diagnosis of primary dysmenorrhea. 

Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and oral contraceptives 
are the most commonly used treatments. Oral 
contraceptives reduce menstrual volume and suppress 
prostaglandin levels. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs relieve dysmenorrhea by suppressing menstrual 
fluid prostaglandin (39). Ibuprofen, mefenamic acid, 
ketoprofen, and aspirin have been shown to be superior to 
placebos for the treatment of dysmenorrhea (40, 41). A 
recent randomized controlled trial showed that administration 
of rofecoxib at a dose of 25 mg or 50 mg significantly 
relieved dysmenorrhea and the time to 
remedication compared with use of a placebo (42). 

Other interventions that may be helpful include transcutaneous 
electrical nerve stimulation and heat therapy 
(43). A low-fat vegetarian diet increases sex hormone– 
binding globulin and reduces both body weight and the 
duration and intensity of dysmenorrhea (44). Most studies 
show that exercise decreases the incidence or severity 
of dysmenorrhea (45). 

Surgical procedures for dysmenorrhea include presacral 
neurectomy and uterosacral nerve ablation. Some evidence 
indicates that these procedures may be effective, but the 
evidence is insufficient to recommend the routine use of 
nerve interruption for the treatment of dysmenorrhea (46). 

ENDOMETRIOSIS 

Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial 
tissue, glands, and stroma outside the uterine cavity and 
musculature. It typically is found on dependent surfaces 
in the pelvis and most often affects the ovaries and posterior 
cul-de-sac. It can affect other sites as well, such as 
abdominal viscera, the urinary tract, and the lungs. The 
exact incidence of endometriosis in the general population 
is unknown. Pelvic endometriosis is present in 
6–43% of women undergoing sterilization, 12–32% of 
women undergoing laparoscopy for pelvic pain, and 
21–48% of women undergoing laparoscopy for infertility 
(47). Endometriosis usually occurs in women of reproductive 
age. 

Pathogenesis 

Several theories exist regarding the pathogenesis of 
endometriosis, including the implantation theory, theory 
of lymphatic and hematogenous spread, theory of direct 
implantation, and the coelomic metaplasia theory. The 
implantation theory proposes that endometrial tissue is 
regurgitated out of the fallopian tubes and then adheres to 
pelvic viscera, and evidence suggests that this mechanism 
is the most likely cause of pelvic endometriosis. 

Pathology 

Endometriotic implants have a variety of appearances. 
Superficial implants on the ovary or peritoneum may 
appear as reddish macules or nodules. The collection of 
hemosiderin gives implants a brown or black coloration. 
Endometriosis may be locally invasive and cause significant 
inflammation and adhesion formation. Endometriomas 
are cystic structures usually involving the ovary. 
These cysts vary from 1 cm to more than 10 cm in diameter 
and are dark red to blue (Image 34). The four major 
histologic components are endometrial gland, stroma, 
fibrosis, and hemorrhage. 

Signs and Symptoms 

The common signs and symptoms of endometriosis are 
pelvic pain, dysmenorrhea, dyspareunia, and infertility. 
The type and severity depend on the extent and location 
of the disease. However, even limited disease can cause 
significant symptoms. 

Pain in women with endometriosis ranges from 
increasing dysmenorrhea to chronic pelvic pain and dyspareunia. 
The mechanism of worsening dysmenorrhea is 
not known but may be related to increased prostaglandins 
and cytokines present in the peritoneal fluid of women 
with endometriosis. Pain due to peritoneal disease is 
mediated by somatic afferent fibers that sense stretching, 
irritation, or injury. Endometriosis-related pain also may 
be perceived by sympathetic or parasympathetic visceral 
nerves that innervate the pelvic organs and are sensitive 
to distention, distortion, or impression. Dyspareunia is 
more common in women with endometriosis and deep 
posterior cul-de-sac disease. 

An estimated 30–50% of women with endometriosis 
are infertile. Severe disease may cause infertility by distorting 
pelvic anatomy. Severe pelvic adhesions may 
impair egg release from the ovary, block sperm entry into 
the distal fallopian tube, and inhibit ovum pickup. In animal 
models of endometriosis, pelvic adhesions appear to 
contribute to the observed decreased fecundity noted in 
animals with advanced endometriosis. The cause in less 
severe cases is controversial. Many studies demonstrate 
that women with endometriosis have an increased volume 
of peritoneal fluid; increased macrophage concentration 
and function; and increased peritoneal fluid concentrations 
of prostaglandin, interleukin-l, tumor necrosis fac



OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 117 

tor, and proteases. These alterations may impair oocyte, 
sperm, embryo, and fallopian tube function (48). 
Peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis reportedly 
contains an ovum capture inhibitor that prevents normal 
cumulus-fimbria interaction (49). Ovum capture 
inhibitor, a protein with a molecular mass greater than 
100,000 daltons, remains to be purified. It also has been 
proposed that numerous endocrine and ovulatory disorders 
may be present in women with endometriosis, 
including luteinized unruptured follicle syndrome, luteal 
phase dysfunction, abnormal follicular growth, and premature 
or multiple LH surges. 

Levels of IgG and IgA antibodies and lymphocytes 
may be increased in the endometrium of women with 
endometriosis. These abnormalities may alter endometrial 
receptivity to embryo implantation. In women with 
endometriosis, it is not clear whether implantation failure 
contributes to decreased fecundity. Some women with 
endometriosis lack endometrial a v b 3 integrin expression 
(50). Decreased endometrial integrin production in the 
midluteal phase may cause infertility by impairing 
implantation. These observations support the concept that 
endometriosis may represent one component of a disease 
that is characterized by dysfunction in multiple components, 
including the ovary, endometrium, fallopian tubes, 
and peritoneum. 

Diagnosis 

Endometriosis should be suspected in patients with the 
previously described symptoms. Signs of endometriosis 
include pelvic tenderness with nodularity, particularly 
over the uterosacral ligaments; pain with uterine movement; 
uterine retroversion with decreased mobility; and 
adnexal enlargement with tenderness. Many symptomatic 
women will have normal findings on pelvic examination. 
No one constellation of signs or symptoms is pathognomonic 
of endometriosis (51). Serum antigen CA 125 
levels are helpful in detecting and monitoring more severe 
cases but are not specific to this condition. Transvaginal 
ultrasonography is helpful to confirm the presence of 
endometriomas. They appear as intraovarian cystic structures, 
usually unilocular with hazy borders and internal 
echoes (Image 35). The diagnosis can be substantiated 
only by laparoscopy or laparotomy. It is important to 
assess correctly the presence and extent of endometriosis. 
Peritoneal biopsy is desirable, though not necessary for 
diagnosis if recognizable lesions are present (Image 36). It 
is used for diagnostic confirmation in doubtful cases. 

Endometriosis should be documented carefully using 
the revised classification of endometriosis recommended 
by the American Society for Reproductive Medicine (Fig. 
50). Although this classification scheme has not been 
prospectively validated and the scores assigned to various 
lesions and adhesions produced by endometriosis are 
arbitrary, it serves as a semiobjective means of determining 
the extent of the disease and provides a quantifiable 
basis for follow-up comparisons. 

Treatment 

Treatment of patients with endometriosis should be based 
on the extent of the disease, the severity of symptoms, the 
patient’s desire for childbearing, the patient’s age, and other 
coexisting medical and surgical factors. Available modalities 
of treatment are expectant, hormonal, surgical, and combination 
medical and surgical treatment. Expectant management 
of infertile women with mild endometriosis has been 
recommended, but recent data suggest that treatment at the 
time of laparoscopy improves pregnancy rates (52). 

MEDICAL THERAPY 

Endometriotic implant growth usually depends on ovarian 
steroids. Consequently, medications that suppress 
ovarian function are beneficial. Ovarian suppression has 
not been shown to improve pregnancy rates for infertile 
women with mild or moderate endometriosis. Medical 
therapy should not be used to enhance fertility. However, 
medical therapy has been shown to relieve pain and 
reduce the amount of endometriosis visible at laparoscopy. 
Thus, medical therapy may be indicated for women 
with pain. 

Oral contraceptives, progestins, danazol, and GnRH 
agonists all appear to be effective in reducing pelvic pain 

(53) (Table 9). Treatment also may be effective in reducing 
the progression of disease, but this benefit is not as 
well documented. Contraindications to medical therapy 
include hypersensitivity to any of the individual agents; 
undiagnosed abnormal vaginal bleeding; and specific 
contraindications to taking oral contraceptives, such as 
being a smoker older than 35 years and having a history 
of thromboembolic disease. Specific contraindications to 
danazol include impaired hepatic, renal, or cardiac function. 
Hormonal therapy is ineffective in resolving 
endometriomas and has no effect on adhesion formation. 
Danazol, GnRH agonists (including leuprolide acetate, 
nafarelin acetate, and goserelin acetate), and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate appear to be comparably effective in 
relieving pain (54). Treatment usually is continued for 6 
months. Menses usually recur within 6 weeks of stopping 
danazol therapy but may take 8–10 weeks to be reestablished 
after GnRH agonist therapy. Danazol therapy is 
associated with deleterious alterations in lipoprotein fractions. 
Gonadotropin-releasing hormone analogue therapy 
produces hypoestrogenism and modest loss of bone mineral 
density. This treatment usually is limited to one 6month 
course. Women who develop adverse effects while 
taking GnRH analogues, who require treatment for longer 
than 6 months, or who require repeated treatments may 
be candidates for “add-back” therapy. This therapy consists 
of combination low-dose estrogen and progestin (ie, 
0.3 mg conjugated estrogen, 5 mg medroxyprogesterone 
daily) (55). The regimen usually decreases adverse 
effects but may not prevent bone loss completely. 
Medical therapy has been employed both before and 
after conservative surgical treatment of endometriosis. 


118 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


American Society for Reproductive Medicine 
Revised Classification of Endometriosis 

Patient’s name Date 

Stage I (minimal) — 1–5 
Stage II (mild) — 6–15 
Stage III (moderate) — 16–40 Laparoscopy Laparotomy Photography 
Stage IV (severe) — >40 Recommended treatment 

Total 
Prognosis 

PeritoneumEndometriosis <1 cm 1–3 cm >3 cm 
Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 2 4 6 
Ovary 
R Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 4 16 20 
L Superficial 1 2 4 
Deep 4 16 20 
Posterior 
cul-de-sac 
obliteration 
Partial Complete 
4 40 
OvaryAdhesions <1/3 Enclosure 1/3 – 2/3 Enclosure >2/3 Enclosure 
R Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4 8 16 
L Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4 8 16 
Tube 
R Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4* 8* 16 
L Filmy 1 2 4 
Dense 4* 8* 16 

*If the fimbriated end of the fallopian tube is completely enclosed, change the point assignment to 16. 
Denote appearance of superficial implant types as red [(R), red, red-pink, flamelike, vesicular blobs, 
clear vesicles], white [(W), opacifications, peritoneal defects, yellow-brown], or black [(B), black, 
hemosiderin deposits, blue]. Denote percent of total described as R %, W %, and B %. Total 
should equal 100%. 

Additional endometriosis: Associated pathology: 
L 
To be used with normal 
tubes and ovaries 
R L 
To be used with abnormal 
tubes and/or ovaries 
R 


n FIG. 50. Revised American Society for Reproductive Medicine classification of endometriosis: 1996. (Reprinted with permission 
from the American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Fertility and Sterility 1997;67:817–821) 

OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 119 

Examples & Guidelines 

Stage I (minimal) 
Stage II (mild) Stage III (moderate) 


Peritoneum Peritoneum Peritoneum 
Superficial endo — 1–3 cm -2 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 

R. ovary 
R. ovary Cul-de-sac 
Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Partial obliteration -4 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 L. ovary 
Total points 
4 L. ovary Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
Superficial endo — <1 cm -1 Total points 26 
Total points 9 

Stage III (moderate) Stage IV (severe) 
Stage IV (severe) 


Peritoneum Peritoneum Peritoneum 
Superficial endo — >3 cm -4 Superficial endo — >3 cm -4 Deep endo — >3 cm -6 

R. tube 
L. ovary Cul-de-sac 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 Deep endo — 1–3 cm -32† Complete obliteration -40 
R. ovary 
Dense adhesions— <1/3 -8† R. ovary 
Filmy adhesions — <1/3 -1 L. tube Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
L. tube 
Dense adhesions— <1/3 -8† Dense adhesions— <1/3 -4 

Dense adhesions— <1/3 -16* 

Total points 
52 L. tube 

L. ovary 
>2/3
Dense adhesions— -16 

Deep endo — <1 cm -4 
L. ovary 

<1/3

Dense adhesions— -4 Deep endo — 1–3 cm -16 
Total points 30 *Point assignment changed to 16. Dense adhesions— >2/3 -16 

†Point assignment doubled. Total points 
114 
*Determination of the stage or degree of endometrial involvement 
is based on a weighted point system. Distribution of points 
has been arbitrarily determined and may require further revision 
or refinement as knowledge of the disease increases. 

To ensure complete evaluation, inspection of the pelvis in a 
clockwise or counterclockwise fashion is encouraged. Number, 
size, and location of endometrial implants, plaques, endometriomas, 
and/or adhesions are noted. For example, five separate 
0.5-cm superficial implants on the peritoneum (2.5 cm total) 
would be assigned 2 points. (The surface of the uterus should 
be considered peritoneum.) The severity of the endometriosis 
or adhesions should be assigned the highest score only for 
peritoneum, ovary, tube, or cul-de-sac. For example, a 4-cm 
superficial and a 2-cm deep implant of the peritoneum should 
be given a score of 6 (not 8). A 4-cm deep endometrioma of the 
ovary associated with more than 3 cm of superficial disease 
should be scored 20 (not 24). 

In those patients with only one adnexa, points applied to 
disease of the remaining tube and ovary should be multiplied by 
two. 

†Points assigned may be circled and totaled. Aggregation of 
points indicates stage of disease (minimal, mild, moderate, or 
severe). 
The presence of endometriosis of the bowel, urinary tract, 
fallopian tube, vagina, cervix, skin, etc., should be documented 
under “additional endometriosis.” Other pathology such as tubal 
occlusion, leiomyomata, uterine anomaly, etc, should be documented 
under “associated pathology.” All pathology should be 
depicted as specifically as possible on the sketch of pelvic 
organs, and means of observation (laparoscopy or laparotomy) 
should be noted. 


120 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 9. Medical Therapy for Women with Endometriosis 
Category Drug Dose Frequency 
GnRH agonist Leuprolide 3.75 mg IM 4 weeks 
Goserelin 3.6-mg implant 4 weeks 
Nafarelin 200–200 intranasally Twice daily 
Progestins Medroxyprogesterone acetate 10–50 mg Daily 
Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg 90 days 
Megestrol acetate 20 mg Daily 
Norethindrone acetate 15 mg* Daily 
Oral contraceptives Ethinyl estradiol/desogestrel 0.02–0.03 mg/0.15 mg Daily 
Danazol Danocrine 200 ng 1–4 times daily 

Abbreviations: GnRH indicates gonadotropin-releasing hormone; IM, intramuscularly. 
*Start at 5 mg/d and increase by 2.5 mg every 2 weeks until a dosage of 15 mg/d is reached. 


There is no good evidence that preoperative treatment 
reduces operating time or bleeding. It has no benefit over 
surgery alone for endometriosis-associated pain or infertility. 
Postoperative treatment may be beneficial for 
delaying pain recurrence (56). 

SURGICAL TREATMENT 

Surgical treatment usually can be completed at the initial 
laparoscopy to diagnose the disease. Conservative or limited 
surgery is appropriate for women desiring future fertility 
and for women with pelvic pain. Conservative 
procedures include excision, vaporization, and coagulation 
of endometrial implants; excision of ovarian endometriomas; 
and lysis of adhesions (Video 4). These procedures 
can accompany laparoscopy using surgical excision, laser 
surgery (carbon dioxide, argon, potassium–titanyl–phosphate, 
or neodymium yttrium–aluminum–garnet [Nd-
YAG]), and monopolar or bipolar electrocautery. 
Conservative surgery most often is performed through the 
laparoscope (Video 5); in the case of extensive disease with 
cul-de-sac obliteration and dense scarring of the ovaries to 
the pelvic side walls, laparotomy may be necessary (57). 
Adjunct procedures, including presacral neurectomy and 
uterosacral nerve ablation, have been recommended for the 
relief of central pelvic pain. The long-term benefit of the 
aliquant procedures has not been demonstrated conclusively. 
Uterosacral plication, uterine suspension, and 
oophoropexy have even less clearly defined benefits (58). 
Patients with significant bowel involvement may require 
resection of the affected segment and anastomosis. 

Pregnancy rates after laparoscopic surgery for 
endometriosis are acceptable (59). Unfortunately, the two 
randomized controlled studies on the effectiveness of 
laparoscopic conservative surgery report conflicting 
results in women with less severe stages of endometriosis 
(52, 60). The Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis 
reported a randomized trial of laparoscopy 

without treatment in 341 women with minimal or mild 
disease. The fecundity rate was 4.7 per 100 person– 
months in treated patients versus 2.4 per 100 person– 
months in controls (95% confidence interval 1.2–3.1) 
(52). However, in a similar study by the Gruppo Italiano 
per lo Studio dell’Endometriosi of 111 patients with 
stage I or stage II endometriosis, the pregnancy rate 1 
year after surgery was 29% (13 of 45) in the no-treatment 
group and 24% (12 of 51) in the ablation–resection 
group (60). The results of these studies may 
conflict because of different patient populations or 
responses of individual patients to therapy. 

Overall, cumulative pregnancy rates have ranged 
from 34% to 75% when electrical energy or the argon 
laser was used for coagulation of endometriotic 
implants. In one study, a monthly fecundity rate of 2.5% 
after such treatment compared favorably with results 
after other forms of therapy (61). Pregnancy rates after 
carbon dioxide laser vaporization of endometriotic 
implants have ranged from 25% to 100% for mild disease, 
from 19% to 66% for moderate disease, and from 
25% to 50% for severe disease (62). Pregnancy rates 
after laser vaporization do not appear to be related to the 
stage of disease, an observation also found in studies of 
conservative laparotomy. 

Definitive therapy, total abdominal hysterectomy, and 
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy are indicated for patients 
who have completed childbearing or have significant persistent 
pelvic pain after conservative treatment. One or 
both ovaries may be spared if they are uninvolved and the 
endometriosis can be resected completely. Approximately 
one third of women treated conservatively will have recurrent 
endometriosis and require additional surgery within 
5 years (63). After bilateral oophorectomy, estrogen 
replacement therapy may be initiated with little risk of 
reactivating residual disease. There is no reason to delay 
replacement therapy after surgery. 


ASSISTED REPRODUCTION 

In patients with persistent infertility associated with 
endometriosis, controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (with 
and without intrauterine insemination [IUI]) and assisted 
reproductive technologies offer some promise. Monthly 
fecundity rates of 0.10% for stage I endometriosis (n = 
263), 0.09% for stage II (n = 146), 0.18% for stage III (n 
= 51), and 0% for stage IV (n = 14) are reported. A statistically 
significant increase in cycle fecundity was seen 
with four cycles of clomiphene citrate and IUI insemination 
compared with controls having intercourse (0.095 
versus 0.033, respectively). No difference was seen 
between patients with explained infertility and those with 
treated endometriosis. 

Another study randomized 40 women with stage I or 
stage II endometriosis and infertility to receive either 
three cycles of human menopausal gonadotropin 
(hMG)–IUI or no treatment (expectant management) 
(64). The cycle fecundity was 0.15 in the hMG–IUI group 
and 0.045 in the untreated group (P < 0.05). Another 
study reported on the effects of expectant management, 
clomiphene citrate, hMG, or in vitro fertilization and 
embryo transfer (IVF/ET) on cycle fecundity in women 
with infertility and minimal or mild endometriosis (65). 
The cycle fecundity rates were 0.028, 0.066, 0.114, and 
0.22, respectively. The improved fecundity with hMG 
and IVF/ET was statistically significant. 

The effect of endometriosis on the outcome of IVF is 
controversial. Overall, the diagnosis of endometriosis 
(especially previously treated disease) does not appear to 
decrease pregnancy rates in patients with less severe 
stages of disease. However, some have suggested that 
patients with endometriosis undergoing IVF have a 
reduced implantation rate, possibly secondary to 
endometrial dysfunction or an embryotoxic environment 
(66). Women with advanced endometriosis who have a 
history of a previous oophorectomy and a contralateral 
ovarian cystectomy appear to do very poorly in IVF/ET 
programs. It is possible that the previous ovarian surgery 
depleted the available oocyte pool, making the women 
perimenopausal. In addition, women with large endometriomas 
at the start of an IVF/ET cycle also may be at risk 
for a poor cycle outcome. It is recommended that women 
with an endometrioma have the ovarian mass resected 
before initiation of an IVF/ET cycle. 

References 

1. Burrow GN, Fisher DA, Larsen PR. Maternal and fetal thyroid 
function. N Engl J Med 1994;331:1072–1078 
( ) 
2. Mandel SJ, Brent GA, Larsen PR. Levothyroxine therapy in 
patients with thyroid disease. Ann Intern Med 1993;119: 
492–502 
( ) 
3. Mandel SJ, Larsen PR, Seely EW, Brent GA. Increased 
need for thyroxine during pregnancy in women with primary 
hypothyroidism. N Engl J Med 1990;323:91–96 
( ) 
OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 121 

4. Arafah BM. Increased need for thyroxine in women with 
hypothyroidism during estrogen therapy. N Engl J Med 
2001;344:1743–1749 
( ) 
5. Krassas GE, Pontikides N, Kaltsas T, 
Papadopoulou P, 
Batrinos M. Menstrual disturbances in thyrotoxicosis. Clin 
Endocrinol 1994;40:641–644 
( ) 
6. Franklyn JA. The management of hyperthyroidism. N Engl 
J Med 1994;330:1731–1738 
( ) 
7. Momotani N, Noh J, Oyanagi H, Ishikawa 
N, Ito K. 
Antithyroid drug therapy for Graves’ disease during pregnancy. 
Optimal regimen for fetal thyroid status. N Engl J 
Med 1986;315:24–28 
( ) 
8. Mandel SJ, Cooper DS. The use of antithyroid drugs in 
pregnancy and lactation. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2001;86: 
2354–2359 
( ) 
9. Goodwin TM, Montoro M, Mestman JH. Transient hyperthyroidism 
and hyperemesis gravidarum: clinical aspects. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1992;167:648–652 
( ) 
10. Browne-Martin K, Emerson CH. Postpartum thyroid dysfunction. 
Clin Obstet Gyncol 1997;40:90–101 
( ) 
11. Gerstein HC. Incidence of postpartum thyroid dysfunction 
in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. Ann Intern Med 
1993;118:419–423 
( ) 
12. Carr BR, Parker CR Jr, Porter JC, MacDonald PC, Simpson 
ER. Regulation of steroid secretion by adrenal tissue of a 
human anencephalic fetus. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1980;50:870–873 
( ) 
13. Coulter CL, Goldsmith PC, Mesiano S, Voytec CC, Martin 
MC, Han VK, et al. Functional maturation of the primate 
fetal adrenal in vivo: I. Role of insulin-like growth factors 
(IGFs) IGF-I receptor, and IGF binding proteins in growth 
regulation. Endocrinology 1996;137:4487–4498 
( ) 
14. Orentreich N, Brind JL, Rizer RL, Vogelman JH. Age 
changes and sex differences in serum dehydroepiandrosterone 
sulfate concentrations throughout adulthood. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1984;59:551–555 
( ) 
15. McKenzie R, Reynolds JC, O’Fallon A, Dale J, Deloria M, 
Blackwelder W, et al. Decreased bone mineral density during 
low dose glucocorticoid administration in a randomized, 
placebo controlled trial. J Rheumatol 2000;27: 
2222–2226 
( ) 
16. Saag KG, Emkey R, Schnitzer TJ, Brown JP, Hawkins F, 
Groemaere S, et al. Alendronate for the prevention and 
treatment of glucocorticoid induced osteoporosis. Glucocorticoid-
Induced Osteoporosis Study Group. N Engl J 
Med 1998;339:292–299 
( ) 
17. Azziz R, Zacur HA. 21-Hydroxylase deficiency in female 
hyperandrogenism: screening and diagnosis. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1989;69:577–584 
( ) 
18. Spritzer P, Billaud L, Thalabard JC, Birman P, Mowszowicz 
I, Raux-Demay MC, et al. Cyproterone acetate versus 
hydrocortisone treatment in late onset adrenal hyperplasia. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1990;70:642–646 
( ) 
19. Laohaprasitiporn C, Barbieri RL, Yeh J. Induction of ovulation 
with the sole use of clomiphene citrate in late-onset 21

122 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

hydroxylase deficiency. Gynecol Obstet Invest 1996;41: 
224–226 


( ) 
20. Shifren JL, Braunstein GD, Simon JA, Casson PR, Buster 
JE, Redmond GP, et al. Transdermal testosterone treatment 
in women with impaired sexual function after oophorectomy. 
N Engl J Med 2000;343:682–688 
( ) 
21. Spiegel RJ, Vigersky RA, Oliff AI, Echelberger CK, Bruton 
J, Poplack DG. Adrenal suppression after short-term corticosteroid 
therapy. Lancet 1979;1(8117):630–633 
( ) 
22. Nelson AM, Conn DL. Series on pharmacology in practice, 
9. Glucocorticoids in rheumatic disease. Mayo Clin Proc 
1980;55:758–769 
( ) 
23. Nieman LK, Chrousos GP, 
Oldfield EH, Avgerinos PC, 
Cutler GB Jr, Loriaux DL. The ovine corticotropin-releasing 
hormone stimulation test and the dexamethasone suppression 
test in the differential diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome. Ann Intern Med 1986;105:862–867 
( ) 
24. Styne DM, Grumbach MM, Kaplan SL, Wilson CB, Conte 
FA. Treatment of Cushing’s disease in childhood and adolescence 
by transsphenoidal microadenectomy. N Engl J 
Med 1984;310:889–893 
( ) 
25. Tyrrell JB, Brooks RM, Fitzgerald PA, Cofoid PB, Forsham 
PH, Wilson CB. Cushing’s disease. Selective trans-sphenoidal 
resection of pituitary microadenomas. N Engl J Med 
1978;298:753–758 
( ) 
26. Schteingart DE, Tsao HS, Taylor CI, McKenzie A, Victoria 
R, Therrien BA. Sustained remission of Cushing’s disease 
with mitotane and pituitary irradiation. Ann Intern Med 
1980;92:613–619 
( ) 
27. Scott HW Jr, 
Liddle GW, Mulherin JL, McKenna TJ, 
Stroup SL, Rhamy RK. Surgical experience with Cushing’s 
disease. Ann Surg 1977;185:524–534 
( ) 
28. Becker D, Schumacher OP. o,p’DDD therapy in invasive 
adrenocortical carcinoma. Ann Intern Med 1975;82: 
677–679 
( ) 
29. Lindholm J, 
Kehlet H, Blichert-Toft M, Dinesen B, 
Riishede J. Reliability of the 30-minute ACTH test in 
assessing hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal function. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1978;47:272–274 
( ) 
30. Oelkers W, Diederich S, Bahr V. Diagnosis and therapy 
surveillance in Addison’s disease: rapid adrenocorticotropin 
(ACTH) test and measurement of plasma ACTH, renin 
activity, and aldosterone. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1992;75: 
259–264 
( ) 
31. Zondervan KT, Yudkin PL, Vessey MP, Dawes MG, Barlow 
DH, Kennedy SH. The prevalence of chronic pelvic pain in 
women in the United Kingdom: a systematic review. Br J 
Obstet Gynaecol 1998;105:93–99 
( ) 
32. Pescetto G, Pecorari D, De Cecco L, Ragni N. Manuale di 
Ginecologia ed Ostetricia. Edizone Seu. Roma, 1992: 
231–232 
33. Coll-Capdevila C. Dysfunctional uterine bleeding and dysmenorrhea. 
Eur J Contracept Reprod Health Care 1997; 
2:229–237 
( ) 
34. Svanberg L, Ulmsten U. The incidence of primary dysmenorrhea 
in teenagers. Arch Gynecol 1981;230:173–177 
( ) 
35. Jamieson DJ, Steege JF. The prevalence of dysmenorrhea, 
dyspareunia, pelvic pain, and irritable bowel syndrome in 
primary care practices. Obstet Gynecol 1996;87:55–58 
( ) 
36. Klein JR, Litt IF. Epidemiology of adolescent dysmenorrhea. 
Pediatrics 1981;68:661–664 
( ) 
37. Andersch B, Milsom I. An epidemiologic study of young 
women with dysmenorrhea. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1982;144:655–660 
( ) 
38. Pedron-Nuevo N, Gonzales-Unzaga LN, de Celis-Carrillo 
R, Reynoso-Isla M, de la Torre-Romeral L. [Incidence of 
dysmenorrhea and associated symptoms in women aged 1224 
years.] [Spanish] Ginecol Obstet Mex 1998;66:492–494 
( ) 
39. Creatsas G, Goumalatsos N, Eleftheriou N, Loutradis D, 
Deligeo-Roglou E, Ambela C, eds. Dysfunctional uterine 
bleeding during adolescence. Proceedings of the IVth 
European Congress on Pediatric and Adolescent 
Gynecology. September 29–October 3, 1988, Rhodes, 
Greece. Athens: Hellenic Society of Pediatric and 
Adolescent Gynecology, 1988:324–326 
40. Zhang WY, Li Wan Po A. Efficacy of minor analgesics in 
primary dysmenorrhoea: a systematic review. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol 1998;105:780–789 
( ) 
41. Ezcurdia M, Cortejoso FJ, Lanzon R, Ugalde FJ, Herruzo 
A, Artigas R, et al. Comparison of the efficacy and tolerability 
of dexketoprofen and ketoprofen in the treatment of 
primary dysmenorrhea. J Clin Pharmacol 1998;38(Suppl 
12):65S–73S 
( ) 
42. Morrison BW, Daniels SE, Kotey P, Cantu N, Seidenberg B. 
Rofecoxib, a specific cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor, in primary 
dysmenorrhea: a randomized controlled trial. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;94:504–508 
( ) 
43. Akin MD, Weingand KW, Hengehold DA, Goodale MB, 
Hinkle RT, Smith RP. Continuous low-level topical heat in 
the treatment of dysmenorrhea. Obstet Gynecol 2001;97: 
343–349 
( ) 
44. Barnard ND, Scialli AR, Hurlock D, Bertron P. Diet and 
sex-hormone binding globulin, dysmenorrhea, and premenstrual 
symptoms. Obstet Gynecol 2000;95:245–250 
( ) 
45. Golomb LM, Solidum AA, Warren MP. Primary dysmenorrhea 
and physical activity. Med Sci Sports Exerc 1998;30: 
906–909 
( ) 
46. Wilson ML, 
Farquhar CM, Sinclair OJ, Johnson NP. 
Surgical interruption of pelvic nerve pathways for primary 
and secondary dysmenorrhoea. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2000;(2):CD001896 
( ) 
47. Sangi-Haghpeykar H, Poindexter AN III. Epidemiology of 
endometriosis among parous women. Obstet Gynecol 1995; 
85:983–992 
( ) 
48. Lebovic DI, Mueller MD, Taylor RN. Immunobiology of 
endometriosis. Fertil Steril 2001;75:1–10 
( ) 
49. Suginami H, Yano K. An ovum capture inhibitor (OCI) in 
endometriosis peritoneal fluid: an OCI-related mechanism 

responsible for fimbrial failure of ovum capture. Fertil 
Steril 1988;50:648–653 


( ) 
50. Lessey BA, Castlebaum AJ, Sawin SW, Buck CA, Schinnar 
R, Bilker W, et al. Aberrant integrin expression in the endometrium 
of women with endometriosis. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1994;79:643–649 
( ) 
51. Vercellini P, Trespidi L, De Giorgi O,Cortesi I, Parazzini F, 
Crosignani PG. Endometriosis and pelvic pain: relation to 
disease stage and localization. Fertil Steril 1996;65: 
299–304 
( ) 
52. Marcoux S, Maheux R, Berube S. Laparoscopic surgery in 
infertile women with minimal or mild endometriosis. 
Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis. N Engl J 
Med 1997;337:217–222 
( ) 
53. Dawood MY, Ramos J, Khan-Dawood FS. Depot leuprolide 
acetate versus danazol for treatment of pelvic endometriosis: 
changes in vertebral bone mass and serum estradiol and 
calcitonin. Fertil Steril 1995;63:1177–1183 
( ) 
54. Minjarez D, Schlaff WD. Update on the medical treatment 
of endometriosis. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am 2000; 
27:641–651 
( ) 
55. Surrey ES. Add-back therapy and gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone agonists in the treatment of patients with 
endometriosis: can a consensus be reached? Add-Back 
Consensus Working Group. Fertil Steril 1999;71:420–424 
56. Vercellini P, Crosignani PG, Fadini R, Radici E, Belloni C, 
Sismondi P. A gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist 
compared with expectant management after conservative 
surgery for symptomatic endometriosis. Br J Obstet 
Gynaecol 1999;106:672–677 
( ) 
57. Crosignani PG, Vercellini P, Biffignandi F, Constantini W, 
Cortesi I, Imparato E. Laparoscopy versus laparotomy in 
conservative surgical treatment for severe endometriosis. 
Fertil Steril 1996;66:706–711 
( ) 
58. Candiani GB, Fedele L, Vercellini P, Bianchi S, Di Nola G. 
Presacral neurectomy for the treatment of pelvic pain asso-
OTHER ENDOCRINE PROBLEMS 123 

ciated with endometriosis: a controlled study. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1992;167:100–103 


( ) 
59. Olive DL. Medical treatment: alternatives to danazol. In: 
Schenken RS, ed. Endometriosis: contemporary concepts in 
clinical management. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989: 
189–211 
60. Parazzini F. Ablation of lesions or no treatment in minimalmild 
endometriosis in infertile women: a randomized trial. 
Gruppo Italiano per lo Studio dell’Endometriosi. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1332–1334 
( ) 
61. Keye WR, Jr, Hansen LW, Astin M, Poulson AM Jr. Argon 
laser therapy of endometriosis: a review of 92 consecutive 
patients. Fertil Steril 1987;47:208–212 
( ) 
62. Vancaillie 
T, Schenken RS. Endoscopic surgery. In: 
Schenken RS, ed. Endometriosis: contemporary concepts in 
clinical management. Philadelphia: JB Lippincott, 1989: 
249–266 
63. MacDonald SR, Klock SC, Milad MP. Long-term outcome 
of nonconservative surgery (hysterectomy) for endometriosis-
associated pain in women <30 years old. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999;180:1360–1363 
( ) 
64. Fedele L, Bianchi S, Marchini M, Villa L, Brioschi D, 
Parazzini F. Superovulation with human menopausal 
gonadotropins in the treatment of infertility associated with 
minimal or mild endometriosis: a controlled randomized 
study. Fertil Steril 1992;58:28–31 
(button) 
( ) 
65. Kemmann E, Ghazi D, Corsan G, Bohrer MF. Does ovulation 
stimulation improve fertility in women with minimal/
mild endometriosis after laser laparoscopy? Int J Fertil 
Menopausal Stud 1993;38:16–21 
( ) 
66. Olivennes F, 
Feldberg D, Liu HC, Cohen J, Moy F, 
Rosewaks Z. Endometriosis: a stage by stage analysis—the 
role of in vitro fertilization. Fertil Steril 1995;64:392–398 
( ) 

124 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Infertility 


EVALUATION OF INFERTILITY 

Infertility generally is defined as a couple’s failure to 
achieve pregnancy after 1 year of regular, unprotected 
intercourse. The definition is based on expected monthly 
conception rates of 20–25% among healthy young couples 
and studies demonstrating that 85% of normal couples 
conceive within 1 year. Therefore, in the United 
States, approximately 15% of couples are infertile. 

Although many think that infertility is epidemic, its 
incidence actually has changed little over the past three 
decades. The increasing numbers of couples seeking evaluation 
and treatment for infertility can be attributed to 
several factors. Recent demographic trends in the United 
States are largely responsible. The baby boom generation 
(born between 1946 and 1964) is aging, and its youngest 
women are now in their later reproductive years. 
Coincident trends, including a greater emphasis on higher 
education and careers among women, delayed marriage, 
and more frequent divorce, all tend to delay 
childbearing. Biologically, fertility declines with advancing 
age. The incidence of diseases that may adversely 
affect fertility (eg, leiomyomata and endometriosis) also 
increases with age. Together, the greater numbers of 
women at advanced reproductive age and the increasing 
tendency to postpone pregnancy have yielded a marked 
increase in the numbers of subfertile and infertile women. 
A pandemic in sexually transmitted infections is another 
probable contributor. At the same time, the availability of 
legal abortion and societal acceptance of single parenthood 
have greatly reduced the number of infants available 
for adoption. Couples who might otherwise have chosen 
to adopt now have few options but to seek formal evaluation 
and treatment for infertility. Finally, the advent of 
modern assisted reproductive technologies, as well as the 
associated controversies, has increased public awareness 
of infertility and stimulated open debate. As a result, 
infertile couples are now less reluctant to seek medical 
advice, evaluation, and treatment. 

The human reproductive process is complex. 
However, for evaluation, it can be broken down into its 
most important and basic component parts: 

• 
Adequate numbers of spermatozoa must be 
deposited at or near the cervix at or near the time 
of ovulation, ascend into the fallopian tubes, and 
fertilize an ovum (male factor). 
• 
A mature ovum must be released from the ovaries, 
ideally on a regular, predictable, cyclic basis 
(ovarian factor). 
• 
The cervix must capture, nurture, and release 
spermatozoa into the uterus and fallopian tubes 
(cervical factor). 
• 
The fallopian tubes must have a functional 
anatomic relationship to the adjacent ovaries to 
facilitate ovum capture (peritoneal factor). 
• 
The fallopian tubes must be patent and also capable 
of timely transport of an embryo to the uterine 
cavity (tubal factor). 
• 
The uterus must be receptive to embryo implantation 
and capable of supporting subsequent normal 
growth and development (uterine factor). 
Formal evaluation of infertility is designed to isolate 
each component of the reproductive process and to identify 
any abnormalities that may interfere with, or altogether 
prevent, conception. Evaluation generally is 
indicated in women who fail to conceive after a year or 
more of regular, unprotected intercourse. Earlier evaluation 
and treatment is not only appropriate but specifically 
indicated in women older than 35 years; with recent history 
of oligomenorrhea or amenorrhea; and with known 
or strongly suspected tubal disease, endometriosis, or 
male factor infertility (1). Initial consultation with the 
infertile couple should include obtaining complete medical 
histories and a menstrual history; a physical examination 
of the female partner; preconceptional counseling; 
and education on the reproductive process, including 
information regarding how coital frequency and timing 
affect fertility (2). Evaluation of both partners should 
begin at the same time. 

Practitioners should never overlook age as one of the 
more severe determinants of fertility in women. As such, 
it is prudent to expedite the evaluation of couples when 
the woman is older than 35 years. Furthermore, consideration 
should be given to a more aggressive or accelerated 
course of therapy in their treatment, including proceeding 
more rapidly to controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with 
gonadotropins, laparoscopy, and in vitro fertilization. In 
general, practitioners should counsel patients that current 
infertility management has limited success in treating 
patients older than 40–42 years, with the exception of the 
use of in vitro fertilization with donor oocytes. All 
women should be counseled about the impact that age 
will have on their overall reproductive potential. 
Preconceptional counseling and testing are prudent mea-
sures. They should be recommended at the time of the initial 
infertility visit if they have not already been 
undertaken when the decision to attempt conception was 
made (see Boxes J and K). 


BOX J 
INFERTILITY 125 

Preconceptional Screening 

Immunization should be offered to women at risk, including 
rubella vaccination for susceptible women and hepatitis 
B virus vaccination for those at risk of acquiring this 
infection. Screening or diagnostic studies are recommended 
or offered during the preconceptional evaluation. 
Screening for human immunodeficiency virus infection 
should be recommended. A number of tests can be performed 
for specific indications: 

Screening for sexually transmitted disease, based on 
risk assessment 
Testing to assess recurrent pregnancy loss 
Testing for maternal diseases based on medical or 
reproductive history 
Mantoux skin test with purified protein derivative for 
tuberculosis 
Screening for genetic disorders based on racial and 
ethnic background: 
Sickle hemoglobinopathies: African-American, 
Southeast-Asian, or Mediterranean ancestry 
b -Thalassemia: Mediterranean descent 
a -Thalassemia: Southeast-Asian descent 
Tay-Sachs disease: Ashkenazi Jewish, Cajun, or 
French-Canadian descent 

Screening for cystic fibrosis on the basis of family his 
tory of the disease or Caucasian ancestry (including 
Ashkenazi Jews)* 

Screening for other genetic disorders on the basis of 
family history (eg, fragile X for family history of nonspecific 
mental retardation, Duchenne muscular dystrophy) 


*American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American 
College of Medical Genetics. Preconception and prenatal carrier 
screening for cystic fibrosis: clinical and laboratory guidelines. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Guidelines 
for perinatal care. 4th ed. Washington, DC: ACOG; Elk Grove 
Village, Illinois: American Academy of Pediatrics, 1997 

History and Physical Examination 

A careful history and physical examination can identify 
symptoms or signs suggesting a specific cause for infertility 
and thereby help to focus subsequent diagnostic evaluation 
on the factors most likely responsible. Relevant parts 
of the medical history and physical examination in infertile 
couples are listed in Boxes L and M, respectively. In 
the absence of any history of male genital abnormality, 
trauma, surgery, sexual dysfunction, or impotence, physi-

BOX K 
Indications for Genetic Counseling 

A family history of the following disorders: 

Thalassemia (Italian, Greek, Mediterranean, or Asian 

background): mean corpuscular volume greater 

than 80 

Neural tube defect (meningomyelocele, spina bifida, or 

anencephaly) 
Congenital heart defect 
Down syndrome 
Tay-Sachs disease (eg, Jewish, Cajun, French 


Canadian) 
Canavan disease 
Sickle cell disease or trait (African) 
Hemophilia or other blood disorders 
Muscular dystrophy 
Cystic fibrosis 
Huntington’s chorea 
Mental retardation/autism 
Other inherited genetic or chromosomal disorder 
Maternal metabolic disorder (eg, type 1 diabetes 

mellitus, phenylketonuria) 

Recurrent pregnancy loss, or a stillbirth 

Patient’s age at least 35 years as of estimated date of 

delivery 

Patient or baby’s father had a child with birth defects not 

listed above 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Antepartum 
record. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002 

cal examination of the male partner may be deferred pending 
the results of an initial semen analysis. Abnormal 
findings in the reproductive history or semen analysis 
indicate the need for a formal evaluation. This evaluation 
may be conducted by gynecologists who have the necessary 
training and experience, but most often it is performed 
by a urologist or other specialist in male reproduction (3). 

Diagnostic Evaluation—Infertility 
Factors 

Evaluation of the infertile couple should be directed 
toward identifying the cause or causes of infertility in a 
systematic, expeditious, and cost-effective manner so as 
to identify all relevant factors. Initial emphasis is appropriately 
focused on the least invasive methods for detection 
of the most common causes of infertility. The pace, 


126 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

sequence, and extent of evaluation should take into 
account the couple’s wishes, age of the patient, the duration 
of infertility, and unique features of the medical history 
and physical examination or features that suggest 
possible causes of the infertility. 

MALE FACTOR 

A male factor is solely responsible in approximately 20% 
of infertile couples and is an important contributing cause 
in another 30–40%. Semen analysis is the cornerstone of 
the laboratory evaluation of the infertile male and largely 
defines the severity of any male factor. Physicians should 
provide patients with standardized instructions for semen 

BOX L 
Medical History: The Infertile Couple 

Male partner 

Past reproductive performance 
Sexual dysfunction 
Past surgery and outcome 
Medications and allergies 
Serious illness or injury 
Sexually transmitted diseases 
Use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs 
Occupation 
Family history of birth defects or mental retardation 
Gonadal toxin exposures, including heat 

Female partner 

Past reproductive performance 
Sexual dysfunction 
Past surgery and outcome 
Medications and allergies 
Serious illness or injury 
Sexually transmitted diseases 
Use of tobacco, alcohol, and other drugs 
Occupation 
Family history of birth defects or mental retardation 
Onset and severity of dysmenorrhea 
Pelvic or abdominal pain, dyspareunia 
Symptoms of thyroid disease, galactorrhea, or hirsutism 

Couple 

Duration of infertility 
Methods of contraception 
Previous evaluation and treatment 

collection, including a recommended abstinence interval 
of 2–3 days. Semen is typically collected in masturbation, 
but intercourse using a specialized nontoxic semen collection 
condom provides an effective alternative when 
necessary. Specimens may be collected in the laboratory 
or in the home, should be maintained at room or body 
temperature, and should be examined within 1 hour of 
collection in a laboratory certified under the Clinical 
Laboratory Improvement Amendments. At least two 
semen analyses at least 2 weeks apart are recommended 
to define representative semen quality accurately. 

Semen analysis provides information on semen volume 
and sperm concentration, motility, and morphology, 
with normal reference values based on the clinical literature 
(Table 10). Abnormal values suggest a male factor 
and the need for additional evaluation. They may help to 
explain subfertility or reproductive inefficiency, but clearly 
they do not indicate absolute infertility. Conversely, 
men with normal semen parameters still may be infertile. 
Methods used in semen analysis have changed little over 
time, with the exception of the criteria used for judging 
sperm morphology. World Health Organization criteria 
for normal sperm morphology have been revised twice in 

BOX M 
Physical Examination of the 
Infertile Couple 


Male partner 

Signs of inadequate virilization or gynecomastia 
Signs of systemic illness 
Abnormalities of the penis or position of the urethral meatus 
Scrotal varicocele 
Absence or abnormality of the vasa deferentia or epi


didymides 
Testicular symmetry, size, and consistency 

Female partner 

Weight and body mass index 
Signs of systemic illness 
Thyroid enlargement, nodules, or tenderness 
Breast secretions and character 
Signs of androgen excess 
Pelvic or abdominal tenderness 
Vaginal or cervical abnormality or secretions 
Uterine size, shape, position, and mobility 
Adnexal mass or tenderness 
Cul-de-sac mass, tenderness, or nodularity 


recent years, most recently in 1999 (4). The standard in 
use may vary among laboratories. The current criteria are 
significantly more strict than in the past, and when they 
are applied, relatively few sperm will be classified as having 
normal morphology, even sperm in the semen of fertile 
men. The value of the new, stricter criteria is in their 
correlation with prognosis for successful fertilization of 
ova in vitro (5). Critical evaluation of sperm morphology, 
therefore, is crucial to planning an effective treatment 
strategy in couples pursuing IVF. It may also influence 
judgments regarding the relative utility of IUI as a means 
to overcome oligospermia (reduced sperm number), 
asthenospermia (reduced sperm motility), or otherwise 
unexplained infertility (see Table 10). 

Hormonal abnormalities adversely affecting male 
reproductive function are well recognized but generally 
uncommon causes of male factor infertility. They are 
extremely uncommon in men with normal semen parameters. 
Routine endocrine evaluation is therefore generally 
unnecessary, but evaluation should be performed if there 
is 1) an abnormal semen analysis (especially if sperm 
density is <10 million per milliliter), 2) sexual dysfunction, 
or 3) other clinical signs or symptoms of a specific 
endocrine disease (3). A basic initial endocrine evaluation 

n TABLE 10. Semen Analysis: Normal Reference 
Values 
Characteristic Value 
Volume 1.5–5.0 mL 
pH >7.2 
Viscosity <3 (scale: 0–4) 
Sperm agglutination <2 (scale: 0–3) 
Sperm concentration >20 million per milliliter 
Total sperm number >40 million per ejaculate 
Motility >50% 
Forward progression >2 (scale: 0–4) 
Sperm morphology >50% normal (WHO, 1987*) 
>30% normal (WHO, 1992†) 
>14% normal (WHO, 1999‡) 

*World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the 
examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 
2nd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1987 

†World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the 
examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 
3rd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1992 
‡World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for the examination 
of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus interaction. 3rd 
ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1999. Based 
on Kruger criteria (Kruger TF, Acosta AA, Simmons KF, et al. 
Predictive value of abnormal sperm morphology in in vitro fertilization. 
Fertil Steril 1988;49:112–117 and Menkveld R, Stander FS, 
Kotze TJ, Kruger TF, van Zyl JA. The evaluation of morphological characteristics 
of human spermatozoa according to stricter criteria. Hum 
Reprod 1990;5:586–592) and applicable to in vitro fertilization. 
INFERTILITY 127 

includes measurements of serum FSH and total testosterone. 
Low initial testosterone concentrations should be 
confirmed and evaluation expanded to include measurements 
of serum free testosterone, LH, and prolactin. 
Many men with abnormal spermatogenesis have normal 
serum FSH levels, but elevated concentrations clearly 
indicate an abnormality. A basic endocrine evaluation 
prior to formal consultation with a urologist or other specialist 
in male reproduction will help ensure that evaluation 
continues in an efficient and productive manner. 

Additional evaluation of demonstrated or suspected 
male factor infertility requires careful physical examination 
and may involve any of a number of additional tests. 
Low-volume or absent ejaculates suggest retrograde ejaculation, 
lack of emission, ejaculatory duct obstruction, 
hypogonadism, or congenital bilateral absence of the vasa 
deferentia (CBAVD). Postejaculatory urinalysis in men 
with low ejaculate volumes (<1 mL) is indicated to exclude 
retrograde ejaculation, except in men with CBAVD or 
hypogonadism. Transrectal ultrasonography can demonstrate 
dilated seminal vesicles or ejaculatory ducts, which 
may be seen in men with complete or partial ejaculatory 
duct obstruction; this imaging test is indicated in men with 
azoospermia who have palpable vasa and low ejaculatory 
volumes (6). Most scrotal pathologic conditions, including 
varicoceles, spermatoceles, absent vasa, epididymal 
induration, and testicular masses, are palpable on physical 
examination. Scrotal ultrasonography is useful when findings 
are ambiguous or a testicular mass is suspected. 

More specialized tests are available but should be 
reserved only for cases in which results will direct treatment. 
Reports of elevated numbers of leukocytes or round 
cells (>5 million per milliliter) in the ejaculate require 
additional evaluation with cytologic staining or immunohistochemical 
techniques to reliably differentiate leukocytes 
from immature germ cells, which have a very 
similar appearance under wet-mount microscopy. True 
pyospermia (>1 million leukocytes per milliliter) necessitates 
evaluation for genital tract infection or inflammation. 
Tests to detect antisperm antibodies should be 
considered when semen analysis reveals isolated 
asthenospermia with normal sperm density or sperm 
agglutination, but these tests are unnecessary if plans are 
to pursue treatment with IVF and intracytoplasmic sperm 
injection (ICSI). Numerous other specialized tests 
(hypoosmotic swelling test, sperm binding and penetration 
assays, computer-aided sperm analysis, and acrosome 
reaction) are available but generally are not 
required for the diagnosis of male factor infertility. None 
has demonstrated the accuracy and reliability necessary 
to gain wide acceptance. 

Genetic abnormalities may cause infertility in the male. 
Cystic fibrosis gene mutations involving the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene 
are highly associated with CBAVD (7). Consequently, the 
male partner with CBAVD should be screened for CFTR 
gene mutations before undertaking treatments that will 


128 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

use his sperm after recovery from the epididymis (IVF 
with ICSI). Chromosomal abnormalities (aneuploidy, 
translocations, and inversions) are relatively common in 
infertile men (7% overall), their prevalence being inversely 
related to sperm density (8). Less obvious are the 
microdeletions of sections of the Y chromosome that may 
be found in 10–15% of men with azoospermia or severe 
oligospermia (9). Given the increased risks of miscarriage, 
chromosomal and congenital abnormalities, and birth of 
similarly infertile male offspring, men with nonobstructive 
azoospermia or severe oligospermia (sperm density 
<5–10 million per milliliter) must be informed and offered 
genetic counseling, karyotyping, and Y chromosome analysis 
if treatment with IVF and ICSI is being considered. 

OVARIAN FACTOR 

Ovulatory dysfunction will be identified in approximately 
15% of all infertile couples and accounts for up to 40% of 
infertility in women. Objective evaluation of ovulatory 
function is an important initial diagnostic step in any infertile 
couple. Whereas ovulatory dysfunction is often obvious, 
as in women with a history of oligomenorrhea, 
amenorrhea, or dysfunctional uterine bleeding, it can also 
be subtle and present only as polymenorrhea or a short or 
otherwise inadequate luteal phase. It may have a specific 
underlying cause, such as thyroid disease, PCOS, hyperandrogenism, 
pituitary tumor, an eating disorder, extremes of 
weight loss or exercise, hyperprolactinemia, or obesity. All 
these causes are important to identify, because correct 
diagnosis will allow the most specific and effective treatment 
and help to prevent the longer-term health consequences 
that often are associated with these disorders. 
However, despite thorough investigation, the exact cause of 
ovulatory dysfunction often remains obscure. Diagnostic 
evaluation may be accomplished using a variety of studies. 
The choice of particular tests depends on the history and 
physical manifestations of individual patients. 

Menstrual history may be all that is required. Patients 
with a well-documented history of dysfunctional bleeding, 
oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, or a combination do 
not require sophisticated diagnostic evaluation. Basal 
body temperature (BBT) recordings provide a simple and 
inexpensive method for evaluating ovulatory function. 
Whereas biphasic patterns are characteristic of ovulatory 
cycles, monophasic recordings or a grossly short interval 
of postovulatory temperature elevation (less than 11 
days) may identify patients with absent or poor-quality 
ovulatory function. It is also important to remember that 
ovulatory women occasionally may exhibit monophasic 
BBT patterns. In ovulatory cycles, the BBT typically 
rises 1–3 days after the midcycle LH surge, but the 
method cannot reliably define the time of ovulation. 

Serum progesterone determinations obtained during 
the luteal phase (3–10 days before the anticipated 
menses) are commonly used to document ovulation; values 
greater than 3.0 ng/mL provide presumptive evidence 
of ovulation. Midluteal phase determinations may offer 

additional information regarding luteal function, although 
concentrations may fluctuate widely, even in normal 
women. Urinary LH determinations using commercial 
“ovulation predictor kits” can identify the midcycle LH 
surge; provide reliable, albeit indirect, evidence of ovulatory 
function; and help to define the interval within which 
conception is most likely (the 3 days ending with the day 
of ovulation) (2). Results generally correlate well with 
the peak in serum LH level, although accuracy, reliability, 
and ease of use vary among available products. 

Endometrial biopsy and histologic evaluation can 
demonstrate secretory endometrial development that 
results from the action of progesterone and thus implies 
ovulation. Dating the endometrium using established histologic 
criteria and a demonstration of a consistent maturation 
delay (>2 days) (Video 1; Images 5–30) has hitherto 
been considered the traditional method for diagnosis of 
luteal phase defect, but the accuracy of these diagnostic criteria, 
the incidence of luteal phase defect, and its clinical 
relevance as a cause of infertility remain controversial 
issues (10). Serial transvaginal ultrasonographic examinations 
can reveal the size and number of developing follicles 
and provide presumptive evidence of ovulation by demonstrating 
progressive follicular growth, sudden collapse of 
the preovulatory follicle, a loss of clearly defined follicular 
margins, the appearance of internal echoes, and an increase 
in cul-de-sac fluid volume. However, because of the cost 
and logistical demands involved, this method generally is 
reserved for patients in whom less complicated methods 
failed to provide the necessary information. 

Additional evaluation aimed at defining the best choice 
of treatment is indicated in women found to have absent or 
poor ovulatory function. Serum TSH and prolactin determinations 
will identify thyroid disorders, hyperprolactinemia, 
or both. If the findings of these studies are abnormal, 
the patient may require additional specific evaluation and 
treatment. In amenorrheic women, obtaining a serum FSH 
level will differentiate patients with ovarian failure who 
may be candidates to be recipients of donor oocytes from 
those with hypothalamic dysfunction who will require 
treatment with pulsatile exogenous GnRH or exogenous 
gonadotropin stimulation to achieve ovulation. Evaluation 
of “ovarian reserve” using a cycle day 3 FSH or 
clomiphene citrate challenge test (the administration of 
100 mg of clomiphene citrate daily on cycle days 5–9, 
with FSH and estradiol determinations on cycle day 3 and 
FSH determination on cycle day 10) may provide additional 
important prognostic information (11). Threshold 
abnormal values vary with the specific assay systems used 
for the measurement of FSH and estradiol, so the results 
must be interpreted with caution. Ideally, however, ovarian 
reserve testing should be performed only when and 
where accurate threshold values have been firmly established. 
For most assays in widespread use in clinical laboratories, 
cycle day 3 FSH values above 10 IU/L and 
estradiol levels above 80 pg/mL are abnormal and associated 
with a poor prognosis for success (Fig. 51). Errors in 


Comparison of the cumulative probability of pregnancy curves with life table analyses in 589 couples from 
the general infertility population confirmed the predictive value of the clomiphene citrate (CC) challenge test (A).. An 
age-related decline in pregnancy rates was found among patients with normal CC challenge tests (B),, but not among 
the uniformly poor rates in patients with abnormal CC challenge test results (C).. (Reprinted from Fertility and Sterility, 
Vol. 63, pages 1–11, RT Scott Jr, GE Hofmann, Prognostic assessment of ovarian reserv. Copyright 1995, with permis-
sion of Elsevier Science) 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Months 
Months 
Normal Abnormal 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
Months 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
A 
B 
C 
Comparison of the cumulative probability of pregnancy curves with life table analyses in 589 couples from 
the general infertility population confirmed the predictive value of the clomiphene citrate (CC) challenge test (A).. An 
age-related decline in pregnancy rates was found among patients with normal CC challenge tests (B),, but not among 
the uniformly poor rates in patients with abnormal CC challenge test results (C).. (Reprinted from Fertility and Sterility, 
Vol. 63, pages 1–11, RT Scott Jr, GE Hofmann, Prognostic assessment of ovarian reserv. Copyright 1995, with permis-
sion of Elsevier Science) 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
Months 
Months 
Normal Abnormal 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
30 31-33 34-36 37-39 40 
Months 
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
0 
A 
B 
C 

130 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

interpretation of the test can easily encourage ineffective 
treatment or discourage effective treatment, both with 
devastating results. Where available, ovarian reserve testing 
should be considered in women with 1) age older than 
35 years, 2) a single ovary or a history of previous ovarian 
surgery, or 3) previously documented poor response to 
exogenous gonadotropin stimulation. 

CERVICAL FACTOR 

Abnormalities in the production of cervical mucus or in 
sperm–mucus interaction are rarely identified as the sole 
or principal cause of infertility. Speculum examination 
may reveal gross evidence of chronic cervicitis that 
deserves further evaluation and treatment. It also may 
demonstrate significant cervical stenosis, which may be 
the consequence of a previous conization or of extensive 
cauterization or laser ablation for cervical dysplasia. In 
either case, effective sperm–mucus interaction may be 
impaired. In the absence of such findings, deficient or 
otherwise abnormal cervical mucus production or function, 
although possible, is highly unlikely. 

Recent studies have exposed the limitations of the 
postcoital test. Results are subjective and highly variable. 
Its utility and predictive value have been questioned 
because it has not been shown that the test and treatments 
for cervical factor infertility have any significant impact 
on conception rates (12). Contemporary treatments for 
unexplained infertility now can be used to overcome or 
bypass any unrecognized cervical factor. Empiric exogenous 
gonadotropin stimulation, intended to induce ovulation 
of more than a single ovum (controlled ovarian 
hyperstimulation), is one common treatment strategy. The 
markedly elevated serum estrogen levels that accompany 
such treatment stimulate cervical mucus production. 
Moreover, controlled ovarian hyperstimulation therapy 
typically is combined with timely IUI to bring together 
more than the usual numbers of ova and sperm, and IUI 
is widely recognized as the single most effective form of 
treatment for cervical factor infertility. The postcoital test 
may be reserved for those patients in whom the history or 
physical examination findings clearly suggest a cervical 
factor; even then, it should be performed only when the 
result will influence treatment. 

UTERINE FACTOR 

Abnormalities of uterine anatomy or function are relatively 
uncommon causes of infertility in women, but they 
always should be considered. A variety of uterine conditions 
have been implicated as causes of infertility, including 
congenital malformations, leiomyomas, endometrial 
polyps, intrauterine synechiae, foreign bodies, and chronic 
endometritis (Images 37–39). The proposed responsible 
mechanism is implantation failure resulting from mechanical 
interference; functional impairment of normal 
endometrial growth, maturation, and vascularity; or both. 
However, there is little or no compelling direct evidence to 

support this hypothesis. There is no compelling evidence to 
indicate that myomas interfere with fertility unless their 
anatomic location is an obstacle to conception. 

Three basic methods may be used to identify abnormalities 
of the uterine cavity contours that may adversely 
affect fertility. The method chosen may vary and should 
be tailored to the needs of the individual patient. 
Hysterosalpingography defines the size and shape of the 
uterine cavity and will clearly reveal any significant 
developmental anomaly, such as a unicornuate, septate, 
bicornuate, or didelphic uterus, as well as variants 
(Fig. 52 and Images 37–44). It will also demonstrate most 
endometrial polyps, submucous myomas, or intrauterine 
synechiae that are significant enough to have important 
reproductive consequences (Figs. 53 and 54; Images 
45–47). Transabdominal and transvaginal ultrasonography 
also can be used to diagnose uterine pathologic 
conditions, including myomas and polyps. Saline 
ultrasonography, also known as sonohysterography or 
hydrosonography, involves transvaginal ultrasonography 

A


B


n FIG. 52. Hysterosalpingography. (A) Normal uterus. 
(Courtesy of Ricardo Azziz, MD) (B) Didelphic uterus. 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

after the introduction of sterile water or saline. It provides 
accurate information regarding the size and shape of the 
uterine cavity and is perhaps the most sensitive method 
for identifying polyps, submucous myomas, and synechiae 
(13). Hysteroscopy is the definitive method for the 
evaluation of the uterine cavity and the diagnosis of associated 
abnormalities (Video 6). Because it is also the most 
costly and invasive method, it generally is reserved for 
further evaluation and treatment of abnormalities defined 
by less invasive methods (eg, hysterosalpingography or 
saline sonography). However, if patients have clear indications 
for laparoscopy, the addition of hysteroscopy is 
efficient and avoids redundancy. 

Chronic endometritis is an uncommon finding in the 
evaluation of the infertile couple. One exception is genital 
tuberculosis, an exceedingly rare infection in the 
United States, but one that deserves consideration in 
patients who are recent immigrants from regions where 
tuberculosis is endemic. Evidence of granulomas on 
endometrial biopsy is indication for specific culture for 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Endometrial hyperplasia, as 

n FIG. 53. Intrauterine submucosal myoma. (Courtesy of 
Ricardo Azziz, MD) 
n FIG. 54. Filling defect, synechiae. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
INFERTILITY 131 

may be seen in women with long-standing anovulation, 
may interfere with normal endometrial receptivity even 
after ovulation has been induced successfully. Endometrial 
biopsy should therefore be considered in patients 
with a history of dysfunctional uterine bleeding, 
oligomenorrhea, amenorrhea, or a combination. 

TUBAL FACTOR 

Tubal occlusive disease is an important cause of infertility 
and should be identified or excluded during the evaluation 
of an infertile couple. Tubal obstruction is typically 
either proximal, at the level of the cornua or tubal isthmus, 
or distal, at the level of the fimbria. Distal obstructions are 
the most common; midsegment occlusion unrelated to a 
previous elective sterilization procedure is extremely rare. 
Proximal obstructions may result from salpingitis isthmica 
nodosa (Image 48) or intraluminal endometriosis, or 
they may be the presumed consequence of ascending 
pelvic inflammatory disease. Distal tubal occlusion is 
most often the result of previous ascending infection and 
is typically, but not always, bilateral. The probability of 
tubal infertility rises with the number of episodes of pelvic 
inflammatory disease: approximately 12% after one 
episode, 23% after two episodes, and 54% after three 
infectious insults (14). Distal tubal occlusion also may 
result from external insults such as endometriosis, appendicitis, 
chronic inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn’s disease 
or ulcerative colitis), or pelvic and abdominal surgery. 

The methods for evaluation of tubal patency are complementary 
and not mutually exclusive. Accurate diagnosis 
and effective treatment of tubal obstruction often 
require more than one technique. All available methods 
have technical limitations that must be considered when 
any one technique yields abnormal results. Further evaluation 
with a second method is prudent whenever a specific 
diagnosis or the best treatment strategy is uncertain. 

Hysterosalpingography, the traditional and standard 
method for evaluating tubal patency, is done by a gynecologist 
and uses fluoroscopy. It can document proximal 
or distal tubal occlusion, demonstrate salpingitis isthmica 
nodosa, reveal ampullary tubal architectural detail of 
potential prognostic value, and suggest the presence of 
fimbrial phimosis or peritubular adhesions when escape of 
contrast is delayed or becomes loculated. Findings suggesting 
proximal tubal obstruction require further evaluation 
to exclude transient occlusion resulting from the tubal 
and myometrial contractions that often accompany the 
injection of contrast, especially when the injection is rapid 
or at high pressure. Demonstration of distal tubal occlusion 
with hysterosalpingography is an indication for prophylactic 
treatment with a short course of broad-spectrum 
antibiotics. This approach minimizes the risk of postprocedure 
infection, a complication essentially limited to 
patients with distal obstructions (15). Iodine allergy must 
be excluded before using standard contrast media. 

Transvaginal ultrasonography can be used to evaluate 
tubal patency, but the technique generally has limited 


132 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

value. It will clearly reveal obvious hydrosalpinges, but 
lesser degrees of distal tubal occlusive disease generally 
will not be recognized. Saline ultrasonography has been 
advocated as an alternative to hysterosalpingography. It may 
demonstrate distal tubal obstructions when fluid accumulates 
in the fallopian tubes, or it may suggest patency when 
the volume of free fluid in the cul-de-sac clearly increases, 
but the technique is generally less informative than hysterosalpingography 
and has not gained wide acceptance. 

Laparoscopy and “chromotubation” with a dilute solution 
of methylene blue or indigo carmine introduced via 
the cervix can demonstrate tubal patency or document 
proximal or distal tubal occlusive disease. These procedures 
also can identify subtle tubal factors, such as fimbrial 
phimosis or peritubular adhesions, that may escape 
detection with less invasive methods. Fluoroscopic or hysteroscopic 
selective tubal cannulation will confirm or 
exclude proximal tubal occlusion suggested by hysterosalpingography 
or chromotubation while often also providing 
the means to reestablish patency via recanalization 
using specialized balloon or coaxial catheter systems (16). 

PERITONEAL FACTOR 

Peritoneal factors, including pelvic or adnexal adhesions 
and endometriosis, may cause or contribute to reproductive 
failure. History and physical examination findings may 
raise suspicion but are rarely sufficient for diagnosis. 
Peritoneal factors should be suspected if there is history of 
previous pelvic inflammatory disease, chronic inflammatory 
bowel disease, or pelvic surgery; there are signs or 
symptoms suspicious for endometriosis; and when an otherwise 
complete diagnostic evaluation reveals no abnormality 
to which infertility may be confidently attributed. 

Transvaginal ultrasonography may reveal otherwise 
unrecognized pelvic pathologic conditions that may have 
reproductive implications, such as an ovarian endometrioma 
(Image 34); however, laparoscopy with direct visual 
examination of the pelvic reproductive anatomy is the only 
method available for specific diagnosis of otherwise unrecognized 
peritoneal factors that may have an adverse effect 
on fertility (17). It is generally indicated in women with 
unexplained infertility or signs and symptoms of endometriosis 
and in women whose history, physical examination, 
or hysterosalpingography findings demonstrate or 
suggest tubal disease that may be amenable to repair. 

Diagnostic laparoscopy should include a systematic 
examination of the pelvic anatomy that notes any adhesions 
that restrict the freedom of the fallopian tubes and 
ovaries and the appearance of the fimbriae. All peritoneal 
surfaces should be inspected, with special attention given 
to any evidence of endometriosis. The appearance of 
endometriosis varies widely and includes not only the 
classic ovarian endometriomas, “mulberry” and “powder 
burn” lesions, but also the more subtle yellow, brown, 
erythematous, or colorless vesicular lesions that evidence 
suggests may be the most active areas of disease (Images 
35 and 36). Peritoneal biopsy is desirable, but not essen


tial, for diagnosis when characteristic lesions are 
observed (see “Endometriosis”). 

Whereas asymptomatic adhesions or endometriosis 
can be detected only by laparoscopy, surgical evaluation 
of the pelvic anatomy may not be required in all infertile 
women. Given the risks and costs associated with 
laparoscopy, surgery should be reserved for women in 
whom operative findings clearly may influence the 
choice of treatment. For example, identification of severe 
male factor infertility not amenable to any form of treatment 
other than IVF and ICSI renders moot almost any 
potential findings of laparoscopy, particularly when the 
history, physical examination, ultrasonography, and hysterosalpingography 
have revealed no evidence of disease 
or other abnormality. 

OVERVIEW OF MANAGEMENT 

Whenever possible, treatment for infertility should be 
specific to the causes identified after a careful and thorough 
evaluation. 

Treatment—Infertility Factors 

Treatment should be designed to overcome or optimize all 
identified infertility factors in a coordinated fashion. The 
treatment of one factor does little good if other important 
contributing factors go unrecognized or untreated. 

MALE FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Despite significant recent advances in reproductive 
medicine and in the treatment of infertility in general, less 
than 10% of male factor infertility can be effectively 
overcome with medical or surgical treatment. 
Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism can be treated effectively 
with exogenous gonadotropins or pulsatile administration 
of GnRH. Genital tract infections or chronic 
inflammatory conditions may be eliminated with specific 
antibiotic therapy. Ejaculatory failure due to retrograde 
ejaculation may be improved or corrected with sympathomimetics 
or anticholinergic agents. Some forms of 
obstructive azoospermia may be amenable to specific surgical 
procedures to eliminate the obstruction. Oligospermia 
or asthenospermia associated with scrotal 
varicoceles may respond to spermatic vein ligation, 
although results are highly variable and generally unpredictable. 
With these notable exceptions, the cause of most 
male factor infertility remains obscure, and empirical 
forms of treatment, including clomiphene citrate therapy 
for idiopathic oligospermia, have no predictable effect. 
Consequently, contemporary treatment of most male factor 
infertility is focused on mechanical methods that are 
designed to compensate for inadequate sperm numbers or 
motility or both, or to overcome suspected abnormalities 
of sperm function that may prevent fertilization. 

When semen specimens contain reduced numbers of 
total motile sperm (less than 20 million), cycle fecundity 


may be increased by performing IUI, carefully timed to 
coincide with ovulation in the female partner. The uterus 
will tolerate the introduction of only very small volumes of 
unprocessed seminal plasma. To overcome this limitation 
and to maximize the number of motile sperm, semen samples 
are “washed” by serial dilution in a balanced salt solution 
and low-speed centrifugation, discarding the 
supernatants, and resuspending the final cell pellet in a 
small volume of media. Intrauterine insemination may be 
performed using any of a variety of specialized catheters. 
Best results are achieved when the final specimen contains 
more than 10 million total motile sperm, although IUI may 
still offer some improvement in cycle fecundity with more 
severe seminal abnormalities (5 million to 10 million total 
motile sperm) (18). Given the costs and logistics involved 
in IUI and evidence suggesting that sperm survival may be 
shorter after washing and IUI than after intercourse, it is 
crucially important to optimize the timing of IUI. This is 
best accomplished by performing IUI on the day after 
detection of the midcycle urinary LH surge in spontaneous 
or clomiphene-induced ovulatory cycles, or approximately 
36 hours after the administration of exogenous hCG in 
cycles stimulated with exogenous gonadotropins. 

Severe male factor infertility (total motile counts <5 
million or <5% normal morphology or both by strict criteria) 
and IUI treatment failures are best managed by IVF 
with ICSI (19). Treatment involves physical injection of 
individually selected morphologically normal sperm into 
ova collected by transvaginal ultrasonography–guided follicle 
aspiration after ovarian stimulation with exogenous 
gonadotropins. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection requires 
only a very few normal sperm, which may be isolated from 
the ejaculate or, in azoospermic men, may be obtained by 
epididymal aspiration (20) or testis biopsy (21). A single 
sperm is injected into each individual ovum, which has 
been retrieved through follicle aspiration. The technique 
requires highly specialized micromanipulation equipment, 
laboratory facilities, and personnel, but it is highly effective 
in experienced hands. Success achieved with ICSI in 
recent years has effectively redefined sterility in males. 
The technique now offers couples who in the past had few 
options other than insemination with donor sperm or adoption 
the hope and means to have a child who is biologically 
their own. Insemination with donor sperm remains a highly 
effective alternative for those couples who are unable or 
prefer not to use assisted reproductive technologies (22). 
When chosen, donor insemination must be performed using 
frozen thawed specimens acquired from accredited private 
or commercial sperm banks that comply fully with current 
standards for donor screening and quarantine of specimens 
before release (23). The use of fresh donor semen samples 
no longer can be justified under any circumstances. 

OVARIAN FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Anovulatory patients and patients in whom cycles exhibit 
varying characteristics and quality are candidates for 
treatment with ovulation-inducing agents. (For a thor-

INFERTILITY 133 

ough discussion of ovulation induction, therapeutic 
options and indications, monitoring requirements, risks, 
and results, see “Ovulation Induction.”) 

In most cases, clomiphene citrate is the most appropriate 
initial choice, but there are notable and specific 
exceptions. Amenorrheic patients with hypogonadotropic 
hypogonadism are candidates for treatment with exogenous 
gonadotropins (24) or pulsatile administration of 
GnRH (25), because clomiphene citrate treatment is ineffective 
when the HPO feedback axis is dysfunctional. 
Patients with thyroid abnormalities first should receive 
appropriate treatment and then be reevaluated to determine 
whether treatment with ovulation-inducing drugs is 
also required. Administration of dopamine agonists 
(bromocriptine or cabergoline) is the treatment of choice 
in hyperprolactinemic anovulatory patients. Most hyperandrogenic 
anovulatory patients with PCOS respond to 
clomiphene citrate, but in patients with associated insulin 
resistance, primary or adjunctive treatment with metformin 
or other insulin-sensitizing agents merits serious 
consideration. Metformin therapy alone often restores 
ovulatory function in such patients (26), and patients who 
fail to respond to metformin or clomiphene treatment 
alone often ovulate when the two are used in combination 
(27). Corticosteroids represent another useful adjunct in 
selected clomiphene-resistant patients. More aggressive 
treatment regimens employing exogenous gonadotropins, 
alone or in sequence with clomiphene, may be used to 
induce ovulation when other methods and efforts fail. 

Surgical treatment for anovulatory infertility, commonly 
known as laparoscopic “ovarian drilling,” may be 
an appropriate choice in selected patients. Women with 
PCOS that is refractory to clomiphene treatment are the 
best candidates, particularly when they are unable or 
unwilling to accept the risks and costs of ovulation induction 
with exogenous gonadotropins. The technique, 
essentially a contemporary form of traditional ovarian 
wedge resection, involves penetrating the ovarian cortex 
at numerous sites using an electrosurgical needle or a 
laser with the intent of reducing the volume of ovarian 
stroma. Circulating androgen concentrations are typically 
reduced after ovarian drilling, at least for several months. 
Numerous recent series indicate that 50–90% of women 
will ovulate, and 30–60% may be expected to conceive 
after undergoing the procedure. The risk of postoperative 
adhesions is real and must be considered before selecting 
this form of treatment. 

Whatever the regimen used to improve or induce ovulation, 
treatment should be actively monitored, with any 
of the means previously described, to ensure that effective 
treatment is established in an efficient and cost-effective 
manner. In young anovulatory patients having no 
history or physical examination findings that suggest 
tubal or peritoneal infertility factors, it is reasonable to 
induce ovulation without first excluding these factors, 
provided that semen quality is clearly normal. However, 
subsequent failure to achieve pregnancy within three to six 


134 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

effective treatment cycles should be regarded as an indication 
to expand the diagnostic evaluation or, if evaluation 
is already complete, to change the treatment strategy. 

CERVICAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

When the physical examination reveals obvious mucopurulent 
cervical secretions, cultures and antibiotic treatment 
are indicated. Patients with severe cervical stenosis 
may be suspected of having a significant cervical factor. 
If suspicion is confirmed by findings of scant, absent, or 
clearly poor cervical mucus quality when evaluated by 
simple examination or with a postcoital test in the immediate 
periovulatory interval, it is reasonable to consider 
treatment. Low-dose exogenous estrogen supplementation 
often has been used, but there is no compelling evidence 
that such treatment improves cycle fecundity. In 
those uncommon patients with apparent isolated cervical 
factor infertility, the most logical, expedient, and proven 
effective treatment is to bypass the cervix by performing 
appropriately timed IUI. 

Clomiphene citrate is widely regarded as a cause of 
iatrogenic cervical factor infertility as a consequence of 
its intrinsic antiestrogenic actions. On careful scrutiny, 
however, the evidence in support of this contention is 
extremely weak. Although the possibility cannot simply 
be dismissed, it is also largely irrelevant. In practice, if 
pregnancy is not achieved in the anovulatory patient after 
three to six clomiphene-induced ovulatory cycles, alternative 
treatment is clearly indicated. When infertility is 
otherwise unexplained, the logical alternative treatment is 
exogenous gonadotropin therapy. Any presumed adverse 
effects of clomiphene are thus eliminated while the higher 
estrogen levels that typically accompany gonadotropin 
treatment also stimulate mucus production. Furthermore, 
if IUI is included in the treatment regimen in efforts to 
maximize cycle fecundity, any possibility of a past or persistent 
cervical factor is moot. 

UTERINE FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

There is insufficient evidence to indicate that leiomyomata, 
endometrial polyps, or minor intrauterine adhesions 
are a cause of infertility. Retrospective studies of 
outcomes following IVF in women with myomas suggest 
that submucous myomas may indeed have adverse effects 
on pregnancy maintenance and outcome, whereas subserosal 
or intramural fibroids have less, if any, importance 
(28). Given the risk that postoperative adhesions may 
compromise fertility and the high probability that cesarean 
delivery will be required in any subsequent pregnancy, 
abdominal myomectomy in the treatment of infertility is 
recommended only when myomas are otherwise symptomatic 
or when they are large and clearly impose on the 
uterine capacity. Small, asymptomatic endometrial 
polyps are relatively common, even in fertile women, and 
are an unlikely cause of infertility. However, endometrial 
polyps may act like intrauterine foreign bodies to inter


fere with conception. Hysteroscopic surgery is most 
clearly indicated when polyps are large or symptomatic. 

Intrauterine synechiae are of obvious importance 
when extensive or associated with amenorrhea. In such 
circumstances, hysteroscopic lysis is clearly indicated 
and best performed under laparoscopic guidance when 
dissection is difficult or intrauterine anatomy cannot be 
clearly defined, because uterine perforation is a common 
complication when adhesions are severe. Postoperative 
exogenous estrogen therapy to promote rapid reepithelialization 
is prudent following extensive intrauterine dissection 
(29). The insertion of a pediatric Foley catheter or 
a specially contoured intrauterine balloon catheter also 
may help to reduce the risk of adhesion reformation. 

In the absence of any other identified infertility factors 
or when treatment of other factors fails, hysteroscopic 
resection of small submucous myomas, endometrial 
polyps, or minor intrauterine adhesions is reasonable and 
recommended. An aggressive approach to such cavitary 
abnormalities is clearly warranted in infertile women of 
advanced reproductive age and in infertile women who 
otherwise would require more advanced forms of treatment 
involving significant costs or risks. 

Although developmental uterine anomalies clearly are 
associated with early pregnancy loss, preterm delivery, 
and fetal malpresentation, evidence that they are a cause 
of infertility is lacking. Surgical excision of a vaginal septum 
is clearly indicated when the vaginal septum prevents 
or interferes with intercourse, such as one that is associated 
with a uterus didelphys. Women with bicornuate or 
septate uteri typically have no difficulty achieving pregnancy 
in the absence of other infertility factors. Because 
surgical unification of a bicornuate uterus requires 
laparotomy, risks postoperative adhesions, and dictates 
subsequent cesarean delivery, it is rarely indicated in the 
treatment of infertility. Before the advent of modern hysteroscopic 
techniques, the same could be said regarding 
the surgical correction of septate uteri. However, given 
the relative ease and safety of hysteroscopic septum 
resection (Fig. 55) and the strong association between 
intrauterine septa and pregnancy wastage, septum resection 
is justified in the treatment of infertility, particularly 
when no other factors are identified, age is advanced, or 
more advanced forms of treatment are contemplated (30). 

When identified, chronic endometritis clearly deserves 
treatment. A 10–14-day course of broad-spectrum antibiotics 
is typically curative and best documented by 
repeated endometrial sampling. When chronic 
endometriosis is associated with a foreign body or residual 
products of conception, hysteroscopic surgery and 
curettage are indicated. The diagnosis of tuberculous 
endometritis necessitates prolonged treatment with a 
combination of drugs and careful long-term follow-up. 
Pregnancy rarely is possible after a patient has had tuberculous 
endometritis. 

Endometrial hyperplasia also demands treatment. 
Cyclic or continuous progestational therapy is highly 


n FIG. 55. Hysteroscopic resection of intrauterine septum.
(Baggish MS, Barbot J, Valle RF. Diagnostic and operativehysteroscopy. A text and atlas. Chicago: Mosby, 1999:283)
effective in all but rare instances; treatment failures are 
more common when cytologic atypia also is observed. 
Repeated sampling to demonstrate that treatment was 
effective is prudent. Ovulation induction in anovulatory 
infertile women with endometrial hyperplasia is best 
postponed until a normal endometrium has been restored. 

TUBAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Distal tubal occlusive disease may be amenable to surgical 
treatment when it is not severe. Fimbriolysis or fimbrioplasty 
may be performed to relieve phimosis when 
fimbrial architecture is otherwise normal. Neosalpingostomy 
merits consideration in patients with complete 
distal obstructions when hysterosalpingography reveals 
that ampullary tubal architecture is preserved and the 
obvious alternative of IVF is impractical or has been 
rejected. Results achieved with modern laparoscopic 
techniques are comparable to those reported for traditional 
microsurgery (31). Success rates of 50–70% may be 
expected after fimbriolysis or fimbrioplasty, but only 
5–30% of women conceive after surgery for moderate to 
severe disease, a prognosis significantly worse than with 
IVF. Consequently, tubal reconstructive surgery for 
severe distal tubal occlusive disease is rarely indicated 
and is now typically reserved for the few women who 
may have moral or ethical objections to IVF (32, 33). 

Surgery still may have a role in the management of 
distal tubal obstruction. The procedure of choice may be 
salpingectomy with IVF. Evidence derived from a number 
of retrospective studies strongly suggests that success 
rates with IVF are reduced by approximately one half in 
patients with hydrosalpinges (34). The mechanism 

INFERTILITY 135 

responsible is not entirely clear, but adverse effects of the 
chronic inflammatory tubal exudate on the endometrium 
or transferred embryos seem the most plausible explanation. 
Surgical occlusion of the proximal fallopian tubes 
with cautery or clips has been advocated as an alternative 
to salpingectomy prior to IVF in women with hydrosalpinges. 
Preliminary evidence suggests that this simpler 
procedure may be equally effective in maximizing the 
probabilities for success with IVF. However, given the 
possibility that bipolar occlusion may increase the risk of 
development of expanding symptomatic hydrosalpinges, 
salpingectomy may be the best choice when surgery 
before IVF is elected and it is technically feasible. 

Proximal tubal obstructions are encountered less frequently. 
Surgical options include segmental tubal resection 
and microsurgical reanastomosis, along with 
fluoroscopic or hysteroscopic proximal tubal recanalization. 
Tubal reimplantation procedures are no longer indicated, 
because results achieved with either of the 
alternative techniques are clearly superior. Success rates 
following the surgical correction of proximal tubal 
obstructions range between 20% and 50% (16). In vitro 
fertilization is the treatment of choice for patients with 
both proximal and distal tubal obstruction, as well as 
patients who decline surgery or have undergone unsuccessful 
procedures. 

Microsurgical sterilization reversal remains a highly 
successful option for patients who regret their earlier 
decision and again seek pregnancy; IVF is another obvious 
alternative. Success rates after tubal reanastomosis 
depend on the type of sterilization procedure that was 
performed, the site of the anastomosis, and the lengths of 
the remaining tubal segments (35). Procedures that 
remove or destroy the least amount of tissue have the best 
prognosis for successful reversal. Isthmic–isthmic anastomoses 
are more often successful than isthmic– 
ampullary, ampullo–ampullary, or cornual anastomoses. 
Prognosis is best when the final tubal lengths are 5 cm or 
longer. In vitro fertilization should be recommended for 
patients who have undergone fimbriectomy sterilization 
procedures, because its results are clearly superior to 
those achieved with surgery. Moreover, given its steady 
improvement in success rates overall, IVF deserves serious 
consideration for use after all types of sterilization 
procedures performed. It avoids a major surgical procedure, 
makes the best use of time, and may be a more costeffective 
choice when only a single additional child is 
desired, when age is relatively advanced, and when other 
infertility factors are identified. In contrast, microsurgical 
anastomosis allows for natural conception as often as the 
couple may desire, and it avoids the risks of gonadotropin 
stimulation and multiple pregnancy associated with IVF. 
After all relevant information has been obtained, patients 
should be counseled carefully on the advantages and disadvantages 
of both forms of treatment to ensure that the 
option that best meets the couple’s needs and goals is 
selected. 


136 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

PERITONEAL FACTOR INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

Pelvic or adnexal adhesions may affect fertility adversely 
by distorting adnexal anatomy so that ovum capture after 
ovulation is inefficient or impossible. The diagnosis may 
be suspected on the basis of history or hysterosalpingography 
findings, but only laparoscopy can confirm or 
exclude the diagnosis while also providing the means and 
opportunity to restore functional anatomic relationships 
between the fallopian tubes and the adjacent ovaries. The 
prognosis for successful pregnancy after laparoscopic 
adhesiolysis depends on the extent of the disease, the 
effectiveness of lysis, and the existence of any other infertility 
factors. When the disease is mild or moderate and is 
the only finding after thorough evaluation, adhesiolysis 
generally is associated with an excellent prognosis. When 
the disease is severe or is associated with other infertility 
factors, IVF is the logical recommendation. 

A relationship between endometriosis and infertility has 
been documented repeatedly. A thorough discussion of the 
disease and its management has been provided, and only 
issues relating to the treatment of infertility are summarized 
here. Whereas severe or extensive disease that distorts 
anatomy or causes frank tubal occlusion obviously 
can interfere with reproduction, how—or even if—minimal 
or mild disease causes infertility remains unclear (see 
“Endometriosis”). When endometriosis is diagnosed at the 
time of laparoscopy, it is reasonable to attempt the excision 
or ablation of all visible disease when technically feasible. 
Recent evidence suggests that the excision of even minimal 
or mild disease at the time of diagnosis yields a better prognosis 
than does expectant management (36). Ovarian 
endometriomas should be enucleated when possible, or 
drained and ablated when it is not possible. Peritoneal 
implants should be excised or ablated; the method chosen 
may vary, and there is no evidence that one technique is 
clearly superior. Effective surgical treatment most often 
can be accomplished with laparoscopic techniques, given 
the expanded array of laparoscopic instruments now available 
(Video 5). When there is extensive disease involving 
cul-de-sac obliteration or dense adhesion of the ovaries to 
the pelvic side walls, laparotomy may be preferable, 
depending on the technical expertise of the surgeon. 

Medical treatment of endometriosis with progestins, 
oral contraceptives, danazol, or long-acting GnRH agonists 
has proven effectiveness in the management of pain 
associated with the disease, but ovarian suppression has 
not been shown to improve fertility. Postoperative medical 
treatment occasionally may be useful when there is 
known residual disease and infertility is associated with 
persistent or recurrent pain, but its contraceptive properties 
are clearly disadvantageous. 

Unexplained Infertility 

In up to 30% of infertile couples, a thorough evaluation 
will fail to identify any clear cause for reproductive failure. 
Under such circumstances, any treatment is necessar


ily empiric. Contemporary treatments for unexplained 
infertility range from conservative to aggressive, but all 
generally involve the use of ovulation-inducing drugs with 
the intent to cause controlled ovarian hyperstimulation of 
more than a single ovum, most often in conjunction with 
IUI. A thorough discussion of treatment regimens, monitoring 
requirements, prognosis, costs, and risks associated 
with each treatment appears elsewhere (see “Controlled 
Ovarian Hyperstimulation with Intrauterine Insemination”). 
In vitro fertilization is an even more effective 
alternative treatment for couples with unexplained infertility. 
It offers the potential advantage of greater control 
over the number of embryos that ultimately reach the 
uterus, although the costs involved are limiting and often 
prohibitive for many couples. Careful counseling is essential 
to determine which form of treatment will best meet 
the needs of the individual couple. 

OVULATION INDUCTION 
Ovulation Disorders 

The evaluation of the infertile woman for ovulation disorders 
relies on tests that provide presumptive evidence, 
rather than actual proof, of ovulation. Because of the 
small size of the oocyte, the only convincing in vivo 
demonstration of ovulation is pregnancy. Instead, physicians 
must resort to inference to determine whether a 
woman is normally ovulatory. The woman with cycle 
intervals of 24–34 days associated with moliminal symptoms 
and a biphasic basal body temperature pattern very 
likely, but not definitely, is normally ovulatory. So, too, is 
the woman with ultrasonographic patterns of ovarian follicle 
development and collapse, secretory endometrial 
histology findings in a biopsy obtained late in the menstrual 
cycle, or a serum progesterone level of at least 10 
ng/mL 1 week before the next menses. However, the 
physician should remember that these tests and features 
of the woman’s history are incompletely sensitive and 
specific for identifying the actual status of the ovulatory 
function. 

The World Health Organization has adopted a classification 
of ovulatory disorders that is useful for guiding the 
treatment of women so affected. Group 1 includes women 
with hypoestrogenic amenorrhea and ovaries replete with 
dormant follicles. Serum levels of FSH are in the normal 
range or low. Previously, women were labeled as having 
“hypothalamic amenorrhea,” “psychogenic amenorrhea,” 
and “stress-induced amenorrhea” (see “Hypothalamic 
Amenorrhea”). Women in group 2 are normally estrogenic 
and occasionally hyperandrogenic, have infrequent 
menstruation, and have normal serum levels of FSH. 
Conditions assigned to this group are termed ovulatory 
dysfunction or, in the presence of otherwise unexplained 
hyperandrogenism, PCOS (see “Polycystic Ovary 
Syndrome, Hirsutism, and Other Androgen Excess 
Disorders”). Women in group 3 are usually amenorrheic 


and have few or no ovarian follicles. Serum levels of FSH 
are high. Premature ovarian failure and ovarian dysgenesis 
are the most commonly encountered conditions in this 
group (see the section on premature ovarian failure). 

Before inducing ovulation in the infertile couple, the 
contribution of other infertility factors should be defined 
and addressed (see the section on evaluation of infertility). 
The potential role of male factor infertility should be 
investigated with at least one semen analysis. The risk for 
adnexal and uterine factors of infertility should be 
assessed. If that risk is high, diagnostic procedures, such 
as laparoscopy, hysteroscopy, sonohysterography, or hysterosalpingography, 
are essential for predicting the efficiency 
of the contemplated course of treatment. However, 
in the anovulatory woman with a low risk for tubal or uterine 
infertility factors, investigations of these factors can be 
deferred until first-line therapy is proven unsuccessful. 

Agents Used for Ovulation Induction 

The process of inducing ovulation with medication in the 
anovulatory woman should begin with an understanding 
of the cause of her ovulatory dysfunction. A number of 
agents are available for ovulation induction, with 
clomiphene citrate the most widely used (Table 11). 
Ideally, the agent used for treatment would simply correct 
the underlying problem while leaving intact the remainder 
of the HPO axis, in part to avoid the unattractive consequences 
of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) 
(37). An overall goal is unifollicular recruitment; however, 
no product can guarantee that result. Because of cost 
and adverse effects, the use of gonadotropin should be 
reserved for situations when other agents have failed or 
when this approach is not applicable. 

CLOMIPHENE CITRATE 

Clomiphene citrate is a triphenylethylene derivative that, 
depending on the tissue type and hormonal context, possesses 
estrogen receptor agonist and antagonist properties. 
In the hypothalamus, its antiestrogenic effect results in an 

n TABLE 11. Agents Used for Ovulation Induction 
Preparation 
Trade Name 


Clomiphene citrate 
Clomid, Serophene 

GnRH agonist/antagonist 
Leuprolide acetate Lupron 
Ganirelix acetate Antagon 

Dopamine agonist 
Bromocriptine mesylate Parlodel 
Cabergoline Dostinex 

Human chorionic gonadotropin 
Novarel, Pregnyl, 
Profasi, A.P.L. 

Abbreviation: GnRH indicates gonadotropin-releasing hormone. 

INFERTILITY 137 

increase in GnRH pulse frequency. This, in turn, stimulates 
release of gonadotropins, yielding ovarian follicle development. 
An endogenous LH surge is evoked by rising 
estradiol. It has little beneficial effect in inducing ovulation 
in hypoestrogenic, hypogonadotropic women (group 1 
ovulation disorders) and no role in the treatment of women 
with group 3 ovulatory disorders. Clomiphene is contraindicated 
in the presence of pregnancy, liver disease, or 
history of visual changes with previous clomiphene use. 

Induction of ovulation with clomiphene is initiated 
early in the menstrual cycle or after progestogen-induced 
withdrawal bleeding, typically on cycle day 3, 4, or 5. 
The dosage usually chosen for the first cycle is 50 mg/d 
for 5 days. The response of the ovaries to clomiphene frequently 
is measured with midluteal serum progesterone 
levels or some other presumptive test for ovulation. If 
ovulation does not occur, a menstrual period is induced 
and the woman is treated in the next cycle with daily 
doses of 100 mg of clomiphene. If ovulation does not 
occur with a daily dose of 100 mg, the dose may be 
increased by another 50 mg. The use of daily doses 
greater than 150 mg or for longer than 5 days has limited 
benefit. If, at any dose, ovulation is detected but pregnancy 
fails to occur, the same dose is repeated during the 
next cycle. 

Adverse effects demonstrated by patients receiving 
clomiphene are vasomotor symptoms such as headaches 
and mood changes (approximately 10% of women) and, 
rarely, visual changes such as halos, streaks around lights, 
blurring, or scotoma (38). Adverse effects on cervical 
mucus or luteal phase function may explain why many 
ovulatory cycles stimulated with clomiphene do not result 
in conception. The addition of low-dose estrogen to 
clomiphene to improve cervical mucus does not appear to 
improve conception rates. 

Complications of clomiphene therapy include cystic 
ovarian enlargement; a mild, self-limited form of ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome occurring in less than 5% of 
cycles; and multifetal gestations (5–10% of pregnancies) 
(38). Screening for adverse effects and complications of 
clomiphene therapy commonly is limited to review of the 
patient’s history and a pelvic examination. However, this 
approach has low sensitivity for abnormal ovarian 
enlargement and cyst formation, particularly in obese 
patients. A more accurate assessment of ovarian size can 
be obtained with ultrasonography in the middle of the 
luteal phase or early in the follicular phase of the next 
cycle. 

The maximum number of treatment cycles that any 
patient should undergo depends on the estimate of the 
benefit achieved with additional cycles. If a woman does 
not consistently ovulate with clomiphene at daily doses 
of 150 mg, there is little point to additional treatment 
cycles. Similarly, the yield is small for continued ovulation 
induction with the same agent in the patient who has 
experienced 12 ovulatory cycles without a pregnancy, 
considering that most pregnancies occur early in the 


138 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

course of treatment. Concerns regarding the risk of ovarian 
cancer associated with the use of clomiphene have 
diminished recently (39), particularly when the total 
duration of therapy is less than 1 year (38). 

Ovulation is seen in 80% of women taking 
clomiphene, most requiring daily doses of 100 mg or less 
(40). Obesity and hyperandrogenemia are associated with 
a lower rate of ovulation with clomiphene (40). 
Approximately 40% of women achieve a pregnancy with 
the drug. Early in the course of therapy, cycle fecundity 
approaches that of the normally fertile population. Later, 
the likelihood of pregnancy diminishes, and alternative 
therapy should be considered. 

Improved ovulation and pregnancy rates in poorly 
responding women are occasionally achieved with 
adjunctive treatment. Such treatment includes the injection 
of hCG when there is a preovulatory-sized follicle 
seen on a pelvic sonogram, or the use of corticosteroids, 
particularly in women with serum levels of DHEAS higher 
than 200 m g/dL. 

EXOGENOUS GONADOTROPINS 

The development of safe, consistent, effective, and widely 
available preparations of gonadotropins over the past 
40 years has dramatically increased opportunities for 
treatment of the infertile couple, particularly the couple 
requiring ovulation induction. From the earliest availability 
of human menopausal gonadotropins to the development 
of urofollitropin to recombinant preparations of 
FSH (Table 12), the experienced clinician has been able 
to provide a powerful means of stimulating ovarian follicle 
development in women with group 1 ovulatory disorders 
or group 2 ovulatory disorders refractory to first-line 
therapy and in women undergoing assisted reproduction. 

Human menopausal gonadotropins consisting of 75 IU 
of FSH and 75 IU of LH were the first commercial formulation 
of exogenous gonadotropins for injection. 
Extracted from the urine of postmenopausal women, the 
product’s availability and consistency from one manufacturer’s 
lot to the next is imperfect. Urofollitropin, a more 
purified preparation of FSH from urine, has similar problems 
of consistency and availability without substantial 

n TABLE 12. Exogenous Gonadotropin Preparations 
improvement in clinical efficacy. The one advantage of 
highly purified FSH preparations achieved through 
immunochromatographic purification of human menopausal 
gonadotropins is the capacity for self-administered 
subcutaneous injections. Currently, the benefit of recombinant 
preparations of FSH, with or without recombinant 
LH, is largely in the virtually limitless availability of a 
consistent isoform of FSH. Other significant clinical 
advantages of recombinant preparations remain unproved. 

Injections of gonadotropin preparations promote ovarian 
follicle development in women by increasing the stimulation 
of the ovarian FSH receptors above that provided 
by endogenous FSH secretion. The process of selection of 
the dominant ovarian follicle is muted, to the advantage of 
women undergoing assisted reproductive technology 
(ART), through a superimposition of exogenous FSH on 
the efferent portion of the negative feedback relationship 
that exists in the HPO axis. This loss of internal control 
accounts for the two most significant complications of 
ovulation induction with exogenous gonadotropins: multifetal 
gestation as a result of ovulation of multiple follicles 
and ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

In infertile women with anovulation as the sole infertility 
factor, the rate of ovulation with gonadotropins is 
80–90% of initiated cycles. The pregnancy rate is approximately 
20% per cycle (41). 

Approximately 15–25% of women with group 2 disorders 
will develop premature luteinization, manifested as 
an increase in the circulating LH concentration or a rising 
progesterone level prior to follicle maturity. This results 
in diminished cycle fecundity through premature ovulation, 
undesirable acceleration of endometrial development, 
or induction of follicle atresia. Treatment with 
GnRH agonists or antagonists can improve cycle fecundity 
by preventing the premature luteinization. 

Women with suboptimal follicle development despite 
large doses of gonadotropins have received adjunctive 
treatment with growth hormone. However, there is no 
convincing evidence to support its use. 

Complications of ovarian stimulation with exogenous 
gonadotropins stem from an exaggerated response of the 
ovaries to the stimulation. Ovarian hyperstimulation syn-

Composition 
Preparation FSH (IU) LH (IU) Trade Name 
hMG 75 75 Humegon, Pergonal, Repronex 
Pure FSH 75 <1 Metrodin 
Ultrapure FSH 75 <0.1 Fertinex 
Recombinant FSH 75 0 Follistim, Gonal-F 
Recombinant LH 0 75 Not yet available 

Abbreviations: FSH indicates follicle-stimulating hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; hMG, human menopausal gonadotropins. 


drome, which is characterized by ovarian enlargement and 
increased capillary permeability (42), is more commonly 
encountered in women who become pregnant; are young; 
are of low weight; and have high estradiol levels, a large 
number of ovarian follicles, or PCOS. When severe— 
usually early in pregnancy—ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome is associated with sudden and rapid weight 
gain, ascites, pleural and pericardial effusions, oliguria, 
and vascular hyperviscosity. Thromboembolic disease, 
adult respiratory distress syndrome, and death can follow. 
Vascular endothelial growth factor, produced by the ovary 
in response to stimulation with LH or hCG, is the most 
likely mediator of ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
(43). Multifetal gestation, occurring in approximately 
20–30% of deliveries (41), usually results from concurrent 
ovulation of multiple follicles. Both ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and multiple gestation represent incomplete 
control of follicle development. Prevention of these 
complications is preferable to treatment. Treatment 
depends on the severity of the condition (Table 13). 
Patients with more severe symptoms should be monitored 
closely (Box N).The risks of multifetal gestation and ovarian 
hyperstimulation increase with the number of follicles 
and serum levels of estradiol on the day of hCG injection. 
Initial reports of an increased risk of ovarian cancer and 
borderline ovarian tumors associated with gonadotropin 
use have not been substantiated (38, 39, 44). 

PULSATILE GONADOTROPIN-RELEASING HORMONE 

The administration of GnRH intravenously or subcutaneously 
in a pulsatile manner stimulates the release of LH 
and FSH from the pituitary gland and stimulates ovarian 
follicle growth. Exogenous pulsatile GnRH was used 
primarily to induce ovulation in women with group 1 

n TABLE 13. Classification of Ovarian 
Hyperstimulation Syndrome 
Grade Definition 
1 Mild: abdominal distention/discomfort 
2 Mild: features of grade 1 plus nausea, vomiting, 
or diarrhea or both; ovaries enlarged to 
5–12 cm 
3 Moderate: features of mild OHSS plus ultrasonographic 
evidence of ascites 
4 Severe: features of moderate OHSS plus 
clinical evidence of ascites, hydrothorax, or 
difficulty breathing 
5 Severe: all of the above plus change in blood 
volume, increased blood viscosity due to 
hemoconcentration, coagulation abnormalties, 
and decreased renal perfusion and function 


Abbreviation: OHSS indicates ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

INFERTILITY 139 

ovulatory dysfunction. Pregnancy rates were in excess of 
20% per cycle, and complication rates were low and limited 
to malfunction of the infusion pump (45). In contrast, 
the rates of ovulation and pregnancy in women with 
PCOS were poor, largely because of a dysfunctional 

BOX N 
Management of Ovarian Hyperstimulation 
Syndrome 

Outpatient management 

Grade 1 
Counsel patient to avoid strenuous activity. 
Administer analgesics for relief of pelvic discomfort. 
Counsel the patient to watch for the symptoms of pro 

gressive ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome. 

Grades 2 and 3 
Perform a physical examination. 
Measure serum electrolytes and hematocrit. 
Recommend abdominal ultrasonography to diagnose 

ascites. 
Counsel the patient to minimize physical activity. 
Recommend an oral fluid intake greater than 1,000 

mL/day. 
Tabulate daily intake and output. 
Measure weight daily. 


Inpatient management 

Grades 4 and 5 
Measure intake and output at 4-hour intervals. 
Every day, measure weight, conduct a physical exami 

nation, and measure abdominal girth. 
Determine serum electrolyte levels and obtain a com 
plete blood count on a daily basis. 

Determine baseline liver function, prothrombin time, 
and partial thromboplastin time. 
Determine serial hematocrit levels at 4–8-hour 


intervals. 
Obtain a radiograph of the chest and pulse oximetry 

results to check for respiratory symptoms. 
Have the patient undergo abdominal ultrasonography. 
Order paracentesis if required for ascites. 
Administer intravenous fluids (crystalloid and albumin 

if urinary output is diminished). 
Administer thrombosis prophylaxis (vascular support 
stockings and heparin in patients at high risk for 
thromboembolic events). 


140 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

response to the stimulation. The medication is no longer 
available in the United States. 

DOPAMINE AGONISTS 

Women with hyperprolactinemic anovulation rarely enter 
the medical system seeking treatment of infertility. 
Instead, the reason they seek consultation is usually 
amenorrhea or galactorrhea, or both. Ovulation develops 
as a consequence of successful treatment of hyperprolactinemia. 
Anovulation associated with hyperprolactinemia, 
which is usually hypoestrogenic, can be idiopathic 
or can arise from a pituitary microadenoma (<10 mm) or 
macroadenoma. 

Treatment with any form of dopamine agonist to 
induce ovulation is guided by several critical principles. 
The first principle is to use the minimum dose effective for 
inducing ovulation, which may occur even before normal 
serum levels of prolactin are achieved (46). The second 
principle is to monitor the drug requirement by measuring 
serum levels of prolactin. Dose increases, which often 
precipitate an exacerbation of gastrointestinal side 
effects, lead to a reduction of prolactin levels within 1 
month. The medication should be discontinued when 
pregnancy is detected except, possibly, in pregnant 
women with expanding macroadenomas (see “Hyperprolactinemia 
and Other Pituitary Disorders”). 

Restoration of menstrual cycles heralds the possibility 
of normal ovulation, which should be confirmed with the 
measurement of midluteal serum progesterone. With this 
approach, 80–90% of hyperprolactinemic patients ovulate 
(46, 47). Resistance to dopamine agonists occurs in 5–18% 
as a result of poor compliance or receptor defects (48). 

Using the minimum effective dosage limits the severity 
of adverse effects, including headache, nausea, and 
vomiting. Once normal levels of prolactin are attained, 
many patients can maintain normal levels despite dose 
reduction. Using a vaginal route of administration of 
bromocriptine also may diminish the frequency and intensity 
of gastrointestinal side effects while lowering the total 
dose required for suppression of prolactin levels (48). 
Orthostatic hypotension is usually transient. Cabergoline 
is associated with a substantially reduced frequency of 
adverse effects compared with bromocriptine. 

INSULIN-SENSITIZING AGENTS 

Women with hyperandrogenic oligo-ovulation and 
anovulation—PCOS—commonly have hyperinsulinemia 
and insulin resistance, occasionally to the point of glucose 
intolerance or diabetes mellitus. The use of insulinsensitizing 
drugs, such as metformin, has been shown to 
ameliorate some of the manifestations of PCOS, especially 
in obese women, inducing less ovarian androgen 
production, more frequent ovulation with or without 
clomiphene (49), and pregnancy (50, 51). 

Metformin, which decreases hepatic gluconeogenesis 
and increases peripheral sensitivity to insulin, is started at 

an initial dosage of 500 mg/d. Because of commonly 
encountered gastrointestinal side effects, the dose is 
increased slowly, at weekly intervals, to a maximum 
dosage of 2,000 mg/d. In PCOS patients who fail to ovulate 
on standard doses of clomiphene citrate, the addition 
of metformin may be considered. 

Adverse effects are minor and primarily gastrointestinal. 
Although lactic acidosis can be induced with metformin, 
it is unlikely to occur in women who do not have 
diabetes mellitus or in women with normal renal function. 
More commonly, patients report abdominal bloating, 
diarrhea, and nausea. 

Other insulin-sensitizing drugs, such as thiazolidinediones 
(rosiglitazone and pioglitazone) and D-chiro-inositol 
(52), also may prove useful for ovulation induction. 

Controlled Ovarian Hyperstimulation 
with Intrauterine Insemination 

If infertility persists despite identification and correction 
of etiologic factors, COH with intrauterine insemination 
(COH–IUI) has been shown to be an effective alternative 
to expectant management. The rationale for this approach 
is that it provides for an increase in the number of oocytes 
and sperm in the reproductive tract and, theoretically, an 
increased probability of conception. 

Infertile couples who would benefit from treatment 
with COH–IUI have no significant anatomic abnormality 
of the adnexa or uterus, have ovaries responsive to 
gonadotropin stimulation, and can reliably produce an 
ejaculate providing at least 500,000 motile sperm after 
processing for IUI. Consequently, COH–IUI should not 
be recommended to women with severe bilateral distortion 
of the oviducts, tubal occlusion, severe oligospermia, 
or ovaries unresponsive to gonadotropin stimulation. 

Infertility evaluation for couples undergoing COH– 
IUI should include at least two semen analyses and hysterosalpingography 
or laparoscopy and hysteroscopy. 
Additionally, in ovulatory women undergoing IUI, a midluteal 
serum progesterone assay or endometrial biopsy is 
required. Older women would benefit from the prognostic 
information provided by early follicular serum FSH 
and estradiol assays, a clomiphene citrate challenge test, 
or the determination of early follicular-phase inhibin levels. 
If the estimated number of motile sperm recovered 
after processing for IUI is less than 500,000 or if the concentration, 
motility, and morphology findings of the 
semen analysis are all abnormal, the couple has a poor 
prognosis for success with COH–IUI. 

Although the cycle fecundity for COH–IUI is less than 
that for ART, the direct costs of ART are much greater 
than those of COH–IUI and are proportionally greater 
than the increase in cycle fecundity (53). Because the 
probability of pregnancy diminishes with repeated 
attempts, couples should be advised to undertake no more 
than three to six cycles of COH–IUI before moving on to 
ART for further treatment. The couples should be reas



INFERTILITY 141 

sured that there is no apparent drop in success rates with 
ART after failure to conceive with COH–IUI. 

SUCCESS RATES 

Properly designed studies comparing COH–IUI with 
ART are rare. Conclusions regarding the relative merits 
of each method of treatment have been sought through 
meta-analysis of a few randomized controlled trials and 
of nonrandomized studies or retrospective cohort 
reviews. One such study indicated that the cost-effectiveness 
of COH–IUI exceeded that of IVF for couples with 
mild male factor or unexplained infertility (54) . 

COMPLICATIONS 

The most frequent complication of COH–IUI is multifetal 
gestation, which occurs in 15–40% of clinical pregnancies 
(55). High-order multifetal gestation occurs in 
5–7% of pregnancies. Attempts to increase the cycle 
fecundity through aggressive stimulation of multiple-follicle 
development (Fig. 56) yield rates of multifetal gestation 
comparable to those seen with ART. If high-order 
multiple gestation is deemed likely on the basis of recruitment 
of large numbers of 15–20-mm follicles, abandonment 
of the cycle or conversion to IVF in that cycle may 
be contemplated. 

Although mildly symptomatic OHSS is common in 
ovulatory women undergoing COH–IUI, severe OHHS is 
rare, occurring in less than 1% of normally ovulatory 
women. Approximately 4–8% of reported clinical pregnancies 
are ectopic, which is similar to rates of ectopic 
pregnancies in couples undergoing ART. Even higher 
rates (18%) have been noted in women with peritubal and 
periovarian adhesions who were treated with COH–IUI. 

ASSISTED REPRODUCTIVE 
TECHNOLOGIES 

Assisted reproductive technologies are a group of procedures 
that have in common the handling of oocytes and 
embryos outside the body, with gametes or embryos 
replaced into the body to establish pregnancy (56). The 
initial—and still most commonly used—procedure is 
IVF, which involves the extraction of oocytes, fertilization 
in the laboratory, and transfer of embryos across the 
cervix into the uterine cavity. After the first successful 
birth from IVF (57), numerous variations have been 
described and brought into practice. This section 
describes each procedure and offers a perspective to 
understand the choice among them. 

Assisted reproductive technologies make up a complex 
discipline requiring a team of individuals with train


n FIG. 56. Multiple ovarian follicle development, as shown on this sonogram, is essential to the success of controlled ovarian 
hyperstimulation and intrauterine insemination, but it can result in multiple gestations. (Dodson WC, Haney AF. Superovulation 
and intrauterine insemination. In: Adashi EY, Rock JA, Rosenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery, and technology. 
Vol 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:2233) 

142 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

ing and expertise in reproductive surgery, pelvic ultrasonography, 
reproductive endocrinology, embryology, 
and andrology. Therefore, discrete programs usually are 
organized to provide this service; a director has overall 
responsibility, and each function is provided by various 
members of the team. Standards have been established by 
the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology (23). 

Because of the complexity of these procedures and 
because relatively few aspects of the technique have been 
defined and universally accepted, each program varies in 
a multitude of aspects throughout each part of the process. 
It is not surprising, therefore, that success rates also 
vary widely. It is the responsibility of the referring physician 
to be aware of the results of various programs (which 
are published annually by the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine [ASRM] and the Centers for 
Disease Control and Prevention), as well as the difficulties 
inherent in assessing quality of care. 

Before considering ART, office visits are essential to 
ensure that the couple has had a full evaluation of their 
infertility (Box O) and that all reasonable alternative 
treatments have been tried or at least offered. These visits 
also offer an opportunity for counseling about the risks of 
conception and pregnancy (Box P). 

In Vitro Fertilization–Embryo Transfer 

Infertility resulting from abnormal fallopian tubes or 
endometriosis, idiopathic infertility, male infertility, and 
immunologic infertility all respond well to IVF. Women 
who have failed to conceive with donor insemination or 
ovulation induction are also excellent candidates. Rough 
guidelines as to when ART may be considered are after 2 
years of unexplained infertility, 1 year after treatment of 
a particular defect, or after 1 year of donor insemination 
or ovulation induction. These guidelines may be modified, 
depending on factors such as age, presence of severe 
defects, or multiple infertility factors. 

PRECYCLE TESTS 

Levels of FSH and estradiol can be used to identify 
women with abnormal ovarian function and a reduced 
prognosis. When the FSH level is consistently elevated on 
day 3 of menses (>10–12 mIU/mL in most current 
assays), successful birth rarely is achieved with IVF (58). 
When the day 3 estradiol level exceeds 80 pg/mL, the rate 
of cycle cancellation is increased (59). Age alone predicts 
prognosis, with successful birth occurring in about one 
third as many women older than 40 years as those 
younger than 40 years. There is no clear upper age 
regarding successful IVF with donor eggs, although 
ASRM does not recommend pregnancy after the normal 
age of menopause. Egg donation recipients with Turner’s 
syndrome must have careful assessment of their aorta, 
because death has occurred during pregnancy in such 
women. Testing for chlamydia should be performed or 

BOX O 
General Infertility Workup 

Semen analysis with quantification of leukocytes. 
Documentation of ovulation with luteinizing hormone 


surge monitoring and a serum progesterone measurement 
8 days after the surge. 
Postcoital testing on the day following the luteinizing hor


mone surge (selected patients). 
Hysterosalpingography: With tubal patency and no distal 


occlusion, the injection of Ethiodol enhances fertility in the 
months following the test.* 
Laparoscopy in selected patients with a history or exami


nation suggesting tubal disease or endometriosis; positive 
chlamydia antibodies may help identify women with occult 
tubal disease. 


Many programs routinely test both partners for hepatitis B 
and C, syphilis, and human immunodeficiency virus infection. 
Some states require these tests on the male partner; 
some also require testing for human T-cell lymphoma 
virus (HTLV-1). 


Couples at higher risk for cystic fibrosis, sickle cell disease, 
thalassemia, Tay-Sachs disease, or Canavan disease 
may be offered prenatal screening. Rubella screening will 
identify patients at risk who can be offered vaccination. 


*See Watson A, Vandekerckhove P, Lilford R, Vail A, Brosens I, 
Hughes E. A meta-analysis of the therapeutic role of oil soluble 
contrast media at hystersalpingography: a surprising result? Fertil 
Steril 1994;61:470–477 

empiric treatment given, because serologic evidence of 
infection has been associated with a reduced birth rate 
and increased fetal loss (60). 

The uterine cavity should be assessed with hysterography, 
transvaginal ultrasonography, or hysteroscopy to 
ensure the absence of any significant uterine defects. The 
presence of a hydrosalpinx decreases the IVF pregnancy 
rate by approximately 50% (61). Tubal interruption by 
cautery or salpingectomy appears to be equally effective 
in improving pregnancy rates (62). Because of the 
adverse effect of a hydrosalpinx on implantation, any 
patient undergoing surgery (such as laparoscopy) who 
has a hydrosalpinx should be offered the option of salpingectomy. 
If the opposite tube is normal, conception 
may occur even without IVF. 

A complete semen analysis should be obtained close 
to the time of the cycle of treatment; attempts should be 
made to resolve pyospermia, which can reduce sperm 
function. A trial of the embryo transfer has been shown 
to increase the rate of pregnancy significantly by avoiding 
difficult or traumatic embryo transfers (63). 


BOX P 
Components of Preconceptional Care 
and Counseling 

Systematic identification of preconceptional risks through 
the assessment of medical, social, reproductive, and family 
histories, including genetic risk, drugs, and medication 
history 

Discussion of possible effects of pregnancy on medical 
conditions for both the prospective mother and the fetus, 
along with an introduction of interventions, if appropriate 
and desired 

Determination of risk of infection and, if indicated, testing 

and vaccination (if available) 
Nutrition counseling regarding appropriate weight for 
height, sources and importance of folic acid, and avoidance 
of vitamin oversupplementation (especially vitamin 
A); referral for in-depth nutrition counseling, if appropriate 
and desired 

Discussion of social, financial, and psychologic issues in 
preparation for pregnancy, including lifestyle habits, alcohol 
use, recreational drug use, and domestic violence 
screening 

Review of alternative and complementary practices 
Provision of education based on risks 
Discussion of real and perceived barriers to achieving 


desires, including problems with contraceptive use 
Recommendation to keep a menstrual calendar 
Emphasis on the importance of early and continuous pre


natal care and discussion of how care will be structured 
based on the woman’s risks and concerns 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Precis: 
obstetrics. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2000;3 

OVARIAN STIMULATION AND MONITORING 

Most IVF cycles are conducted with ovarian stimulation, 
because the pregnancy rate increases with the number of 
embryos available for transfer and the number of 
embryos transferred. A meta-analysis of randomized trials 
has shown a twofold odds ratio for pregnancy with 
administration of a combination of a GnRH agonist and 
gonadotropins compared with other stimulation regimens 
(64). This method reduces cancellations for poor responses 
and premature LH surges, yields more extra embryos 
for cryopreservation, and gives patients and the medical 
staff more flexibility in scheduling by varying the duration 
of ovarian suppression before stimulation. The use of 
an oral contraceptive during the cycle in which the GnRH 
agonist is started will help to prevent cyst formation from 
the agonist phase of the medication. 

INFERTILITY 143 

It is also possible to retrieve the single mature oocyte 
from the natural menstrual cycle, although approximately 
three such cycles are necessary to achieve a cumulative 
pregnancy rate comparable to that of one stimulated 
cycle. However, retrieving the oocyte from the natural 
menstrual cycle avoids any risk of stimulation and multiple 
pregnancy. Recently, two GnRH antagonists have 
become available and are used to prevent an endogenous 
LH surge during the stimulation process. They can be 
given during the latter part of follicle maturation, because 
there is an immediate suppression of gonadotropins. They 
also can be used in clomiphene citrate cycles. Issues as to 
when the antagonist should be started, whether some LH 
should be added, and whether success rates are equal to 
GnRH agonist cycles remain to be resolved. 

Both transvaginal ultrasonography and serum estradiol 
are used to determine when hCG should be injected to 
initiate resumption of meiosis. With the natural cycle, 
serum or urinary LH levels must be monitored either to 
ensure that the LH surge has not begun or to time retrieval 
according to the onset of the LH surge. The ultrasonographic 
appearance and thickness of the endometrium 
have been found to be prognostic for successful pregnancy; 
a sonolucent superficial layer and a thickness of at 
least 8–9 mm are ideal. 

OOCYTE RETRIEVAL 

Follicle aspiration is scheduled for 34–36 hours after 
hCG injection. With the administration of GnRH agonist 
and human menopausal gonadotropin, the timing of this 
step can be extended to as late as 38 hours with minimal 
risk of ovulation. Prophylactic antibiotics are commonly 
given. Retrieval almost always is performed by transvaginal 
aspiration under ultrasonographic guidance (Fig. 57), 
even if it is necessary to traverse the uterus when an ovary 
is adherent to the uterine fundus. In most cases, intravenously 
administered sedation is sufficient for analgesia, 
making it an outpatient or office-based procedure. 
Preparation of the vagina with povidone-iodine to prevent 
pelvic infection is wise, but the povidone-iodine must be 
thoroughly removed before the procedure. 

INSEMINATION 

Washed sperm are added to the eggs after 2–8 hours of 
preincubation to allow further oocyte maturation. The 
oocytes are stripped of their surrounding cells and examined 
12–20 hours after insemination. Visualization of two 
pronuclei confirms normal fertilization. Conceptuses 
with three or more pronuclei are discarded. 

EMBRYO CULTURE AND QUALITY CONTROL 

A variety of media have been used with success for 
embryo culture. Electrolyte concentrations often are 
adjusted to simulate the levels in a normal human fallopian 
tube. Serum from the patient, umbilical cord blood, 
or designated donors generally has been added to media 


144 
144144 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 


n FIG. 57. Oocyte retrieval using the transvaginal route 
under ultrasonographic guidance. Using a sterile needle 
attached to the vaginal ultrasonographic transducer and a 
needle path on the monitor screen, a 16–17-gauge needle is 
advanced through the vagina and the abdominal cavity into 
the ovary. This ultrasonogram guides aspiration of a follicle 
with the bevel of the needle between the 2-cm and 3-cm 
mark. (Chang PL, Sauer MV. Assisted reproductive techniques. 
In: Mishell DR Jr. Atlas of clinical gynecology. III. 
Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: Current 
Medicine, 1999:13.8 with permission) 
to provide protein and growth factors. Preparations of 
serum proteins also have been used successfully. 
Bioassays have been used for quality control of the media 
(eg, mouse embryos, human sperm, or hamster sperm) to 
detect toxicity. Various methods are used to control the 
culture environment, such as the use of heating blocks, a 
layer of oil over the medium, or carbon dioxide and temperature-
controlled mobile chambers that keep temperature, 
pH, and osmolarity within narrow limits. 

EMBRYO TRANSFER 

Embryos most often are replaced 3 days after oocyte 
retrieval. More recently, media have been developed that 
are more closely matched to the metabolic requirements 
of the embryo on the fourth and fifth day of development, 
making it possible to transfer embryos at the blastocyst 
stage (65). The theoretical rationale for transfer at the 
blastocyst stage is to improve embryo selection, maintain 
pregnancy rates, and reduce the risk of high-order multiple 
gestations (three or more). Transfer of blastocyststage 
embryos can be limited to two embryos, yielding a 
reduced risk of twins. However, an increased incidence of 
monozygotic twins recently has been recognized as a 
drawback of blastocyst culture. 

Embryos are graded, and those chosen for transfer are 
loaded in a minute volume of medium into a transfer 
catheter. The catheter tip is advanced into the uterine fun


dus to approximately 1–1.5 cm from the top, and the 
embryos are expelled (Fig. 58). The catheter is checked 
for retained embryos, and the patient rests for a period 
(30 minutes is adequate) before returning home. 

The frequency of implantation is higher when the 
transfer is easy and atraumatic. As noted, the performance 
of a trial transfer in a prior cycle reduces the incidence 
of difficult transfers. If cervical dilation is required, 
it should be done before the cycle of embryo transfer. 
Recent studies have suggested that ultrasonographic 
guidance may enhance transfer outcome. Any techniques 
that promote a smooth transfer, without touching the top 
of the fundus or causing contractions or irritation of the 
endometrium, will maximize uterine implantation rates 
and reduce the chances of tubal implantation. 

LUTEAL-PHASE SUPPLEMENTATION 

With GnRH agonist and human menopausal gonadotropin 
cycles, it is necessary to support the luteal phase 
with hCG or progesterone supplementation. The latter is 
probably as effective and carries less risk of ovarian 
hyperstimulation. Progesterone supplementation generally 
is continued until 10 weeks of gestation, although 
recent studies suggest that it may be possible to discontinue 
it earlier. 

EARLY PREGNANCY 

Pregnancy is diagnosed by rising levels of hCG. Clinical 
pregnancy is confirmed by the presence of a gestational 
sac. It is inappropriate for a program to count biochemical 
pregnancies (rising hCG levels only) in their pregnancy 
rate. Because about 2% of clinical pregnancies are 
ectopic, transvaginal ultrasonography should be undertaken 
carefully at 4 weeks and 6 weeks after transfer. 
Cornual pregnancies can occur and are easily visualized. 
Cervical and even ovarian pregnancies occur in rare 
instances. A tubal pregnancy usually can be detected by 
ultrasonography, but the patient with an intrauterine 
pregnancy should be cautioned not to ignore significant 
pain. If both ectopic and intrauterine pregnancies are 
found, the ectopic gestation usually can be excised 
laparoscopically without disturbing the intrauterine gestation. 
Elevated hCG levels with no sign of an intrauterine 
sac by 4 weeks from transfer should raise suspicion 
of an ectopic pregnancy. 

COMPLICATIONS 

The incidence of pelvic infection after follicle aspiration 
has been very low. The incidence can be further minimized 
by using prophylactic antibiotics and preparing the 
vagina with povidone-iodine. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
occurs in about 0.2% of stimulated cycles; it is more 
common in anovulatory women. Multiple pregnancy 
occurs in approximately one third of pregnancies. It is 
more common in programs with higher success rates, in 


INFERTILITY 145 


n FIG. 58. Embryo transfer. Embryos in 10–50 mL of media are placed through the catheter at 0.5 cm from the upper fundus. 
The catheter is then checked for the absence of embryos. (Chang PL, Sauer MV. Assisted reproductive techniques. In: Mishell DR Jr. 
Atlas of clinical gynecology. III. Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia, PA: Current Medicine, 1999:13.13 with permission) 
younger women, when many embryos are transferred, 
and when the embryos are of superior quality. The 
Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology has circulated 
guidelines (66) on the number of embryos to transfer 
depending on factors such as age, embryo quality, and 
whether extra embryos are available for freezing (as an 
index of ovarian response). These guidelines should dramatically 
reduce the incidence of high-order multiple 
pregnancy with ART. 

Tubal pregnancy occurs almost exclusively in women 
with tubal disease and has the highest incidence in 
women who have had tubal surgery. Cornual pregnancy 
primarily occurs when the tube has been removed previously. 
Although rare, bleeding may occur following 
retrieval or rupture of an endometrioma and may require 
surgical intervention. Ureteral injury also is rarely 
encountered. 

CRYOPRESERVED EMBRYOS 

Extra embryos may be cryopreserved at the pronuclear 
stage, cleavage stage, or blastocyst stage. There is no 
known limit on the duration of embryo storage. Women 
who experience success with fresh embryos are more 
likely to do so with frozen embryos from the same cycle. 
About two thirds of embryos survive the freezing process, 
but results vary with each woman, just as there are some 
men with high-quality sperm whose germ cells do not 
freeze well. The embryos can be transferred during a natural 
cycle or a hormonally controlled cycle. It has not yet 
been confirmed whether the latter yields superior pregnancy 
rates. In 1997 the delivery rate per frozen embryo 
transfer was 18.8% (67). 

There is a minor trend toward preterm labor in single-
ton pregnancies. The rate of spontaneous abortion is similar 
to normal (18.2% in 1997). The rate of congenital 
anomalies is not increased. In one report, the rate of 
abnormalities was lower after embryo freezing. 

MICROMANIPULATION OF OOCYTES AND EMBRYOS 

Micromanipulation of oocytes and embryos has added 
another dimension to ART. By using high-power magnification 
and micromanipulators to translate hand movements 
into extremely fine and controlled motions of 
holding and manipulating pipettes, it is possible to 
accomplish the following: 

• 
Make an opening in the zona pellucida to aid in 
the hatching process (assisted hatching) 
• 
Insert a single sperm into the oocyte (intracytoplasmic 
sperm injection) 
• 
Remove one of the cells of the embryo for the 
purpose of genetic analysis (preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis) 
Assisted Hatching. One of the factors most predictive of 
embryo implantation is areas of thinning of the zona pellucida. 
Out of this observation, a technique, termed 
assisted hatching, was developed to create an artificial 
opening in the zona (68). Assisted hatching has been 
shown to lead to an overall increase in embryo implantation. 
This effect increases with a woman’s age, probably 
because older embryos appear to have lower metabolism. 
Women with an elevated day 3 level of FSH also have 


146 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

improved implantation with assisted hatching, probably 
analogous to increased chronologic age. Data also suggest 
that embryos with a lower morphologic score and 
embryos with a thicker zona implant better after assisted 
hatching. Couples who have had multiple unsuccessful 
cycles of ART also appear to benefit. 

The procedure usually is done on the day of embryo 
transfer, using an acidic Tyrode’s solution. A steroid and 
an antibiotic generally are given for 4 days, starting on 
the evening of egg retrieval, to reduce damage to the 
embryo by inflammatory cells. There may be an increase 
of identical twinning with assisted hatching due to pinching 
of the embryo during hatching, although this increase 
could depend on technique, and the magnitude of any 
such effect probably has been overestimated because of 
publication bias. 

Intracytoplasmic Sperm Injection. One of the most dramatic 
advances in ART has been the ability to treat any 
male with even a few moving sperm by the injection of a 
single sperm into each oocyte (69) (Fig. 59). The sperm 
may be ejaculated or surgically retrieved from the epididymis 
or testis. Thawed frozen sperm appear to work 
equally well, as long as sperm viability can be confirmed 
by some degree of motility. 

The rate of fetal abnormalities does not appear to be 
increased because of the procedure, although men with very 
low sperm counts may transmit inherent sperm defects to 
their offspring. The sperm of these men may have a higher 
incidence of sex chromosome abnormalities, or the men may 
have deletions of Y chromosome material or karyotypic 
abnormalities as a cause of their impaired sperm production. 
A recent report also found a slight increase of autosomal 
chromosome anomalies (70). Men with congenital bilateral 
absence of the vas deferens have an increased incidence of 
mutations for cystic fibrosis. Men with very low sperm 
counts also may have an increased chance of being a carrier 
for cystic fibrosis. Because not all cystic fibrosis mutations 
may have been identified in these men, it has been suggested 
that the female partner be tested instead (71). Although testing 
for Y chromosome deletions should be offered,these couples 
usually will not be deterred by the possibility that the 
offspring also may be infertile and ultimately may need ICSI 
to achieve fertility. A karyotype should be determined in men 
with very low numbers of sperm or no sperm unless there is 
a well-defined cause. Genetic counseling may be considered 
for certain couples requiring ICSI. The pregnancy rate is the 
same for ICSI and non-ICSI cycles. 

USE OF DONOR GAMETES 

The fertilization rate is normal with donor-quality frozen 
sperm. The pregnancy rate with donated oocytes is almost 
1.5-fold higher than with routine IVF because donors are 
generally young or fertile or both. Both known and 
anonymous oocyte donors are used. This has allowed 
women who have experienced failure on multiple IVF 
attempts, who have abnormal ovarian function (eg, ele-

A


B


n FIG. 59. Intracytoplasmic sperm injection. (A) Oocyte 
being held by a holding pipette. The injection pipette contains 
a single sperm. (B) The injection pipette has penetrated 
the zona pellucida and plasma membrane of the oocyte, 
and the sperm has been microinjected into the oocyte. 
(Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
vated FSH or poor response to stimulation), or who are 
advanced in age to have a greater chance of pregnancy. 
Other advantages of egg donation are that amniocentesis 
is not required (provided the donor is young) and the rate 
of spontaneous abortion is low. 

CHOOSING AN IN VITRO FERTILIZATION PROGRAM 
FOR REFERRAL 

Success rates of IVF programs generally are reported as 
clinical pregnancies and deliveries per retrieval. For 
1998, the average delivery rate per retrieval was 28.9%. 
Rates for women under age 35, 35–37, 38–40, and 41 
years and older were 32%, 26%, 18%, and 8%, respectively. 
Individual rates vary considerably, but many programs 
consistently achieve a rate higher than 30% 
delivery per retrieval in women younger than 40 years. 
Many factors can influence these rates. With many pro



grams reporting relatively small numbers of cases, rates 
will vary widely based on chance alone. Ideally, rates 
should be based on at least 100–200 retrievals per year. 

Success rates also can be enhanced by transferring 
more embryos, but at the cost of increased multiple pregnancy, 
with its attendant medical risks and costs. The 
ASRM has published guidelines on the number of 
embryos that it is appropriate to transfer based on patient 
age and other factors (23). Referrals should be directed to 
programs that achieve high rates of pregnancy with fewer 
embryos transferred and high-order multiple pregnancy 
(triplets or more) of 5% or less. 

GAMETE INTRAFALLOPIAN TRANSFER 

Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT) is the placement of 
sperm and eggs into the fallopian tube. This generally has 
been done by laparoscopy. The average delivery rate per 
retrieval for GIFT in 1997 was 30%, compared with 
27.9% for IVF (67). Because IVF is less invasive, programs 
with IVF rates close to or exceeding the national 
average for GIFT are likely to do relatively little GIFT, 
both by their recommendation and by patient choice. 

Women with significant abnormalities of the fallopian 
tubes should not undergo GIFT, because in such women 
the success rate is no higher than the success rate with 
IVF, whereas the rate of tubal pregnancy is increased. 
Couples with significant male factor infertility also do 
less well with GIFT, and fertilization is better documented 
with IVF. The rate of tubal pregnancy may be higher 
with GIFT, although it may be decreasing as fewer 
women with tubal disease undergo the procedure (5% 
ectopic pregnancy rate in 1988, 3.2% in 1994, and 2.6% 
in 1998). Gamete intrafallopian transfer has been performed 
in combination with IVF. In these cases, fewer 
oocytes are placed into the fallopian tubes, leaving more 
for IVF; a transcervical transfer of embryos also is performed. 
This method allows better documentation of fertilization 
but to some extent compromises the objective of 
the GIFT procedure. 

ZYGOTE OR TUBAL EMBRYO TRANSFER 

The placement of fertilized oocytes into the fallopian 
tubes (zygote intrafallopian transfer, or ZIFT) or the 
placement of cleaving embryos into the fallopian tubes 
(tubal embryo transfer, or TET) allows fertilization to be 
confirmed while taking advantage of the tubal environment 
for part of the early development of the embryo. 
The success rates for these two procedures theoretically 
should be higher than that of IVF, but the rate was the 
same as the rate for IVF in 1997 (28% for ZIFT and TET 
versus 27.9% for IVF). Two randomized studies in programs 
with good IVF success rates failed to find a difference 
in outcome with the tubal procedures. Transfer 
efficiency may be a factor with ZIFT and TET; probably, 
a small transfer volume and accurate placement are critical. 
Whether the increased cost and a second surgical pro-

INFERTILITY 147 

cedure are worthwhile depends on each program’s individual 
experience with these procedures. In one randomized 
study, TET achieved significantly better results with 
thawed frozen embryos. 

Over the past few years, attempts have been made to 
cannulate the tubes transcervically to deposit gametes or 
embryos into the fallopian tubes to avoid the need for 
laparoscopy and anesthesia. This procedure has had irregular 
and generally inferior results compared with standard 
GIFT or TET. 

OVUM DONATION 

Guidelines for women who should receive oocyte 
gametes include premature menopause attributable to 
ovarian failure (72), surgical removal of the ovaries, and 
gonadal dysgenesis (66). Other accepted indications 
include the need to avoid transmission of a genetic defect 
and the desire to increase the chance of establishing a 
pregnancy in women with poor oocyte quality because of 
advanced maternal age, among other factors. 

PATIENT SELECTION AND PREPARATION OF THE 
DONOR AND RECIPIENT 

The ideal donor is 32 years of age or younger, because 
outcomes are reduced after that age (73). Proven fertility 
is also a favorable factor in donors. The donor should 
undergo a general medical history and a physical examination, 
including a gynecologic examination, cervical 
cytology studies, pelvic ultrasonography, and testing for 
cystic fibrosis, to rule out underlying pathologic conditions 
of the reproductive system. Infectious disease 
screening to rule out hepatitis B and hepatitis C, HIV 
infection, and syphilis also is required. Donors, whether 
anonymous or known, also must undergo a careful 
psychologic evaluation and legal counseling to make 
them fully aware of the legal situation in their jurisdiction. 
They essentially abdicate any and all rights over their 
gametes. Donors may be compensated for their time and 
effort but may not be paid for their oocytes. They should 
be informed of the risks of medications and of the 
oocyte retrieval process, and this discussion should be 
documented. 

Medical preparation of the patient for the procedure 
should include a standard COH regimen in preparation 
for ART, which may include therapy with a GnRH agonist 
to institute pituitary down-regulation, followed by 
gonadotropin therapy, ultrasonography, and endocrine 
monitoring of follicular development. Oocyte aspiration 
guided by transvaginal ultrasonography is performed 
approximately 34–36 hours after hCG administration. As 
in customary IVF protocols, a GnRH antagonist may be 
used. 

The recipient and partner should undergo psychologic 
and legal counseling. Preparation of the recipient may 
include down-regulation with GnRH agonist therapy to 
prevent spontaneous ovarian activity from interfering 


148 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

with timely endometrial maturation, as well as to aid in 
synchronization with the donor (74), unless ovarian failure 
with no spontaneous ovarian activity has been clearly 
documented. The endometrium is stimulated with oral or 
transdermal estrogen in graduated doses and monitored 
with transvaginal ultrasonography to ensure an adequate 
response. Progesterone supplementation is started before 
embryo replacement, usually on the day after the donor 
receives hCG. Some investigators perform endometrial 
biopsies in a “mock” cycle to ensure an adequate 
endometrial response before the actual cycle of replacement. 
A natural cycle may be used, and embryos obtained 
from the donated oocytes and partner’s sperm may be 
transferred fresh or after cryopreservation. 

EMBRYO REPLACEMENT 

Embryo replacement is performed 2–5 days after oocyte 
insemination. The number of embryos replaced should be 
contingent on the donor’s age. Because donors are usually 
young and fertile, most often only two embryos are 
replaced. Gametes or embryos also can be placed into the 
fallopian tube. Remaining gametes can be fertilized, and 
embryos can be cryopreserved. The average delivery rate 
in patients who received donated eggs in 1997 was 40%. 

CARE OF THE DONOR AFTER EMBRYO TRANSFER 

Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome is a potential risk 
after embryo transfer that must not be overlooked. 
Donors at particularly increased risk include those with a 
maximal estradiol level greater than 3,000 pg/mL with a 
rapid rate of rising during COH associated with more 
than 30 aspirated ova. 

CARE OF THE RECIPIENT AFTER EMBRYO TRANSFER 

The recipient should continue exogenous estrogen and 
progesterone replacement therapy until pregnancy is confirmed; 
this replacement therapy then should be continued 
until placental hormone production is ensured. 
Estrogen therapy usually is discontinued at about 8 weeks 
of gestation, and progesterone therapy at about 12 weeks 
of gestation. Some pregnancies may be considered high 
risk on the basis of the recipient’s age rather than the 
mode of conception. If the donor is young, prenatal 
genetic testing is not necessary, although it still may be a 
consideration if ICSI was used. 

FUTURE DIRECTIONS IN 
INFERTILITY TREATMENT 

The dominant arena for major future developments in the 
treatment of infertility most likely will continue to be 
ART and its ancillary procedures and techniques. The 
ensuing discussion focuses on three major areas of IVF 
investigation: preimplantation genetic diagnosis, extended 
embryo culture, and oocyte and ovarian tissue cryopreservation. 


Preimplantation Genetic Diagnosis 

A single cell can be removed from the embryo and analyzed 
by various genetic techniques such as PCR or fluorescent 
in situ hybridization (75). These procedures allow 
the identification of genetically abnormal embryos. 
Couples with various genetic abnormalities thus can 
avoid their genetic transmission by ensuring the transfer 
of only genetically normal embryos (76). The removal of 
a single cell from a day 3 embryo does not appear to 
compromise its development. Preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis also has been used in older women to screen for 
aneuploid embryos. Although there is a possibility of discarding 
a genetically normal mosaic embryo that would 
have relegated that particular cell to the placenta, the 
technique has been shown to reduce the chance of 
miscarriage in these older women and may increase the 
ongoing pregnancy rate (77). Preimplantation genetic 
diagnosis is performed in relatively few programs and 
requires meticulous technique and experienced geneticists. 


Extended Embryo Culture 

The introduction of physiologically based sequential culture 
media has enhanced the in vitro development of 
human embryos to the blastocyst stage, permitting excellent 
pregnancy rates following the replacement of fewer 
conceptuses (65). Future research should further improve 
embryo growth; eventually, all embryos may be transferred 
at the blastocyst stage. Refinement of cryopreservation 
techniques will be required so that the cumulative 
pregnancy rate with fresh and frozen embryos can be 
superior to transfer and freezing on day 3. Improvements 
of culture conditions, such as the use of 5% oxygen, may 
improve the integrity of the inner-cell mass so that the 
risk of monozygotic twinning will no longer be increased. 

Oocyte and Ovarian Tissue 
Cryopreservation 

The cryopreservation of human sperm and embryos 
(zygote through blastocyst stages) is a standard adjunctive 
technique in the treatment of infertility. Pretreatment 
cryobanking of sperm has permitted the preservation of 
reproductive potential for men with diagnosed malignancies 
requiring gonadotoxic therapy, particularly therapy 
with alkylating agents or irradiation. Additionally, semen 
cryopreservation has facilitated treatment with donor 
inseminations and has enhanced the safety of this procedure 
through the ability to quarantine sperm. The cryopreservation 
of embryos following IVF has enhanced the 
efficiency of the procedure by allowing the storage of 
potentially viable supernumerary embryos for future 
embryo transfer procedures after the initial treatment 
cycle. 

Unfortunately, cryopreservation of human oocytes has 
been far less successful. For more than two decades, 


investigators have been exploring the effects of various 
freezing and thawing protocols on oocyte cryopreservation 
with only minimal improvement in survival and subsequent 
rates of development. The first human birth 
resulting from a cryopreserved oocyte was reported in 
1986 (78). To date, however, fewer than 30 pregnancies 
have been reported using cryopreserved oocytes, with 
very limited efficiency (on the order of a few percent). 
Current research efforts are focusing on the comparative 
efficacy of techniques such as slow freezing versus vitrification 
(rapid freezing after exposure of the oocyte to 
high concentrations of cryoprotectants, which reduce 
intracellular ice formation) and optimization of solute 
concentrations. Potential applications for oocyte cryopreservation 
include the preservation of future fertility in 
women requiring antineoplastic therapy (eg, bone marrow 
transplantation), banking of oocytes in an effort to 
offset the consequences of future reproductive aging, and 
enhanced efficiency and safety for oocyte donation. 

Ovarian tissue storage is an alternative approach that 
may confer particular advantages, especially for women 
or girls at risk for sterilization following chemotherapy or 
radiation therapy. This procedure could allow the preservation 
of a large number of oocytes that potentially could 
be grown to maturity and result in future pregnancies. 
Success in this area will require the development of reliable 
techniques for effecting in vitro maturation of 
oocytes from cryopreserved ovarian tissue; alternatively, 
xenografting of human ovarian tissue might prove effective 
in maintaining fertility potential. Laparoscopic transplantation 
of frozen, banked autologous ovarian tissue 
was recently described (79). In this case, successful ovulation 
from the transplanted tissue was documented following 
stimulation with gonadotropins. 

Ovarian tissue cryopreservation has the potential to 
extend a woman’s optimal fertility. Ultimately, the most 
common reason for ovarian tissue cryopreservation might 
be to preserve options for procreation while pursuing a 
career or until a life partner has been found. 

ETHICAL ISSUES 

Advances in technology have prompted most of the public’s 
ethical concerns about infertility treatment over the 
past 25 years. The most dramatic advance was the successful 
introduction of human IVF in 1978. Since then, a 
host of new technologies for assisting or modifying 
human reproduction have been introduced. 

Physicians, ethicists, and the public have raised many 
ethical questions in considering which procedures generally 
should be acceptable for couples and individuals. 
Any procedure or therapy should satisfy concerns about 
safety, efficacy, interests of the infertile couple or individual, 
interests of the children produced, interests of 
donors or surrogates, and social values. In general, a procedure 
is ethical if it is safe, effective, and nonexploitative 
and if the infertile individuals desire a child and can pro-

INFERTILITY 149 

vide a good and loving home (80). However, the complexity 
of ethical issues has increased with the use of 
third parties for assisted reproduction. Recently, the 
emergence of different techniques, such as somatic cell 
nuclear transfer to clone individuals, has raised new ethical 
concerns. 

The principles of biomedical ethics that are applied to 
all of medicine apply also to discussions of ethical issues 
in assisted reproduction (81). Respect for autonomy has 
become a central principle in the form of procreative liberty. 
It should be considered with other principles such as 
beneficence (ie, doing good, or balancing benefits and 
drawbacks to do the most overall good) and nonmaleficence 
(ie, doing no harm). Respecting the principle of 
justice may mean treating all patients fairly, but it also 
means acknowledging the inequities in access to reproductive 
technologies (Box Q). 

Ethical Issues Related to Procreative 
Liberty 

In the United States, there is a strong presumptive right to 
reproductive freedom. It has been argued that a couple’s 
or an individual’s choice to use technology to achieve 
reproductive goals should be respected, except when 
there is evidence of specific harm (82). 

Respect for procreative liberty suggests that requested 
services should be denied only after careful consideration. 
The physician or fertility practice, personal finances, 
and insurers now determine any limitations imposed on 
procreative liberty. In some cases, a physician’s duty to a 

BOX Q 
Ethical Principles 

Conflicting obligations in health care often can be clarified 
when the principles underlying them are identified and 
understood. The principles most often referred to in discussions 
about ethics include the following: 

Autonomy: Respect for the right of individual patients to 

make their own choices about their health care. 
Beneficence: The obligation to promote the well-being of 
others, balancing benefits and harms; the source of a 
physician’s obligation to act with due care. 

Justice: The right of individuals to claim what is due them 
based on certain personal properties or characteristics; 
justice requires strict avoidance of discrimination on the 
basis of race, color, religion, or national origin or any other 
basis that would constitute illegal discrimination. 

Nonmaleficence: The obligation to do no harm or injury; 
best known in the maxim Primum non nocere: “First, do 
no harm.” 


150 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

third party or to the welfare of potential offspring may 
prompt the physician to limit individual reproductive 
choice. Currently, the major reason to limit access is 
financial, with many patients unable to pay for assisted 
reproduction. 

Ethical Issues Related to Manipulation 
of Embryos 

MORAL STATUS OF THE EMBRYO 

Our society accepts a strong moral responsibility for the 
welfare of children after they are born. There are major 
differences expressed in our society, however, regarding 
abortion and the extent of our moral responsibilities to the 
embryo and the fetus as opposed to the needs of the pregnant 
woman who wants to terminate her pregnancy. With 
assisted reproduction, the moral status of the embryo is at 
the core of many ethical controversies (83). To some, the 
fertilized egg, from the moment of fertilization, has a 
strong moral claim to all the rights and protections of an 
infant after birth; these individuals object to reproductive 
technologies that involve the destruction or discarding of 
embryos. To others, the early embryo should have no 
moral status in view of the extreme waste that occurs in 
natural reproduction. Many others believe that the preimplantation 
embryo deserves special respect because it is a 
potential human, but not to the extent of a more fully 
developed fetus or child (84). 

DISCARDING OF “ABANDONED” EMBRYOS 

Although cryopreservation provides an effective mechanism 
for preserving excess embryos so that they can be 
used in other cycles, excess embryos ultimately are 
donated or discarded, in accord with the wishes of the 
couple. When a fertility program cannot contact a couple 
with stored embryos for 5 years, the ethics committee of 
the ASRM considers the embryos to be “abandoned” and 
supports their discard (85). However, many programs still 
hesitate to discard embryos, and large numbers of excess 
frozen embryos remain in storage. Each program must 
maintain an inventory of its patients’ cryopreserved 
embryos and be able to provide detailed information to 
each couple regarding their embryos. 

EMBRYO RESEARCH 

The use of human embryos in research has been controversial 
in the United States, and current law prohibits the 
use of federal funds for such research. In general, the 
arguments for and against the use of human embryos for 
research center on the moral status of the human embryo. 
Some argue that only embryos destined to be discarded 
should be used for research, whereas others feel that in 
select circumstances, the creation of new embryos for 
research purposes also should be allowed. 

RESEARCH WITH HUMAN EMBRYONIC STEM CELLS 

The discovery in 1998 of methods to isolate and culture 
pluripotent stem cells from human preimplantation blastocysts 
and aborted fetuses has re-ignited the controversy 
concerning embryo research in general. Stem cells in 
culture have the ability to develop into many specialized 
cells and tissues, which could provide new therapeutic 
options for a variety of nonreproductive disorders, as 
well as new methods to test drugs. The extent to which 
this debate continues may depend on political issues 
and on the availability of alternative sources for stem 
cells (86). 

Ethical Issues Related to Consent for 
Reproductive Technologies 

INFORMED CONSENT 

An informed consent discussion is essential for in vitro 
fertilization, as it is for other procedures in obstetrics and 
gynecology. Both partners should be counseled and 
should consent to the procedures. Expected success rates 
should not be overstated. The risks of the procedure, 
including the risk of multiple gestations, should be stated 
accurately. 

SUCCESS RATE REPORTING 

Effectiveness and competency always have been ethically 
required in the practice of medicine, but with IVF these 
issues have become public. In response to concerns about 
the inflated portrayal of success rates, federal law now 
requires that clinics report their success rates through the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 

RISKS OF REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGIES 

Adequate informed consent from the infertile couple concerning 
known and unknown risks has been considered 
essential. Unfortunately, the risks of reproductive technologies 
cannot be known until the techniques have been 
used clinically, and federally funded research on these 
procedures has been blocked since the initial development 
of IVF. Current techniques in assisted reproduction 
appear to be safer than initially anticipated. The major 
recognized risks are associated with OHSS and multiple 
gestations. However, with the introduction of each new 
technology—whether it is cryopreservation, ICSI, preimplantation 
embryo biopsy for diagnosis of genetic 
defects, or cloning—similar issues of safety and risk 
apply. How much work should precede a trial in humans 
remains an ethical, as well as a scientific, question. 

MULTIPLE GESTATIONS 

Multiple gestations have become one of the most troubling 
issues in the field of infertility, for their complica



INFERTILITY 151 

tions may jeopardize an infertile couple’s goal of having 
a healthy child. Because of fertility treatments, in the past 
20 years there have been dramatic increases in the numbers 
of twins, triplets, and higher-order multiple gestations. 
High-order multiple gestations seem to be an 
unavoidable risk of gonadotropin use for ovulation induction, 
but many couples choose this treatment instead of 
IVF because of its lower cost. In IVF, multiple pregnancies 
can be limited by reducing the numbers of embryos 
transferred in a given cycle. However, multiple embryos 
are transferred to enhance the success of the process; 
when current guidelines are followed, the number of 
fetuses usually should not exceed two. Some couples who 
are desperate to conceive request the transfer of larger 
numbers of embryos than are recommended by guidelines 
or by their physicians, even when they would not 
consent to selective termination under any circumstances. 
In this situation, the physician should ensure that the 
patient truly understands the consequences of a multiple 
gestation. The physician may sometimes feel compelled 
to respect the choices of an informed patient, even when 
limiting the number of embryos to be transferred could 
have benefited the unborn children. 

The introduction of blastocyst culture techniques 
sometimes allows the transfer of fewer, but highly selected, 
embryos. The ultimate goal is to transfer one highly 
selected blastocyst in order to maintain acceptable pregnancy 
rates while virtually eliminating IVF-related multiple 
gestations. The ACOG Committee on Ethics has 
emphasized the importance of prevention of multiple 
pregnancies, but it also states that physicians should 
counsel patients on the availability of nonselective 
embryo reduction when choosing a fertility procedure or 
when a multiple gestation does occur (87). 

Ethical Issues Concerning the Role of 
the Health Care Provider 

Health care providers have a duty to care for their own 
patients and to respect their autonomy in reproductive 
decisions. The extent to which providers also have a duty 
to care for other parties involved in reproduction— 
including partners, potential offspring, donors, and surrogates—
remains controversial. 

Providers of fertility services may be asked to provide 
services that involve the creation of a family but that are not 
considered treatment of infertility. Sperm selection or even 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis for sex selection for couples 
with gender preference is one example (88). Donor 
insemination of single or lesbian women and surrogacy for 
gay couples are other such services. Although the ethics 
committee of the ASRM has accepted that nontraditional 
arrangements are compatible with the right to reproduce 
(83), it has provided little guidance on how to deal with the 
complex ethical ramifications of such arrangements. In general, 
physicians address these issues on an ad hoc basis. 

Ethical Issues Involving Third-Party 
Reproduction 

With the use of reproductive technologies now generally 
accepted, the simplest case that raises few ethical problems 
would be providing services for a married heterosexual 
couple to overcome infertility without the need for 
donation of gametes. The introduction of a third party 
into reproduction, as occurs in sperm, egg, or embryo 
donation or in surrogate relationships, has increased the 
number and complexity of ethical issues. 

RISKS TO DONORS OR SURROGATES 

Oocyte donation requires ovarian stimulation with 
gonadotropins, sedation, and a surgical procedure, so the 
question of medical risks to the donor arises. A surrogate 
assumes the risks of pregnancy. In both circumstances, 
the short- and long-term health risks must be balanced 
against the benefit to another party. Accurate informed 
consent obtained by the physician of the mother and 
avoidance of exploitation are essential. 

COMPENSATION TO DONORS OR SURROGATES 

An argument has been made for not allowing any payments 
to donors under the assumption that human tissues 
should not be sold; this is the case in organ donation. 
Payments for time and inconvenience are considered 
appropriate, but there is often disagreement over an 
appropriate payment. In the past, large sums of money 
have been offered to oocyte donors thought to have desirable 
characteristics. Ethical issues include concerns for 
exploitation and devaluation of human life by treating 
eggs as commodities. In 2000, the ethics committee of the 
ASRM recommended that a limit of $5,000 be placed on 
compensation to ovum donors (89). No similar guidelines 
are available for surrogates, but some states currently outlaw 
any payment to them. 

DISCLOSURE VERSUS PRIVACY IN GAMETE DONATION 

The ethical and practice guidelines in the United States 
have favored anonymous gamete donation, because it 
respects the infertile couple’s right to privacy while limiting 
the obligations of the donor (83). The issue of disclosure—
what the resulting children should know or not 
know about their genetic history and the details of their 
conception—remains controversial. Some believe that 
nondisclosure protects the child from psychologic harm 
and from the frustration of wanting additional unobtainable 
information, such as the identity of the donor. Proponents 
of disclosure believe that all children have a right to know 
their genetic history. Currently, there are no outcome data 
to suggest that either disclosure or nondisclosure would be 
harmful to the children resulting from gamete donation. 


152 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

SURROGACY 

Surrogacy arrangements are available when an individual 
who desires children has no uterus, has an uncorrectable 
uterine disorder, or cannot carry a child for health reasons. 
The surrogate may donate her egg or eggs to establish 
the pregnancy, or she may carry a pregnancy created 
in vitro with gametes from the infertile couple (gestational 
surrogacy). In some instances, mothers, sisters, or 
friends have volunteered to carry children. 

Some states have made payment to surrogates illegal 
in order to avoid concerns about exploitation. Some 
prominent cases reported in the press have involved surrogates 
who refused to surrender the children. Ethics 
committees have recognized the complex and controversial 
nature of surrogate arrangements and have provided 
guidelines for physicians faced with requests for surrogacy 
(83, 90). In the United States, there remain legal and 
ethical questions about whether contracts for surrogacy 
can or should be enforced. 

Ethical Issues Related to New 
Definitions of Reproduction 

Some reproductive technologies are troubling to a wide 
segment of society because of concerns about human dignity 
and about what is natural. In fact, one of the major initial 
concerns about IVF was that conception outside the 
body is not natural. What is natural and accepted in society 
seems to be based on balancing considerations of the 
health and social benefits of new technologies with social 
costs and cultural attitudes. These considerations evolve 
with time. Gradually, the notions of conception outside the 
body (IVF), then conception separated in time from pregnancy 
(cryopreservation), and then the involvement of 
third parties have become generally accepted in the United 
States. Some newer procedures, such as postmenopausal 
reproduction, posthumous reproduction, and germline 
manipulation and cloning, are more troubling because 
they challenge society’s definition of reproduction. 

POSTMENOPAUSAL REPRODUCTION 

With women in their 50s and 60s reporting successful 
pregnancies through oocyte donation, arguments about 
nature, health risk, and life expectancy have arisen. The 
ethics committee of the ASRM has discouraged reproduction 
after the natural age of menopause, arguing that infertility 
should be the natural characteristic of the menopause 
and that the risks of pregnancy in the postmenopausal 
woman are uncertain (85). However, with men able to 
reproduce well into their 60s, 70s, and beyond, it has been 
argued that denying ovum donation to postmenopausal 
women constitutes gender discrimination. 

POSTHUMOUS REPRODUCTION 

Procreative rights generally are thought to apply to living 
human beings. However, with the advent of artificial 

insemination, a dying man’s sperm can be stored and 
used to impregnate his wife after his death. Sperm (and in 
the near future, ova as well) can be retrieved and frozen 
immediately after a person’s death for later use by a 
spouse or family member. Such requests often are cast as 
attempts to memorialize a loved one. 

The ethical issues include whether preterminal consent 
should be required and what the possible impact of 
posthumous reproduction on the resulting child is. The 
ethics committee of the ASRM supports posthumous 
reproduction in some circumstances and holds the physician 
responsible to ensure that involved parties are 
informed and counseled and that the appropriate consent 
has been obtained (85). In general, courts have held that 
consent by both parties is required for reproduction. 
When consent prior to death is not recorded, cases have 
been judged on individual circumstances. 

ENHANCEMENT OF GENETIC ATTRIBUTES 

Positive “eugenics” is the use of techniques to select for 
or modify traits that are thought to be desirable. Current 
examples of this practice are cryobanks providing the 
sperm of Nobel Prize winners, as well as sperm or 
embryo selection to conceive a child of a desired gender. 
In the future, gene manipulation might produce desirable 
traits or eliminate undesirable traits. 

The conflict in this situation involves honoring the 
rights of the individual to choose or manipulate the traits 
of offspring while considering the extent to which society 
wishes to limit these practices. The ethics committee of 
the ASRM has opposed sex selection for nonmedical reasons, 
arguing that these techniques have the potential to 
undermine equality between the sexes (90). The committee 
recently has given cautious support to the nonmedical 
use of sperm sorting for sex selection, but only to increase 
the chances of having a child of the gender opposite that 
of an existing child, and only after the techniques for gender 
selection have been proven to be safe and effective 
(88, 92). Currently, there are no laws in the United States 
that limit an individual’s choice to use such technology. It 
is the physician or clinic that supports or declines a 
request for services. 

CLONING 

Ever since success in cloning sheep was reported in 1997, 
concerns about the application of this technology to 
humans has prompted a moratorium on federal funding of 
research on cloning and a request for a voluntary ban on 
human cloning in the private sector. The position of the 
ASRM is that reproductive cloning of humans by somatic 
cell nuclear transfer is unethical because there is an 
insufficient scientific basis to support it, and it is unlikely 
to be safe (93). 

Opponents of reproductive cloning also have argued 
that the replication of a person does not show adequate 
respect for the individual. Supporters of reproductive 


INFERTILITY 153 

cloning argue that the right to procreate extends to 13. Schwarzler P, Concin H, Bosch H, Berlinger A, 

cloning, and that cloning is not unethical per se because 
Wohlgenannt K, Collins WP, et al. An evaluation of sonohysterography 
and diagnostic hysteroscopy for the assess


there is a model for cloning in nature (ie, identical twins). 
ment of intrauterine pathology. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 

Furthermore, it is well established that each identical twin 

1998;11:337–342

has a unique identity. However, many supporters and 


( ) 
opponents of reproductive cloning agree that human non-14. Westrom L. Incidence, prevalence, and trends of acute 
pelvic inflammatory disease and its consequences in indus


reproductive cloning should be allowed because of the 
trialized countries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1980;138:

potential benefits to society. 

880–892 


( ) 
15. Pittaway DE, Winfield AC, Maxson W, Daniell J, Herbert 
References 
C, Wentz AC. Prevention of acute pelvic inflammatory disease 
after hysterosalpingography: efficacy of doxycycline 

1. American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Optimal 
prophylaxis. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1983;147:623–626 

evaluation of the infertile female. ASRM Practice 
( ) 
Committee Report: A Committee Opinion. Birmingham, 16. Valle RF. Tubal cannulation. Obstet Gynecol Clin North 
Alabama: ASRM, 2000. Available at http://www.asrm.org/ Am 1995;22:519–540 
( ) 
Medical Practice/eval_infertile_female.pdf. Retrieved 


17. Ubaldi F, Wisanto A, Camus M, Tournaye H, Clasen K, 
October 10, 2001 
Devroey P. The role of transvaginal ultrasonography in the 

2. Wilcox AJ, Weinberg CR, Baird DD. Timing of sexual detection of pelvic pathologies in the infertility workup. 
intercourse in relation to ovulation. Effects on the probabil-Hum Reprod 1998;13:330–333 
( ) 
ity of conception, survival of the pregnancy, and sex of the 


18. Van Voorhis BJ, Sparks AE, Allen BD, Stovall DW, Syrop 
baby. N Engl J Med 1995;333:1517–1521 
CH, Chapler FK. Cost-effectiveness of infertility treat( 
) 
ments: a cohort study. Fertil Steril 1997;67:830–836 

3. American Society for Reproductive Medicine, American 
Urological Association. Report on optimal evaluation of the 
( ) 
19. Palermo GD, Cohen J, Rosenwaks Z. Intracytoplasmic 
infertile male. An AUA Best Practice Policy and ASRM 
sperm injection: a powerful tool to overcome fertilization 
Practice Committee Report. Committee Opinion. Birming


failure. Fertil Steril 1996;65:899–908 
( ) 
ham, Alabama: ASRM; Baltimore: AUA, 2001 


20. Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Alikani M, Adler A, Reing AM, 
4. World Health Organization. WHO laboratory manual for 
Cohen J, et al. Micropuncture retrieval of epididymal sperm 
the examination of human semen and sperm-cervical mucus 


with in vitro fertilization: importance of in vitro microinteraction. 
4th ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge manipulation techniques. Urology 1995;46:238–241 
( ) 
University Press, 1999 


21. Schlegel PN, Palermo GD, Goldstein M, Menendez S, 
5. Pisarska MD, Casson PR, Cisneros PL, Lamb DJ, Lipshultz 
Zaninovic N, Veeck LL, et al. Testicular sperm extraction 
LI, Buster JE, et al. Fertilization after standard in vitro fer-with intracytoplasmic sperm injection for nonobstructive 
tilization versus intracytoplasmic sperm injection in subfer-azoospermia. Urology 1997;49:435–440 
tile males using sibling oocytes. Fertil Steril 1999;71: 
( ) 
22. Shenfield F, Doyle P, Valentine A, Steele SJ, Tan SL. Effects 
627–632 

of age, gravidity and male infertility status on cumulative 


( ) 
6. Jarow JP. 
Transrectal ultrasonography of infertile men. conception rates following artificial insemination with 
Fertil Steril 1993;60:1035–1039 
cryopreserved donor semen: analysis of 2998 cycles of 
( ) 
treatment in one centre over 10 years. Hum Reprod 1993; 

7. Anguiano A, Oates RD, Amos JA, Dean M, Gerrard B, 
8:60–64

Stewart C, et al. Congenital bilateral absence of the vas def( 
) 
erens. A primarily genital form of cystic fibrosis. JAMA 23. Revised minimum standards for in vitro fertilization, 
1992;267:1794–1797 


gamete intrafallopian transfer, and related procedures. The 
( ) 
American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Fertil Steril 

8. De Braekeleer M, Dao TN. Cytogenetic studies in male 
1998;70 (Suppl 2):1S–5S

infertility: a review. Hum Reprod 1991;6:245–250 


( ) 
( ) 
24. Sagle MA, Hamilton-Fairley D, Kiddy DS, Franks S. A 
9. Pryor JL, Kent-First M, Muallem A, Van Bergen AH, 
comparative, randomized study of low-dose human 

Nolten WE, Meisner L, et al. Microdeletions in the Y chro


menopausal gonadotropin and follicle-stimulating hormone

mosome of infertile men. N Engl J Med 1997;336:534–539 

in women with polycystic ovarian syndrome. Fertil Steril 


(button) 
10. Batista MC, Cartledge TP, Merino MJ, Axiotis C, Platia 
1991;55: 56–60 
MP, Merriam GR, et al. Midluteal phase endometrial biop( 
) 
25. Filicori M, Flamigni C, Meriggiola MC, Cognigni G, 
sy does not accurately predict luteal function. Fertil Steril 

Valdiserri A, Ferrari P, et al. Ovulation induction with pul


1993;59:294–300 

satile gonadotropin-releasing hormone: technical modali


( ) 
11. Sharara FI, Scott RT Jr, Seifer DB. The detection of dimin- 
ties and clinical perspectives. Fertil Steril 1991;56:1–13 
ished ovarian reserve in infertile women. Am J Obstet 
( ) 
26. Velazquez EM, Mendoza S, Hamer T, Sosa F, Glueck CJ. 
Gynecol 1998;179:804–812 

Metformin therapy in polycystic ovary syndrome reduces 


( ) 
12. Oei SG, Helmerhorst FM, Bloemenkamp KW, Hollants FA, 
hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance, hyperandrogenemia, 
Meerpoel DE, Keirse MJ. Effectiveness of the postcoital and systolic blood pressure, while facilitating normal 
test: randomized controlled trial. BMJ 1998;317:502–505 
(button) 
( ) 
menses and pregnancy. Metabolism 1994;43:647–654 


154 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

27. Vandermolen DT, Ratts VS, Evans WS, Stovall DW, Kauma 
SW, Nestler JE. Metformin increases the ovulatory rate and 
pregnancy rate from clomiphene citrate in patients with 
polycystic ovary syndrome who are resistant to clomiphene 
citrate alone. Fertil Steril 2001;75:310–315 
( ) 
28. Eldar-Geva 
T, Meagher S, Healy DL, MacLachlan V, 
Breheny S, Wood C. Effect of intramural, subserosal, and 
submucosal uterine fibroids on the outcome of assisted 
reproductive technology treatment. Fertil Steril 1998;70: 
687–691 
( ) 
29. March CM. Intrauterine adhesions. Obstet Gynecol Clin 
North Am 1995;22:491–505 
( ) 
30. Goldenberg M, Sivan E, Sharabi Z, Mashiach S, Lipitz S, 
Seidman DS. Reproductive outcome following hysteroscopic 
management of intrauterine septum and adhesions. 
Hum Reprod 1995;10:2663–2665 
( ) 
31. Schlaff WD, Hassiakos DK, Damewood MD, Rock JA. 
Neosalpingostomy for distal tubal obstruction: prognostic 
factors and impact of surgical technique. Fertil Steril 
1990;54:984–990 
( ) 
32. Benadiva CA, Kligman I, Davis O, Rosenwaks Z. In vitro 
fertilization versus tubal surgery: is pelvic reconstructive 
surgery obsolete? Fertil Steril 1995;64:1051–1061 
( ) 
33. Penzias AS, DeCherney AH. Is there ever a role for tubal 
surgery? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996;174:1218–1221; discussion 
1221–1223 
( ) 
34. Zeyneloglu HB, Arici A, Olive 
DL. Adverse effects of 
hydrosalpinx on pregnancy rates after in vitro fertilizationembryo 
transfer. Fertil Steril 1998;70:492–499 
( ) 
35. Dubuisson JB, Chapron C, Nos C, Morice P, Aubriot FX, 
Garnier P. Sterilization reversal: fertility results. Hum 
Reprod 1995;10:1145–1151 
( ) 
36. Marcoux S, Maheux R, Berube S. Laparoscopic surgery in 
infertile women with minimal or mild endometriosis. 
Canadian Collaborative Group on Endometriosis. N Engl J 
Med 1997;337:217–222 
( ) 
37. Multiple gestation pregnancy. The ESHRE Capri Workshop 
Group. Hum Reprod 2000;15:1856–1864 
( ) 
38. Vollenhoven BJ, Healy DL. Short- and long-term effects of 
ovulation induction. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 
1998;27:903–914 
( ) 
39. Modan B, Ron E, Lerner-Geva L, Blumstein T, Menczer J, 
Rabinovici J, et al. Cancer incidence in a cohort of infertile 
women. Am J Epidemiol 1998;147:1038–1042 
( ) 
40. Imani B, Eijkemans MJ, teVelde ER, Habbema JD, Fauser 
BC. Predictors of patients remaining anovulatory during 
clomiphene citrate induction of ovulation in normogonadotropic 
oligoamenorrheic infertility. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1998;83:2361–2365 
( ) 
41. Tadokoro N, Vollenhoven B, Clark S, Baker G, Kovacs G, 
Burger H, et al. Cumulative pregnancy rates in couples with 
anovulatory infertility compared with unexplained infertility 
in an ovulation induction programme. Hum Reprod 
1997;12:1939–1944 
( ) 
42. Whelan JG III, Vlahos NF. The ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome. Fertil Steril 2000;73:883–896 
( ) 
43. Geva E, Jaffe RB. Role of vascular endothelial growth factor 
in ovarian physiology and pathology. Fertil Steril 
2000;74:429–438 
( ) 
44. Mosgaard BJ, Lidegaard O, Kjaer SK, Schou G, Andersen 
AN. Ovarian stimulation and borderline ovarian tumors: a 
case-control study. Fertil Steril 1998;70:1049–1055 
( ) 
45. Schoemaker J, Braat DDM. Pulsatile gonadotropin-releasing 
hormone therapy. In: Adashi EY, Rock JA, Rosenwaks 
Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, surgery, and technology. 
Vol 1. Philadelphia: Lippincott–Raven, 1996:1093– 
1106 
46. Molitch ME. Medical treatment of prolactinomas. 
Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 1999;28:143–169, vii 
( ) 
47. Verhelst J, Abs R, Maiter D, van den Bruel A, Vandeweghe 
M, Velkeniers B, et al. Cabergoline in the treatment of 
hyperprolactinemia: a study in 455 patients. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 1999;84:2518–2522 
( ) 
48. Conner P, Fried G. Hyperprolactinemia; etiology, diagnosis 
and treatment alternatives. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 
1998;77:249–262 
( ) 
49. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Evans WS, Pasquali R. Effects 
of metformin on spontaneous and clomiphene-induced ovulation 
in the polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 
1998;338:1876–1880 
( ) 
50. Vandermolen DT, Ratts VS, Evans WS, Stovall DW, Kauma 
SW, Nestler JE. Metformin increases the ovulatory rate and 
pregnancy rate from clomiphene citrate in patients with 
polycystic ovary syndrome who are resistant to clomiphene 
citrate alone. Fertil Steril 2001;75:310–315 
( ) 
51. Velazquez E, Acosta A, Mendoza SG. Menstrual cyclicity 
after metformin therapy in polycystic ovary syndrome. 
Obstet Gynecol 1997;90:392–395 
( ) 
52. Nestler JE, Jakubowicz DJ, Reamer P, Gunn RD, Allan G. 
Ovulatory and metabolic effects of D-chiro-inositol in the 
polycystic ovary syndrome. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
1314–1320 
( ) 
53. Van Voorhis BJ, Sparks AE, Allen BD, Stovall DW, Syrop 
CH, Chapler FK. Cost-effectiveness of infertility treatments: 
a cohort study. Fertil Steril 1997;67:830–836 
( ) 
54. Zayed F, Lenton EA, Cooke ID. Comparison between stimulated 
in-vitro fertilization and stimulated intrauterine 
insemination for the treatment of unexplained and mild 
male factor infertility. Hum Reprod 1997;12:2408–2413 
( ) 
55. Gleicher N, Oleske DM, Tur-Kaspa I, Vidali A, Karande V. 
Reducing the risk of high-order multiple pregnancy after 
ovarian stimulation with gonadotropins. N Engl J Med 
2000;343:2–7 
( ) 
56. Meldrum DR. In vitro fertilization and embryo transfer. In: 
Sciarra JJ, ed. Gynecology and obstetrics. Vol 5. Philadelphia: 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2001:1–16 
57. Steptoe PC, Edwards RG. Birth after reimplantation of a 
human embryo. Lancet 1978;2(8085):366 
( ) 
58. Toner JP, Philput CB, Jones, GS, Muasher SJ. Basal follicle-
stimulating hormone level is a better predictor of in 

vitro fertilization performance than age. Fertil Steril 
1991; 55:784–791 


( ) 
59. Frattarelli JL, Bergh PA, Drews MR, Sharara FI, Scott RT. 
Evaluation of basal estradiol levels in assisted reproductive 
technology cycles. Fertil Steril 2000;74:518–524 
( ) 
60. Licciardi F, 
Grifo JA, Rosenwaks Z, Witkin SS. 
Relationship between antibodies to Chlamydia trachomatis 
and spontaneous abortion following in vitro fertilization. J 
Assist Reprod Genet 1992;9:207–210 
( ) 
61. Camus E, Poncelet C, Goffinet F, Wainer B, Merlet F, 
Nisand I, et al. Pregnancy rates after in-vitro fertilization in 
cases of tubal infertility with and without hydrosalpinx: a 
meta-analysis of published comparative studies. Hum 
Reprod 1999;14:1243–1249 
( ) 
62. Surrey ES, Schoolcraft WB. Laparoscopic management of 
hydrosalpinges before in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer: 
salpingectomy versus proximal tubal occlusion. Fertil Steril 
2001;75: 612–617 
( ) 
63. Mansour R, Aboulghar M, Serour G. Dummy embryo transfer: 
a technique that minimizes the problems of embryo 
transfer and improves the pregnancy rate in human in vitro 
fertilization. Fertil Steril 1990;54:678–681 
( ) 
64. Hughes EG, Fedorkow DM, Daya S, Sagle MA, Van de 
Koppel P, Collins JA. The routine use of gonadotropinreleasing 
hormone agonists prior to in vitro fertilization and 
gamete intrafallopian transfer: a meta-analysis of randomized 
controlled trials. Fertil Steril 1992;58:888–896 
( ) 
65. Gardner DK, Schoolcraft WB, Wagley L, Schlenker 
T, 
Stevens J, Hesla J. A prospective randomized trial of blastocyst 
culture and transfer in in-vitro fertilization. Hum 
Reprod 1998;13:3434–3440 
( ) 
66. American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Guidelines 
on number of embryos transferred. Birmingham, Alabama: 
ASRM, 1999. Available at http://www.asrm.org/Media/ 
Practice/No Embryos Transferred.pdf. Retrieved October 
10, 2001 
67. Assisted reproductive technology in the United States: 1998 
results generated from the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine/Society for Assisted Reproductive 
Technology Registry. Fertil Steril 2002;77:18–31 
( ) 
68. Cohen J, 
Alikani M, Trowbridge J, Rosenwaks Z. 
Implantation enhancement by selective assisted hatching 
using zona drilling of human embryos with poor prognosis. 
Hum Reprod 1992;7:685–691 
( ) 
69. Palermo G, Joris H, Devroey P, 
Van Steirteghem AC. 
Pregnancies after intracytoplasmic injection of single spermatozoon 
into an oocyte. Lancet 1992;340:17–18 
( ) 
70. Aboulghar H, Aboulghar M, Mansour R, Serour G, Amin Y, 
Al-Inany H. A prospective controlled study of karyotyping 
for 430 consecutive babies conceived through intracyto-
INFERTILITY 155 

72. Sauer MV, Paulson RJ, Macaso TM, Francis MM, Lobo 
RA. Oocyte and pre-embryo donation to women with ovarian 
failure: an extended clinical trial. Fertil Steril 
1991;55:39–43 
( ) 
73. Faber BM, Mercan R, Hamacher P, Muasher SJ, Toner JP. 
The impact of an egg donor’s age and her prior fertility on 
recipient pregnancy outcome. Fertil Steril 1997;68:370–372 
74. Navot D, 
Scott RT, Droesch K, Veeck LL, Liu HC, 
Rosenwaks Z. The window of embryo transfer and the efficiency 
of human conception in vitro. Fertil Steril 1991; 
55:114–118 
( ) 
75. 
Handyside AH, Kontogianni EH, Hardy K, Winston RM. Pregnancies 
from biopsied human preimplantation embryos sexed 
( ) 
by Y-specific DNA amplification. Nature 1990;344:768–770 


( ) 
76. Geraedts J, Handyside A, Harper J, Liebaers J, Sermon K, 
Staessen C, et al. ESHRE preimplantation genetic diagnosis 
(PGD) consortium: data collection II (May 2000). Hum 
Reprod 2000;15:2673–2683 
( ) 
77. Munne S, Magli C, Cohen J, 
Morton P, Sadowy S, 
Gianaroli L, et al. Positive outcome after preimplantation 
diagnosis of aneuploidy in human embryos. Hum Reprod 
1999;14:2191–2199 
( ) 
78. Chen C. Pregnancy after human oocyte cryopreservation. 
Lancet 1986;1(8486):884–886 
( ) 
79. Oktay K, Karlikaya G. Ovarian function after transplantation 
of frozen, banked autologous ovarian tissue. N Engl J 
Med 2000;342:1919 
( ) 
80. Ryan KJ. Ethical and legal implications. In: Adashi EY, 
Rock JA, Rozenwaks Z, eds. Reproductive endocrinology, 
surgery, and technology. Vol 2. Philadelphia: Lippincott– 
Raven, 1996:1942–1951 
81. Beauchamp TL, Childress JF. Principles of biomedical 
ethics. 5th ed. New York: Oxford University Press, 2001 
82. Robertson JA. Children of choice: freedom and the new 
reproductive technologies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 1994 
83. Ethical considerations of assisted reproductive technologies. 
By the Ethics Committee of the American Fertility 
Society. Fertil Steril 1994;62:1S–125S 
( ) 
84. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Preembryo research: history, scientific background, and 
ethical considerations. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:69–78 
85. Ethical considerations of assisted reproductive technologies. 
The Ethics Committee of the American Society for 
Reproductive Medicine. Fertil Steril 1997;67(5 Suppl 1): 
i–iii, 1S–9S 
( ) 
86. Edwards BE, Gearhart JD, Wallach EE. The human pluripotent 
stem cell: impact on medicine and society. Fertil Steril 
plasmic sperm injection. Fertil Steril 2001;76:249–253 


( ) 
2000;74(1):1–7 


( ) 
71. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
87. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Preconception and prenatal carrier screening for cystic Nonselective embryo reduction: ethical guidance for the 
fibrosis: clinical and laboratory guidelines. Washington, obstetrician–gynecologist. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gyne-
DC: ACOG, 2001 cology. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:53–56 

156 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

88. Sex selection and preimplantation genetic diagnosis. Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 1999;72:595–598 
( ) 
89. Financial incentives in recruitment of oocyte donors. Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2000;74:216–220 
( ) 
90. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Responsibilities of physicians regarding surrogate motherhood. 
In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. Washington, 
DC: ACOG, 2002:79–84 
91. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Sex 
selection. In: Ethics in obstetrics and gynecology. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2002:85–88 
92. Preconception gender selection for nonmedical reasons. 
Ethics Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2001;75:861–864 
( ) 
93. Human somatic cell nuclear transfer (cloning). Ethics 
Committee of the American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine. Fertil Steril 2000;74:873–876 
( ) 
Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 


Recurrent pregnancy loss is a profound personal tragedy 
to couples seeking parenthood and a formidable clinical 
challenge to their physicians. Whereas spontaneous abortion 
occurs in approximately 15% of clinically diagnosed 
pregnancies of women of reproductive age, recurrent 
pregnancy loss occurs in approximately 1–2% of this 
same population (1). Great strides have been made in 
characterizing the incidence and diversity of this heterogeneous 
disorder. A definite cause of pregnancy loss can 
be established in approximately 60% of couples after a 
thorough evaluation (2). A complete evaluation includes 
investigations into genetic, endocrinologic, anatomic, 
immunologic, microbiologic, and iatrogenic causes. In 
cases of idiopathic recurrent miscarriage, intense supportive 
care is indicated; successful outcomes will occur 
in more than two thirds of all couples (3). 

DEFINITION OF PREGNANCY LOSS 

The traditional definition of the term recurrent pregnancy 
loss included couples with three or more consecutive spontaneous 
pregnancy losses. However, several recent studies 
have indicated that the risk of recurrent miscarriage after 
two successive losses is similar to the risk of miscarriage in 
women after three successive losses; thus, couples with 
two or more consecutive spontaneous miscarriages warrant 
an evaluation to determine the etiology of their pregnancy 
losses (4, 5). The term miscarriage applies to any loss 
before 20 weeks of gestation; it can be divided further into 
embryonic losses that occur before the ninth week of gestation 
and fetal losses that occur between week 9 and week 

20. Couples with primary recurrent loss have never had a 
previous viable infant, whereas those with secondary 
recurrent loss have previously delivered a pregnancy 
beyond 20 weeks and then had subsequent losses. 
RECURRENCE RISK 

The risk of recurrence of pregnancy loss depends on several 
factors, including maternal age, the number of previous 
miscarriages, and the history of previous term 
deliveries. Recent studies evaluating the frequency of 
pregnancy loss, based on highly sensitive tests for quantitative 
hCG, indicate that the total clinical and preclinical 
losses in women aged 20–30 years represent 
approximately 25%; the loss rate in women 40 years or 
older is at least double that figure (6, 7). Similarly, having 
a greater number of prior losses is associated with an 
increased risk of recurrence in most studies. A patient 
with two prior losses has a recurrence risk of at least 
25%. After four losses, that figure at least doubles. Most 
studies have indicated a more favorable prognosis in 
women with secondary recurrent pregnancy loss. 

ETIOLOGY OF RECURRENT 
PREGNANCY LOSS 

Genetic Causes 

Structural abnormalities in parental chromosomes occur 
in 3–5% of couples with recurrent pregnancy loss. The 
most common chromosomal abnormality is a balanced 
translocation, an event that occurs at meiosis with an 
abnormal genetic complement in the germ cells. In recurrent 
pregnancy loss, this abnormality is found more frequently 
in the female partner, at a ratio of 2:1 up to 3:1 
(female:male). Other parental chromosomal abnormalities, 
such as robertsonian translocations, inversions, sex 
chromosome aneuploidies, and supernumerary chromosomes, 
occur less frequently. Management includes 
genetic counseling, prenatal diagnosis by amniocentesis 


or chorionic villus sampling, the use of donor gametes, or 
preimplantation genetic diagnosis. 

Endocrinologic Causes 

LUTEAL PHASE DEFICIENCY 

Progesterone produced from the corpus luteum is necessary 
for successful implantation and maintenance of early 
pregnancy until progesterone production by the placenta 
takes over. Luteal phase deficiency has been described as 
a cause of recurrent pregnancy loss, although evidence is 
lacking to document this association. Classically, diagnosis 
was obtained after an endometrial biopsy on day 26 or 
day 27 of a cycle that was more than 2 days out of phase. 
More recently, a midluteal progesterone concentration of 
<10 ng/mL has been suggested to be diagnostic. Women 
with endometrial biopsies that show they are out of phase 
are unable to maintain endometrial progesterone receptors 
and have abnormal expression of the a Vb 3 integrin, a 
biomarker of uterine receptivity (8). The a Vb 3 integrin 
normally appears in the endometrial glands on cycle days 
20–21 during the “window of implantation.” The majority 
of these patients, when treated with supplemental progesterone 
or low-dose clomiphene citrate, will have restoration 
of normal histologic endometrium (Images 5–30; 
Video 1) and normal a Vb 3 expression. Late implantation 
of the embryo also has been associated with an increased 
miscarriage rate (9). 

UNTREATED HYPOTHYROIDISM 

Untreated hypothyroidism may increase the risk of miscarriage. 
A recent study of more than 700 patients with 
recurrent pregnancy loss identified 7.6% with hypothyroidism 
(10). Hypothyroidism is diagnosed easily with a 
sensitive TSH test, and patients should be treated to 
become euthyroid before attempting another pregnancy. 

INSULIN RESISTANCE 

Patients with poorly controlled diabetes mellitus are 
known to have an increased rate of spontaneous miscarriage. 
The spontaneous loss rate is reduced to normal 
when women are euglycemic preconceptually (6). It is 
known that women with PCOS have an increased risk of 
miscarriage. The high prevalence of insulin resistance in 
women with PCOS may account for the increased risk of 
miscarriage in this group (11). Testing of fasting insulin 
and glucose levels is simple, and treatment with insulinsensitizing 
agents can reduce the risk of recurrent miscarriage. 


ELEVATED DAY 3 FOLLICLE-STIMULATING 
HORMONE LEVEL 

An elevated serum FSH level on cycle day 3 correlates 
with diminished ovarian reserve. Elevated serum FSH 
levels on day 3 have been associated with decreased 
pregnancy rates in women undergoing IVF. Although the 

INFERTILITY 157 

frequency of elevated FSH levels on day 3 in women with 
recurrent miscarriage is similar to the frequency in the 
infertile population, the likelihood of recurrent miscarriage 
is increased with increased day 3 levels of FSH (12). 
Although no treatment is available, testing should be performed 
in women older than 35 years who have recurrent 
pregnancy loss, and appropriate counseling should follow. 

Congenital Uterine Abnormalities 

Congenital uterine anomalies associated with müllerian 
fusion defects have been associated with an increased risk 
of pregnancy loss. The most common abnormality associated 
with pregnancy loss is a septate uterus (Fig. 60). 
Uncontrolled studies suggest that resection of the uterine 
septum results in higher delivery rates than in women 
without treatment. Other congenital abnormalities, such 
as bicornuate uterus and unicornuate uterus, are more frequently 
associated with second-trimester losses or 
preterm delivery. 

A


B


n FIG. 60. (
((A) Uterine septum of a patient who was gravida 
3, para 0, abortus 3. (B) Deep uterine septum of a patient 
who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 

158 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Acquired Abnormalities 

Intrauterine synechiae (Asherman’s syndrome) (Fig. 61; 
Image 49) have been associated with recurrent miscarriage. 
The most common cause of intrauterine adhesions is 
postabortion or postpartum curettage. The adhesions are 
thought to interfere with normal placentation and are treated 
with hysteroscopic resection. Intrauterine cavity abnormalities, 
such as leiomyomas and polyps (Figs. 62 and 63), 
can contribute to pregnancy loss by interfering with 
implantation. Such space-occupying lesions should be 
removed before another pregnancy is attempted. Until 
recently, it was felt that only submucous leiomyomas 
should be removed surgically prior to subsequent attempts 
at pregnancy. However, several recent studies investigating 
the implantation rate in women undergoing IVF have 
clearly demonstrated decreased implantation with intramural 
myomas in the range of 20–30 mm (13). It is uncertain 
if surgical intervention is beneficial (14). 

Autoimmune Causes 

Autoantibodies to phospholipids, thyroid antigens, nuclear 
antigens, and others have been investigated as possible 
causes for pregnancy loss (10). Antiphospholipid antibodies 
include both lupus anticoagulant and anticardiolipin 
antibodies. The occurrence of recurrent pregnancy 
loss, fetal death, thrombosis, or a combination in conjunction 
with antiphospholipid antibodies is termed the 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (15) (Table 14). 
There is still controversy concerning testing for the presence 
of other phospholipids, but an increasing number of 
studies suggest that antibodies to phosphatidyl serine also 
are associated with pregnancy loss. In the past, treatment 
with low-dose steroids was advocated; however, recent 
studies indicate that this treatment significantly increases 
maternal and fetal complications without enhancing livebirth 
rates (16, 17). Independent prospective investigations 
have indicated the efficacy of the administration of 
subcutaneous heparin and aspirin in the treatment of 
antiphospholipid antibody syndrome (18, 19). 

n FIG. 61. Asherman’s syndrome (intrauterine synechiae) of 
a patient who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 
An increased frequency of antithyroid antibodies 
(antithyroid peroxidase and antithyroglobulin) has been 
reported in women with recurrent pregnancy loss. 
However, if the patient is euthyroid, the presence of 
antithyroid antibodies does not affect the pregnancy 
outcome (20). Euthyroid women who have positive 
antithyroid antibodies are at an increased risk for 
hypothyroidism during and after pregnancy. These 
women should have serum TSH levels determined during 
each trimester and postpartum to detect thyroiditis (21). 

Approximately 10–15% of all women will have 
detectable antinuclear antibodies regardless of their history 
of pregnancy loss. Their chance of successful pregnancy 
outcome does not depend on the presence or 
absence of antinuclear antibodies. Treatments such as 
steroids have been shown to increase the maternal and 
fetal complications without yielding an improved rate of 
livebirths (17); thus, testing and treatment for antinuclear 
antibodies are not indicated. 

n FIG. 62. An anterior fundal polyp in a patient who was 
gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 
n FIG. 63. A large intrauterine fibroid (upper right) and a 
small polyp (lower left) seen on sonohysterography in a 
patient who was gravida 4, para 0, abortus 4. 

INFERTILITY 159 

n TABLE 14. Clinical and Laboratory Characteristics 
of Antiphospholipid Antibody Syndrome 
Clinical Laboratory 


Pregnancy morbidity IgG a CL (³ 20 GPL) 
³ 1 unexplained death at IgM a CL (³ 20 MPL) 
³ 10 weeks or delivery at Positive lupus 
£ 34 weeks with severe anticoagulant test 
pregnancy-induced 
hypertension or three or 
more losses before 10 weeks 

Thrombosis 
Venous 
Arterial, including stroke 

Note: Patients should have at least one clinical and one laboratory 
feature at some time in the course of their disease. Laboratory test 
results should be positive on at least two occasions more than 6 
weeks apart. Abbreviations: IgG indicates immunoglobulin G; IgM, 
immunoglobulin M; a CL, anticardiolipin; GPL, IgG phospholipid 
units; MPL, IgM phospholipid units. 

Wilson WA, Gharavi AK, Koike T, Lockshin ND, Branch DW, Piette 
JC, et al. International concensus statement on preliminary classification 
criteria for definite antiphospholipid antibody syndrome. 
Arthritis Rheum 1999;42:1309–1311. Copyright © 1999 American 
College of Rheumatology. Reproduced with permission of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Alloimmune Abnormalities 

Alloimmune factors have been suggested to be associated 
with recurrent pregnancy loss. Human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) sharing was thought to be associated with recurrent 
pregnancy loss based on a decreased maternal 
immune response and thus a decreased production of 
blocking antibodies. Recent large studies, however, 
reveal no association between HLA (and HLA-DQa ), 
homozygosity, and recurrent pregnancy loss (22). Other 
investigators have implicated certain embryotoxic factors, 
such as tumor necrosis factor-a and interferon-d , 
identified in the supernatants of peripheral blood lymphocytes 
from women with a history of pregnancy loss; 
however, this association has not been confirmed by 
independent studies. Immunophenotypes of endometrial 
cells from women with recurrent pregnancy loss demonstrate 
altered natural killer cell (CD56+) populations. 
Some researchers have suggested that increased numbers 
of natural killer cells are associated with pregnancy loss, 
whereas others have indicated that decreased numbers of 
natural killer cells are associated with pregnancy loss. 
None of these tests has been clearly associated with pregnancy 
loss; thus, there are no recommended tests or treatments 
at this time (23). Therapies such as leukocyte 
immunotherapy and the intravenous administration of 
immunoglobulin have not been shown to be efficacious 
(22, 24). 

Microbiologic Causes 

Certain infectious agents have been identified more frequently 
in cultures from women who have had spontaneous 
pregnancy losses. These agents include 
Ureaplasma urealyticum, Mycoplasma hominis, chlamydia, 
and other, less commonly encountered pathogens. 
Although no studies have associated any infectious agent 
with recurrent pregnancy loss, it is unthinkable that a 
clinician would leave a patient untreated to determine this 
association. Because of the clear association with sporadic 
pregnancy losses and the ease of diagnosis, women 
with recurrent pregnancy loss should be tested for these 
organisms. If the cultures are positive, both partners 
should be treated. 

Iatrogenic Causes 

Smoking more than 15 cigarettes a day has been associated 
with an increased risk of pregnancy loss by 
1.5–2-fold, as has alcohol consumption of more than four 
drinks per week. When a woman has both personal 
habits, the risk of pregnancy loss may increase fourfold. 
Couples should be counseled concerning these habits and 
strongly encouraged to discontinue them prior to attempting 
conception (25). 

Thrombophilic Problems 

Recent attention has focused on certain inherited disorders 
that may predispose women to arterial thrombosis or 
venous thrombosis or both (26). These disorders include 
the group of mutations leading to a hypercoagulable state, 
such as factor V Leiden (G1691A), factor II–prothrombin 
mutation (G20210A), and hyperhomocysteinemia (thermolabile 
MTHFR C677T). Another group of deficiencies 
leading to hypercoagulable states includes the antithrombin 
III deficiency, protein C deficiency, protein S deficiency, 
and fibrinogen deficiency. Studies are not in 
agreement at this time, but it appears that some of these 
hypercoagulable states are found more commonly in 
late-trimester pregnancy losses than early losses. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia has been reported in early pregnancy 
losses and can be treated with folic acid supplementation 
(27). 

EVALUATION FOR PREGNANCY 
LOSS 

When the clinician decides to initiate an evaluation for 
recurrent pregnancy loss, complete diagnostic testing 
should be performed. This testing includes a complete 
history, including documentation of prior pregnancies, 
any pathologic tests that were performed on prior miscarriages, 
any evidence of chronic or acute infections or diseases, 
any recent physical or emotional trauma, any 
family history of pregnancy loss, and any previous gynecologic 
surgery or complicating factor. A summary of the 


160 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

diagnosis and management of recurrent pregnancy loss 
includes an investigation of genetic, endocrinologic, 
anatomic, immunologic, microbiologic, psychologic, 
iatrogenic, and possible thrombophilic causes (Table 15). 

FOLLOW-UP 

In approximately 60% of all cases of recurrent pregnancy 
loss, a complete evaluation will reveal a possible etiology 
(2). If no cause can be found, the majority of couples will 
eventually have a successful pregnancy outcome with 
supportive therapy alone (3). Couples who have experienced 
recurrent pregnancy loss want to know what 
caused the miscarriages. Unexplained reproductive failure 
can lead to anger, guilt, and depression. Anger may be 
directed toward the responsible physician for not being 
able to solve their reproductive problems. Feelings of 

grief and guilt following an early loss are often as intense 
as those following a stillbirth, and parents experience a 
grief reaction similar to the grief associated with the 
death of an adult. The couple should be assured that exercise, 
intercourse, and dietary indiscretions do not cause 
miscarriage. Any questions or concerns that the couple 
may have about personal habits should be discussed. 

Women with recurrent pregnancy loss have begun to 
prepare for their baby, both emotionally and physically, 
unlike couples with infertility who have never conceived. 
When a miscarriage occurs, a couple may have great difficulty 
informing friends or family about the loss. 
Feelings of hopelessness may continue long after the 
loss. Patients may continue to grieve and have episodes 
of depression on the expected due date or the date of the 
pregnancy loss. Participation in support groups or grief 
counseling may be beneficial in many cases. 

n TABLE 15. Diagnosis and Management of Recurrent Pregnancy Loss 
Abnormal 
Etiology Diagnostic Evaluation Result Therapy 
Genetic Karyotype partners 3–5% Genetic counseling 
Donor gametes 
Anatomic Hysterosalpingogram 15–20% Septum transection 
Hysteroscopy Myomectomy 
Sonohysterography Lysis of Adhesions 
Endocrinologic Midluteal progesterone 8–12% Progesterone 
TSH Levothyroxine 
Prolactin Bromocriptine, 
Dostinex 
Fasting insulin:glucose Metformin 
Day 3 FSH, estradiol Counseling 
Immunologic Lupus anticoagulant 15–25% Aspirin 
Antiphospholipid antibodies Heparin + Aspirin 
Embryotoxicity assay* IV gamma globulin* 
Immunophenotypes* 
Microbiologic Cervical cultures 5–10% Antibiotics 
Thrombophilic Antithrombin III* 5%* Aspirin 
Protein C, Protein S deficiency* Heparin + Aspirin 
Factor V Leiden mutation* Low-molecular-weight 
heparin 
Dysfibrinogenemia* 
Hyperhomocysteinemia* Folic acid 
Psychologic Interview Varies Support groups 
Questionnaire Counseling 
Iatrogenic Tobacco, alcohol use 5% Eliminate consumption 
Exposure to toxins, chemicals Eliminate exposure 

Abbreviations: FSH indicates follicle stimulating hormone; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone. 
*Current data inconclusive. 


References 

1. 
Kutteh WH. Recurrent pregnancy loss. In: Carr BR, 
Blackwell RE, eds. Textbook of reproductive medicine. 2nd 
ed. Stamford, Connecticut: Appleton & Lange, 1998: 
679–692 
2. Stephenson MD. Frequency of factors associated with habit-
INFERTILITY 161 

15. Wilson WA, Ghavari AE, Koike T, Lockshin MD, Branch 
DW, Piette JC, et al. International consensus statement on 
preliminary classification criteria for definite antiphospholipid 
syndrome. Report of an international workshop. 
Arthritis Rheum 1999;42:1309–1311 
( ) 
16. Cowchock FS, Reece EA, Balaban D, Branch DW, Plouffe 
L. Repeated fetal losses associated with antiphospholipid 
ual abortion in 197 couples. Fertil Steril 1996;66:24–29 


( ) 
antibodies: a collaborative randomized trial comparing 

3. Brigham SA, Conlon C, Farquharson RG. A longitudinal 
study of pregnancy outcome following idiopathic recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod 1999;14:2868–2871 
( ) 
4. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Antiphospholipid syndrome. ACOG Educational Bulletin 
244. Washington, DC: ACOG, 1998 
5. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Management of recurrent early pregnancy loss. ACOG 
Practice Bulletin 24. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
6. Mills JL, Simpson JL, Driscoll SG, Jovanovic-Peterson L, 
Van Allen M, Aarons JH, et al. Incidence of spontaneous 
abortion among normal women and insulin-dependent diabetic 
women whose pregnancies were identified within 21 
days of conception. N Engl J Med 1988;319:1617–1623 
(button) 
7. Clifford K, Rai R, Regan L. Future pregnancy outcome in 
unexplained recurrent first trimester miscarriage. Hum 
Reprod 1997;12:387–389 
( ) 
8. Castelbaum AJ, Lessey BA. Infertility and implantation 
defects. Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 2001;12: 
427–446 
9. Wilcox AJ, Baird DD, Weinberg CR. Time of implantation 
of the conceptus and loss of pregnancy. N Engl J Med 
1999;340:1796–1799 
( ) 
10. Ghazeeri GS, Clark DA, Kutteh WH. Immunologic factors 
in implantation. Infertil Reprod Med Clin North Am 
2001;12:315–337 
11. Sills ES, Perloe M, Palermo GD. Correction of hyperinsulinemia 
in oligoovulatory women with clomiphene-resistant 
polycystic ovary syndrome: a review of therapeutic rationale 
and reproductive outcomes. Eur J Obstet Gynecol 
Reprod Biol 2000;91:135–141 
( ) 
12. Hofmann GE, Khoury J, Thie J. Recurrent pregnancy loss 
and diminished ovarian reserve. Fertil Steril 2000;74: 
1192–1195 
( ) 
13. Stovall DW, Parrish SB, Van Voorhis BJ, Hahn SJ, Sparks 
AE, Syrop CH. Uterine leiomyomas reduce the efficacy of 
assisted reproduction cycles: results of a matched follow-up 
study. Hum Reprod 1998;13:192–197 
( ) 
14. Surrey ES, Lietz AK, Schoolcraft WB. Impact of intramural 
leiomyomata in patients with a normal endometrial cavity 
on in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer cycle outcome. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:405–410 
( ) 
prednisone with low-dose aspirin treatment. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1992;166:1318–1323 



( ) 
17. Laskin CA, Bombardier C, Hannah ME, 
Mandel FP, 
Ritchie JW, Farewell V, et al. Prednisone and aspirin in 
women with autoantibodies and unexplained recurrent fetal 
loss. N Engl J Med 1997;337:148–153 
( ) 
18. Kutteh WH. Antiphospholipid antibody-associated recurrent 
pregnancy loss: treatment with heparin and low dose 
aspirin is superior to low dose aspirin alone. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1996;174:1584–1589 
( ) 
19. Rai R, Cohen H, Dave M, Regan L. Randomised controlled 
trial of aspirin and aspirin plus heparin in pregnant women 
with recurrent miscarriage associated with phospholipid 
antibodies (or antiphospholipid antibodies). BMJ 1997;314: 
253–257 
( ) 
20. Rushworth FH, Backos M, Rai R, Chilcott IT, Baxter N, 
Regan L. Prospective pregnancy outcome in untreated 
recurrent miscarriers with thyroid antibodies. Hum Reprod 
2000;15:1637–1639 
( ) 
21. Esplin MS, 
Branch DW, Silver R, Stagnaro-Green A. 
Thyroid antibodies are not associated with recurrent pregnancy 
loss. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;179:1583–1586 
( ) 
22. Ober C, Karrison T, Odem RR, Barnes RB, Branch DW, 
Stephenson MD, et al. Mononuclear-cell immunisation in 
prevention of recurrent miscarriages: a randomised trial. 
Lancet 1999;354(9176):365–369 
( ) 
23. Kutteh WH, Stovall DW, Scott JR. The immunologic diagnosis 
and treatment of recurrent pregnancy loss. Infertil 
Reprod Med Clin North Am 1997;8:267–287 
24. Daya S, Gunby J, Porter F, Scott J, Clark DA. Critical analysis 
of intravenous immunoglobulin therapy for recurrent 
miscarriage. Hum Reprod Update 1999;5:475–482 
( ) 
25. Ness RB, Grisso JA, Hirschinger N, Markovic N, Shaw 
LM, Day NL, et al. Cocaine and tobacco use and the risk of 
spontaneous abortion. N Engl J Med 1999;340:333–339 
( ) 
26. Blumenfeld Z, Brenner B. Thrombophilia-associated pregnancy 
wastage. Fertil Steril 1999;72:765–774 
( ) 
27. Quéré I, Mercier E, Bellet H, Janbon C, Marès P, Gris JC. 
Vitamin supplementation and pregnancy outcome in 
women with recurrent early pregnancy loss and hyperhomocysteinemia. 
Fertil Steril 2001;75:823–825 
( ) 

162 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Hormonal Agents as Contraceptives 


Hormonal contraceptive methods available in the United 
States include combination oral contraceptives (OCs), 
progestin-only pills, injectable agents such as a combination 
estrogen and depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(DMPA) or DMPA only, progestin-containing intrauterine 
contraceptive devices (IUDs), subdermal implants, 
contraceptive patch, and vaginal ring (1). 

Hormonal contraceptives have high efficacy rates that 
approach those seen with sterilization. When comparing 
the efficacy of different hormonal methods, however, it is 
important to consider both the theoretical and actual, or 
typical, efficacy rates. Theoretical rates are calculated 
assuming perfect use. For some hormonal methods, such 
as IUDs and implants, theoretical and actual efficacy 
rates are similar and approach rates of sterilization. 
Typical efficacy rates are rates found with regular use, 
which may be somewhat lower than theoretical rates 
because of poor compliance or other difficulties in using 
the contraceptive method. Injectable hormonal contraception, 
such as DMPA, and oral contraceptive pills have 
theoretical efficacy rates that approach sterilization. 
However, typical efficacy rates associated with these 
methods are often lower. For example, combination OCs 
have a failure rate of less than 1 in 200 women per year, 
assuming perfect use (ie, no missed pills). In clinical 
practice, however, typical failure rates with this method 
range between 2% and 8% because of poor compliance. 
Postpartum adolescents, less educated women, and poor 
women seem to have poor compliance with these pills. 
The more days of no pill use—especially prolonging the 
normal pill-free week—the higher the chance of ovulation 
and pregnancy. Because user failure with combination 
OCs mainly results from missed pills, there is little 
evidence of difference in effectiveness among the various 
products available. 

COMBINATION ORAL 
CONTRACEPTIVES 

Combination OCs contain both estrogen and progestin in 
each tablet. They prevent ovulation by suppression of 
both pulsatile GnRH at the level of the hypothalamus and 
release of LH at the level of the pituitary. This is a classic 
negative feedback system. Follicles may continue to grow 
and regress, but ovulation does not occur. The progestin 
in the pill has the dominant hormonal action and is mainly 
responsible for suppression of the LH surge necessary 
for ovulation. Estrogen potentiates that effect by increasing 
the intracellular progesterone receptor pool. Estrogen 
suppresses FSH and growth of the follicle. As a result, 

follicular cysts are less common among users of pills with 
higher doses of estrogen. 

The progestin in the pill thickens the cervical mucus, 
making it less hospitable to sperm survival and migration. 
In a normal fertile cycle, cervical mucus just before ovulation 
is clear, copious, and stretchable because of an 
increased water content from the high levels of estradiol 
relative to progesterone at that time of the cycle. This 
mucus allows for sperm survival and transport. Exposure 
to exogenous progestins makes the mucus thick, tacky, 
and less receptive to sperm survival and transport. This 
mucous effect is the main mechanism of contraceptive 
action of progestin-only methods, such as progestin-only 
pills and levonorgestrel implants. 

The two types of estrogen used in OCs are ethinyl 
estradiol and mestranol, the 3-methyl ester of ethinyl 
estradiol. When mestranol is included, it must be con-
verted to the active estrogen. Most pills on the market 
today contain ethinyl estradiol; in fact, all pills containing 
35 m g of estrogen contain ethinyl estradiol. In contrast, a 
number of different progestins are used in OCs, including 
norethindrone, norethindrone acetate, ethynodiol diacetate, 
norgestrel, levonorgestrel, and norethynodrel. 
Desogestrel and norgestimate have been most recently 
introduced in the United States and were derived to have 
strong progestational activity with minimal androgenicity. 
Combination OCs frequently are referred to as first, 
second, or third generation. First-generation combination 
OCs generally contain 50 m g mestranol, whereas secondand 
third-generation combination OCs contain less than 
50 m g ethinyl estradiol. Pills are divided into second- or 
third-generation categories according to the progestin 
they contain. Combination OCs containing levonorgestrel 
or norethindrone acetate have been classified as second 
generation, whereas those containing gestodene, norgestimate, 
or desogestrel usually are termed third generation. 
These groupings have led to some confusion, however, 
because they are based on the time of their introduction to 
the market and do not take into account the structure or 
pharmacologic characteristics of the drug. 

Combination OCs have not included progestins 
derived from progesterone, such as medroxyprogesterone 
acetate or megestrol acetate, which are used to prevent or 
treat endometrial hyperplasia. A new class of progestins 
derived from 19-norprogesterone, such as normegestrol, 
elcometrine, and trimegestone, may be available in the 
near future. Another new class of progestin in combination 
OCs, drospirenone, derived from 17a -spironolactone, 
has been approved recently by the FDA. 
Drospirenone has a structure and properties similar to 


spironolactone, acting as an androgen antagonist by 
blocking receptor binding. It also binds to the mineralocorticoid 
receptor. This manifests as a progestin with 
antimineralocorticoid and antiandrogenic activity. Like 
progesterone, it binds to the corticosteroid receptor, but 
this has no effect at therapeutic doses (2). 

The modern safety of combination OCs has been 
achieved by lowering the dose of active hormone in each 
pill and understanding which patients should not use 
combination OCs. The combination OC that was introduced 
in 1960 had up to 150 m g of mestranol. Today, 
commonly used pills contain 15–35 m g of ethinyl estradiol. 
Progestins in the combination OCs are derived from 
19-nortestosterone (ie, removal of the C-19) and adding 
ethinyl substitution at the C-17 position, increasing oral 
absorption. The combination OCs of the 1960s contained 
up to 10 mg of progestin, compared with the 0.5–1 mg of 
norethindrone in today’s pills. 

The lowering of the dose of ethinyl estradiol from 
150 m g to 35 m g has been associated with a decreased risk 
of cardiovascular complications. Thus, combination OCs 
containing less than 50 m g of ethinyl should be used 
exclusively. Many combination OCs today contain 20 m g 
estrogen, but possibly because the combination OC is 
being used in lower-risk individuals, it has been difficult 
to show a further lowering of thrombosis risk. 

Contraindications 

The most common serious adverse effect of combination 
OC use, increased risk of thrombosis and thromboembolic 
events, occurs because of the estrogen impact on 
clotting factors made in the liver. Users of combination 
OCs older than 35 years who smoke or those who have 
atherosclerotic vascular changes secondary to long-standing 
diabetes mellitus, hypertension, lipid disorders, or 
lupus erythematosus have a higher risk of myocardial 
infarction or stroke and should avoid estrogen-containing 
hormonal contraceptives. As the dose of ethinyl estradiol 
in the pill has decreased over the past 50 years, the risk of 
thromboembolic events also has decreased. Whereas the 
risk of myocardial infarction can be limited by avoiding 
combination OC use in older smokers or in patients with 
other risk factors such as hypertension and diabetes, 
thrombosis cannot be predicted easily. Women who have 
had thrombosis during pregnancy or while receiving 
estrogen therapy should not use estrogen-containing pills. 
Gross obesity is a risk factor for thrombosis, but it is not 
known whether obesity increases the risk with oral contraceptives, 
so obesity is not considered a contraindication 
for their use. Although smoking increases the risk of 
myocardial infarction in older users of combination OCs, 
most studies have not found that it increases the risk of 
venous thrombosis (3, 4). 

In recent years a hereditary susceptibility to venous 
thrombosis has been recognized, among those with the 

HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 163 

factor V Leiden mutation; prothrombin mutation; and 
deficiency of protein C, protein S, and antithrombin (5). 
The factor V Leiden mutation is much more common 
than the other mutations and is present in about 5% of 
white European women. Even though these mutations 
increase the risk of thrombosis in combination OC users, 
currently there are no indications to screen for them, 
because even among carriers, the actual risk of thromboembolism 
is low. Although a family history of thrombosis 
may be a relative contraindication to combination 
OC use, even in this group, most women do not have 
mutations when screened. 

Several international studies have reported that the 
progestins desogestrel and gestodene (not available in the 
United States), in combination with estrogen, may 
increase the risk of thromboembolism compared with 
second-generation combination OCs, although the risk is 
still very low (20–30 cases per 100,000 per year versus 
10–15 cases per 100,000 per year) (6–8). The validity of 
these studies has been called into question because of 
concerns about several types of inherent biases (9). 

Combination OCs are metabolized in the liver; therefore, 
active liver disease is a contraindication to their use. 
They do not increase the risk of breast cancer, but diagnosed 
breast cancer is a contraindication (although there 
are few data to support this recommendation). Combination 
products are ineffective in pregnant women; 
therefore, pregnancy is a contraindication. The pills do 
not appear to be teratogenic. 

Interaction with Other Medications 

Rifampin and most antiseizure medications stimulate 
liver metabolism of the combination OC hormones, 
decreasing blood levels and effectiveness. Some anecdotal 
evidence suggests decreased effectiveness of OCs with 
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Controlled studies have not 
confirmed this finding, but it seems prudent to recommend 
a barrier method for users of OCs while they are 
receiving antibiotics. Other medications that decrease the 
effectiveness of contraceptives are listed in Box R (10). 

Adverse Effects 

Adverse effects such as so-called breakthrough bleeding 
(irregular sloughing of the endometrium), breast tenderness, 
nausea, mood changes, and headaches seem to differ 
somewhat between pills, but unfortunately, no 
validated medical evidence is available to determine what 
pill is best for an individual patient. Present guidelines in 
starting combination OCs include using a pill with 35 m g 
of estrogen that is affordable and with which both the 
patient and physician are comfortable. If annoying 
adverse effects develop and do not improve over three 
cycles, switching to a different pill may be warranted. 

Breakthrough bleeding is common among users of 
low-dose combination OCs and can lead to noncompli



164 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

BOX R 
Medications That Decrease the 
Effectiveness of Contraceptives* 


Antiseizure Medications 

Carbamazepine (Tegretol) 

Phenobarbital 

Phenytoin sodium (Dilantin) 

Felbamate (Felbatol) 

Oxcarbazepine (Trileptel) 

Primidone (Mysoline) 

Topiramate (Topamax) 

Antibiotic 

Rifampicin (Rifampin) 

Antifungal 

Griseofulvin 

*Combination oral contraceptives, progestin-only contraceptives, 
and the progestin-only implants other than depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. 

ance with the prescribed regimen. Noncompliance may 
be due to fear that the bleeding is a sign of cancer, which 
is almost never the case, and education may help improve 
compliance. 

Hormonal contraception does not prevent sexually 
transmitted disease. Women who develop breakthrough 
bleeding after regular pill use have a higher incidence of 
chlamydial and gonorrheal cervical infection. 

The effects of combination OCs are rapidly reversible; 
ovulation often occurs within a month of discontinuation. 
Some women have a slight delay in return to ovulation, 
but by 18 months after stopping use, as many women are 
pregnant as is true in those stopping a barrier method. 
Combination OCs do not cause amenorrhea after discontinuation, 
but their use may mask underlying amenorrhea. 

Noncontraceptive Benefits of 
Combination Oral Contraceptives 

Benefits of combination OCs extend beyond that of highly 
effective and safe contraception (see Box S). Their use 
is associated with less menstrual blood loss and less 
cramping, resulting from the continued progestin effect 
on the endometrium. This progestin effect also is associated 
with a decreased risk of endometrial cancer, particularly 
in less parous women or women who do not ovulate 
regularly. In some women, this progestin effect, which 
leads to thinning of the endometrium and decreased men


strual blood loss, will be manifested by no bleeding at all. 
This amenorrhea is reversible and safe, and it does not 
require endocrine evaluation. It does not increase the risk 
of subsequent amenorrhea or infertility. 

Epithelial ovarian cancers are less frequent in combination 
OC users, and it is recommended that women at 
high risk of ovarian cancer use combination agents. One 
recent study did not show protection from ovarian cancer 
in women who tested positive for the BRCA1-2 gene (11), 
but another study did (12). Because the combination OC 
suppresses ovulation, ectopic pregnancy is less frequent 
with its use. 

Oral contraceptives also reduce the incidence and 
severity of acne vulgaris in patients by decreasing LH and 
5a -reductase activity, as well as by increasing sex hormone–
binding globulin levels. However, occasionally 
women develop acne while taking oral contraceptives. 

Changes in cervical mucus and a thin endometrium 
may account for a possible decrease in symptomatic 
upper tract pelvic infections in patients exposed to gonorrhea 
or chlamydia. Hormonal contraception methods, 
however, do not prevent sexually transmitted diseases and 
do not decrease infertility due to exposure to chlamydia. 

For patients who prefer not to have a period each 
month, active combination OCs may be administered for 
42 or 63 days continuously prior to administering the 
placebo pills, instead of the regular 21-day interval. 
Women using this regimen may have only four periods a 
year. 

PROGESTIN-ONLY PILLS 

The mechanism of action of progestin-only pills is primarily 
thickening of the cervical mucus. These pills also 
suppress ovulation in some cycles in some patients. The 

BOX S 
Noncontraceptive Benefits of 
Hormonal Contraception 


Decrease in iron-deficiency anemia 
Less dysmenorrhea 
Reduced ectopic pregnancy 
Less ovarian cancer 
Less endometrial cancer 
Fewer breast cysts and adenomas 
Possible improvement in bone mineral density in peri


menopausal users 
Less severe endometriosis 
Reduced risk of uterine fibroids 


HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 165 

endometrium has a thin progestational effect. Because 
folliculogenesis is not suppressed, not taking these pills 
leads to ovulation and pregnancy more frequently than is 
true with combination pills. 

The 19-nortestosterone–derived progestins in progestin-
only pills are norethindrone or norgestrel. 
Norgestrel is also called dL-norgestrel, because it contains 
equal amounts of both mirror-image forms of this 
compound (levonorgestrel is the active form). Thus, a 
norgestrel formulation of 1.5 mg is equivalent to 0.75 mg 
of levonorgestrel, the dose in a single emergency contraceptive 
tablet. 

Progestin-only pills can be used in patients for whom 
estrogen-containing pills have greater risk, such as older 
smokers and women with a prior history of thrombosis or 
cardiovascular disease, diabetes mellitus with vascular 
disease, hypertension, or valvular cardiac diseases with 
increased risk of thrombosis. Progestin-only pills also are 
a good contraceptive choice for lactating women, because 
they do not affect the quality or quantity of milk produced. 


DEPOT MEDROXYPROGESTERONE 
ACETATE 

In 1992, DMPA was approved for contraceptive use in the 
United States. This method has a failure rate of less than 
1% when administered intramuscularly into the dorsal 
part of the arm or the buttocks every 12 weeks. The primary 
mechanism of action is ovulation suppression. 
Antiseizure medications listed in Box R do not decrease 
DMPA’s effectiveness and are a good contraceptive 
choice for these patients. In addition, DMPA thickens the 
cervical mucus and alters the endometrium, making it 
inhospitable to implantation. 

Menstrual disturbances occur in approximately 70% 
of users during the first 3 months and are the most common 
reason cited for method discontinuation (13). The 
frequency of irregular bleeding decreases over time, and 
by 1 year, a large proportion of users experience amenorrhea. 
Women who use DMPA also frequently experience 
weight gain, with an average of 5.4 lb in the first year 
(14). Other adverse effects associated with DMPA use 
include breast tenderness, mood changes, headaches, nervousness, 
and fatigue. 

Several studies recently have reported that women 
who use DMPA may experience a decrease in bone mineral 
density. Loss of bone mineral density during the 
reproductive years is cause for concern, because bone 
mass attained early in life may be the greatest determinant 
of whether patients will develop osteoporosis in later 
life. In a recent prospective study, a mean decrease of 
2.7% was observed after 12 months of use among DMPA 
users 18–33 years of age as compared with a gain among 
oral contraceptive pill users (15). Other studies have 
observed that this change may be limited to women who 

use DMPA prior to age 21 (16, 17). At least one study has 
suggested that these changes are reversible after discontinuation 
of DMPA (18). 

MONTHLY INJECTABLE 
COMBINATION CONTRACEPTIVE 

A monthly injectable combination contraceptive consisting 
of an ester of estradiol, estradiol cypionate, and 
DMPA is now available in the United States. The estradiol 
cypionate is metabolized to estradiol in the liver; 
estradiol is the active estrogen rather than the ethinyl 
estradiol in combination OCs. Peak estradiol levels are 
reached on day 3 after injection levels similar to the midcycle 
preovulatory level. Estradiol levels then decrease so 
that regular monthly withdrawal bleeding occurs. 

The progestational agent is DMPA, not a 19-nortestosterone 
derivative. Its main contraceptive effect is 
consistently suppressed ovulation, thickening of the 
cervical mucus, and creation of a progestational endometrium. 


The administration of estradiol cypionate/DMPA theoretically 
should carry less risk of estrogen complications 
than combination OC administration, because there are 
fewer estrogenic changes to the blood-clotting parameters. 
In studies used for obtaining FDA approval, there 
were no cardiovascular complications, but these studies 
excluded women at risk of cardiovascular complications. 
The most common adverse effects reported with use of 
this method include menstrual changes, weight changes, 
breast tenderness, and emotional lability. Adverse effects 
usually decrease with continued use. 

The monthly injectable combination contraceptive has 
the advantage of high effectiveness: 0.2% per 100 women 
years, according to a WHO study (19). Its use results in 
fewer bleeding days than does the use of DMPA, and the 
number of bleeding days averages only 1 day longer than 
the number with combination OC use. The profile of 
adverse effects is similar to that of combination OC, but 
with more weight gain, on average. The injections are 
meant to be given every 28 days (23–33 days). Ovulation 
occurs as early as 60 days after the last injection, but follicular 
development may occur earlier. 

HORMONE-RELEASING 
INTRAUTERINE DEVICES 

The only hormone-releasing IUD currently available in 
the United States contains levonorgestrel-20, which is 
released at a rate of 20 m g/24 h in the first year after insertion. 
This device is approved for 5 years of use. 
Contraceptive efficacy is very high because of suppression 
of ovarian function and endometrial growth. It also 
prevents pregnancy by thickening the cervical mucus. In 
a large randomized comparison study of the use of levonorgestrel- 
versus copper-releasing IUDs, it was noted 


166 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

that the number of bleeding or spotting days, as well as 
the amount of dysmenorrhea, vaginitis, and myoma 
development, was significantly lower among users of the 
levonorgestrel IUD. Adverse effects, such as hirsutism, 
acne, and headache, however, were more frequent among 
users of the levonorgestrel IUD. The incidence of pelvic 
inflammatory disease was not significantly different 
between the two groups. In both groups, adverse effects 
were more common during the first 2 years of use and 
among women younger than 25 years (20). Ectopic pregnancies 
are rare among women using levonorgestrel 
IUDs, and return to fertility after their discontinuation is 
rapid. 

Amenorrhea occurs in approximately 20% of levonorgestrel 
IUD users as a result of reversible endometrial 
thinning. Thus, this contraceptive method may be especially 
beneficial to women with menorrhagia or dysmenorrhea. 
Hormone-releasing IUDs may be inserted in 
nulliparous women if they are at low risk of sexually 
transmitted diseases. Intrauterine devices may be inserted 
immediately after an uninfected abortion, but they should 
not be inserted after a septic abortion. It has been suggested 
that an IUD not be inserted less than 6 weeks after 
delivery to reduce the risk of prolonged bleeding. The 
insertion technique for the levonorgestrel IUD is different 
from the technique for the copper-releasing IUD and 
requires special training. 

TRANSDERMAL CONTRACEPTIVE 
PATCH 

A new method of administering hormonal contraception 
is by the use of a transdermal patch containing both an 
estrogen and progestin. The patch measures approximately 
4.5 cm3 and usually is applied to the lower abdomen or 
buttocks, but it also may be placed on the upper outer arm 
or upper torso. Each patch releases 20 m g of ethinyl estradiol 
and 150 m g of norelgestromin (the active metabolite 
of norgestimate) into the circulation daily for 7 days. 
After 7 days, the patch should be removed and discarded 
and a new one placed in a slightly different location on 
the skin. The standard regimen is to administer three 
patches for a total of 21 days and then allow 7 days of 
withdrawal bleeding. 

In a prospective clinical trial comparing the contraceptive 
patch to a triphasic oral contraceptive, both methods 
were noted to have similar efficacy (Pearl index of 

1.2 versus 2.2). Patch users experienced more breakthrough 
bleeding or spotting in the first two cycles of use; 
perfect compliance was higher among users of the patch. 
The four most common adverse effects reported by patch 
users—headache, nausea, application site reactions, and 
breast tenderness—were each reported by approximately 
20% of users. Most adverse effects were reported with 
similar frequency by both groups, except breast tenderness, 
which was reported by only 6% of oral contraceptive 
users. Application site reactions were the most 
commonly cited reason for discontinuation and were 
reported by 3% of patch users (21). 

CONTRACEPTIVE VAGINAL RING 

A vaginal ring that releases 15 m g of ethinyl estradiol and 
120 m g of etonorgestrel daily received FDA approval in 
October 2001. The ring is 4 mm thick, transparent, and 
flexible. It has a diameter of 54 mm, smaller than the 
diaphragm. The ring is inserted into the vagina during the 
first 5 days of the menstrual period and left in place for 
3 weeks, then removed and discarded. After 1 week, during 
which withdrawal bleeding occurs, the woman inserts 
a new ring. During the first cycle in which the ring is 
used, the woman should use a backup method of contraception 
for the first 7 days that it is in place. The ring may 
be left in place during intercourse or be removed, if the 
interval is less than 3 hours. If the ring is left out for more 
than 3 hours, it is necessary to use a backup method of 
contraception for 7 days. 

No progestin-only vaginal rings are currently available 
in the United States. Progestin-only rings usually are 
inserted into the vagina for an interval of 3–6 months. 
Several different progestins have been used, including 
medroxyprogesterone acetate, norethindrone, norgestrel, 
levonorgestrel, megestrol, and progesterone. Progestinonly 
rings are limited in their usefulness because of the 
frequency of breakthrough bleeding and failure rates 
from 3% to 6%. No progestin-only rings are currently 
available. 

The use of a combination ring results in better efficacy 
and cycle control than does the use of progestin-only 
rings. A large, 1-year, multicenter European study of 
1,145 women demonstrated only six pregnancies, with a 
Pearl index of 0.7 (22). Ovulation is suppressed consistently 
during treatment but returns in the first month after 
discontinuation; thus, the method is rapidly reversible 
(23). The most common reasons for discontinuation were 
perceived adverse effects (15% of the sample), followed 
by sensation of a foreign body, coital problems, or expulsion 
(3%). Overall, the ring was well tolerated by most 
users. As with other hormonal methods of contraception, 
the use of the vaginal ring does not protect against sexually 
transmitted diseases. 

LEVONORGESTREL IMPLANTS 

Subdermal contraceptive implants (Norplant) received 
FDA approval in 1990. This extremely effective contraceptive 
method consists of six flexible, closed capsules 
measuring 34 mm long and 2.4 mm each in diameter. 
These capsules provide contraception by releasing 
approximately 30 m g of levonorgestrel into the circulation 
daily. When inserted during the first 7 days of the menstrual 
cycle, pregnancy protection is effective that same 
cycle. Capsules are effective for 5 years. During the first 
year of use, the failure rate is only 0.2%, and it is approx



imately 1% or less during years 2–5. If use is desired 
beyond 5 years, the capsules should be removed and a 
new set inserted facing the opposite direction. Once 
implants are removed, ovulation may resume the next 
cycle. As is true with oral contraceptive use, rifampin and 
most antiseizure medications should not be used in combination 
with levonorgestrel implants, because they 
decrease contraceptive effectiveness. 

The most common adverse effect of subdermal 
implants is irregular menstrual bleeding, which occurs in 
more than 70% of users during the first 6 months (24). A 
course of exogenous estrogen or prostaglandin inhibitors 
often helps decrease the number of days of bleeding (25). 
Other adverse effects reported by implant users include 
headaches, breast tenderness, nausea, and emotional disturbances. 
In addition, a significantly greater amount of 
weight gain has been reported among implant users than 
among users of low-dose oral contraceptives (26). 
Infection at the site of insertion occurs 0.7% of the time. 
Difficulty with removal also has been reported by a number 
of providers. 

In the past decade, a number of lawsuits in the United 
Kingdom and the United States have been filed on behalf 
of users of subdermal implants, claiming that implant use 
is associated with a wide range of complications. The 
FDA conducted a reanalysis of implant safety in response 
to these claims, and it concluded that the method was safe 
and effective when used as directed. In 1999, however, 
the manufacturer withdrew this product from the market 
in the United Kingdom, citing as reasons adverse media 
reports and the large number of lawsuits. 

Research to improve contraceptive delivery by subdermal 
implants continues. A two-rod system that releases 
levonorgestrel has received FDA approval, but it has not 
been marketed in the United States because of concerns 
about possible litigation. Single-rod systems and biodegradable 
implants also are under investigation. In fact, a 
single-rod system containing etonorgestrel (the new name 
for 3-keto-desogestrel) provides effective contraception for 
up to 3 years and may be available in the near future. 

EMERGENCY CONTRACEPTION 
WITH ORAL CONTRACEPTIVES 

Although a number of different estrogens or progestins can 
be used for emergency contraception, only two oral hormonal 
preparations have FDA-approved labeling for this 
purpose in the United States (27). The first to be approved, 
the Yuzpe regimen, consists of four pills, each containing 
50 m g of ethinyl estradiol and 0.25 mg of levonorgestrel. 
Two pills are taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, 
and the other two pills are taken 12 hours later. 
Possible mechanisms of action include delay or interruption 
of follicular development, delay or interruption of 
ovulation, or disturbance of early endometrial development 
(28). The most common adverse effects are nausea and 
vomiting. In addition to current pregnancy, contraindications 
include a history of severe cardiovascular complica-

HORMONAL AGENTS AS CONTRACEPTIVES 167 

tions, acute ongoing focal migraine headaches, and severe 
acute liver disease, although the risks are quite small. 

A more recently approved emergency contraceptive in 
the United States contains a progestin only. One dose of 

0.75 mg of levonorgestrel is administered as soon as possible 
followed by a second dose 12 hours later. One study 
published in 1998 demonstrated that vomiting is less common 
with this regimen than with the Yuzpe regimen (6% 
versus 19%). Furthermore, progestin-only emergency 
contraception was more effective; 85% of pregnancies that 
would have occurred were prevented with this regimen, 
compared with only 57% with the Yuzpe regimen (29). 
With both methods, treatment efficacy was greatest among 
those who took the medication within 24 hours of unprotected 
intercourse. 
Emergency contraceptive pills should not be used routinely 
to prevent pregnancy because they are less effective 
than other methods. In fact, daily use of OCs or another 
effective method should be started the day after taking the 
oral hormone preparation for emergency contraception. 

References 

1. Speroff L, Darney P. A clinical guide for contraception. 3rd 
ed. Baltimore: Lippincott, Williams & Williams, 2001 
2. Parsey KS, Pong A. An open-label, multicenter study to 
evaluate Yasmin, a low dose combination oral contraceptive 
containing drospirenone, a new progestogen. Contraception 
2000;61:105–111 
( ) 
3. Vandenbroucke JP, Rosing J, Bloemenkamp KW, Middeldorp 
S, Helmerhorst FM, Bouma BN, et al. Oral contraceptives 
and the risk of venous thrombosis. N Engl J Med 
2001;344:1527–1535 
( ) 
4. Petitti D, Sidney S, Quesenberry CP. Oral contraceptive use 
and myocardial infarction. Contraception 1998;57:143–155 
( ) 
5. Cosmi B, Legnani C, Bernandi F, Coccheri S, Palareti G. 
Value of family history in identifying women at risk of 
venous thromboembolism during oral contraception: observational 
study. BMJ 2001;322:1024–1025 
( ) 
6 Jick H, Kaye JA, Vasilakis-Scaramozza C, Jick SS. Risk of 
venous thromboembolism among users of third generation 
oral contraceptive compared with users of oral contraceptives 
with levonorgestrel before and after 1995: cohort and 
case-control analysis. BMJ 2000;321:1190–1195 



( ) 
7. Bloemenkamp KW, Rosendaal FR, Helmerhorst FM, Buller 
HR, Vandenbroucke JP. Enhancement by factor V Leiden 
mutation of risk of deep-vein thrombosis associated with 
oral contraceptives containing a third-generation progestagen. 
Lancet 1995:346:1593–1596 
( ) 
8. Spitzer WO, Lewis MA, Heinemann LA, Thorogood M, 
MacRae KD. Third generation oral contraceptives and risk 
of venous thromboembolic disorders: an international case-
control study. Transnational Research Group on Oral 
Contraceptives and the Health of Young Women. BMJ 
1996:312:83–88 
( ) 
9. Spitzer WO. Bias versus causality: interpreting recent evidence 
of oral contraceptive studies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1998:179: S43–S50 
( ) 

168 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

10. Dickinson BD, Altman RD, Nielsen NH, Sterling ML; 
Council on Scientific Affairs, American Medical 
Association. Drug interactions between oral contraceptives 
and antibiotics. Obstet Gynecol 2001;98:853–860 
( ) 
11. Modan B, Hartge P, Hirsh-Yechezkel G, Chetrit A, Lubin F, 
Beller U, et al. Parity, oral contraceptives, and the risk of 
ovarian cancer among carriers and noncarriers of a BRCA1 
or BRCA2 mutation. N Engl J Med 2001;345:235–240 
(button) 
12. Narod SA, Risch H, Moslehi R, Dorum A, Neuhausen S, 
Olsson H, et al. Oral contraceptives and the risk of hereditary 
ovarian cancer. Hereditary Ovarian Cancer Clinical 
Study Group. N Engl J Med 1998;339:424–428 
( ) 
13. Paul C, Skegg DC, Williams S. Depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate. Patterns of use and reasons for discontinuation. 
Contraception 1997;56:209–214 
( ) 
14. Schwallie PC, Assenzo JR. Contraceptive use—efficacy 
study utilizing medroxyprogesterone acetate administered 
as an intramuscular injection once every 90 days. Fertil 
Steril 1973:24:331–339 
( ) 
15. Berenson AB, Radecki CM, Grady JJ, Rickert VI, Thomas 
A. A prospective, controlled study of the effects of hormonal 
contraception on bone mineral density. Obstet 
Gynecol 2001;98:576–582 
( ) 
16. Cundy T, Cornish J, Roberts H, Elder H, Reid IR. Spinal 
bone density in women using depot medroxyprogesterone 
contraception. Obstet Gynecol 1998;92:569–573 
( ) 
17. Scholes D, Lacroix AZ, Ott SM, Ichikawa LE, Barlow WE. 
Bone mineral density in women using depot medroxyprogesterone 
acetate for contraception. Obstet Gynecol 1999; 
93:233–238 
( ) 
18. Cundy T, 
Cornish J, Evans MC, Roberts H, Reid TR. 
Recovery of bone density in women who stop using 
medroxyprogesterone acetate. BMJ 1994;308:247–248 
(button) 
19. A multicentred phase III comparative study of two hormonal 
contraceptive preparations given once-a-month by intramuscular 
injection: I. Contraceptive efficacy and side 
effects. World Health Organization. Task Force on Long-
Acting Systemic Agents for Fertility Regulation. 
Contraception 1988;37:1–20 
( ) 
20. Sivin I, Stern J. Health during prolonged use of levonorgestrel 
20 micrograms/d and the copper TCu 380Ag 
intrauterine contraceptive devices: a multicenter study. 
International Committee for Contraception Research 
(ICCR). Fertil Steril 1994:61:70–77 
( ) 
21. Audet MC, Moreau M, 
Koltun WD, Waldbaum AS, 
Shangold G, Fisher AC, et al. Evaluation of contraceptive 
efficacy and cycle control of a transdermal contraceptive 
patch vs an oral contraceptive: a randomized controlled 
trial. JAMA 2001;285:2347–2354 
( ) 
22. Roumen FJ, Apter D, Mulders TM, Dieben TO. Efficacy, 
tolerability, and acceptability of a novel contraceptive vaginal 
ring releasing etonogestrel and ethinyl oestradiol. Hum 
Reprod 2001;16:469–475 
( ) 
23. Davies GC, Feng LX, Newton JR, Dieben TO, Coelingh-
Benrik HJ. Ovarian activity and bleeding patterns during 
extended continuous use of a combined contraceptive vaginal 
ring. Contraception 1992;46:269–278 
( ) 
24. Datey S, Gaur LN, Saxena BN. Vaginal bleeding patterns of 
women using different contraceptive methods (implants, 
injectables, IUDs, oral pills)—an Indian experience. An 
ICMR Task Force Study. Indian Counsil of Medical 
Research. Contraception 1995;51:155–165 
( ) 
25. Diaz S, Croxatto HB, Pavez M, Belhadj H, Stern J, Sivin I. 
Clinical assessment of treatments for prolonged bleeding 
in users of Norplant implants. Contraception 1990: 42: 
97–109 
( ) 
26. Berenson AB, Wiemann CM, Rickerr VI, McCombs SL. 
Contraceptive outcomes among adolescents prescribed 
Norplant implants versus oral contraceptives after one year 
of use. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1997:176:586–592 
( ) 
27. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Emergency oral contraception. ACOG Practice Bulletin 25. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
28. Croxatto HB, Devoto L, Durand M, Ezcurra E, Larrea F, 
Nagle C, et al. Mechanism of action of hormonal preparations 
used for emergency contraception: a review of the literature. 
Contraception 2001;63:111–121 
( ) 
29. Randomized controlled trial of levonorgestrel versus the 
Yuzpe regimen of combined oral contraceptives for emergency 
contraception. Task Force on Postovulatory Methods 
of Fertility Regulation. Lancet 1998;352:428–433 
( ) 

MENOPAUSE 169 

Menopause 


PHYSIOLOGY 

Menopause is the time when permanent cessation of 
menstruation has occurred for 12 months following the 
final menstrual period. A nomenclature for the time frame 
surrounding menopause has been developed and is 
depicted in Table 16. Based on cross-sectional studies, 
the average age for menopause has been estimated to be 
between 50 and 52 years. In prospective studies, the 
median age has been about 51 years. Approximately 1% 
of women experience menopause before age 40 years. 

Clinical impression has suggested that mothers and 
daughters tend to experience menopause at the same age, 
and studies indicate that daughters of mothers with an 
early menopause (younger than 46 years) also have an 
early menopause. There is sufficient evidence to believe 
that undernourished women and vegetarians experience 
an earlier menopause. Because of the contribution of 
body fat to estrogen production, thinner women experience 
a slightly earlier menopause. Multiple studies have 
consistently documented that smoking is associated with 
an earlier menopause (an average of 1.5 years earlier). 
Even former smokers show evidence of an impact. There 
is also a dose–response relationship with both the number 
of cigarettes smoked and the duration of smoking. The 
consumption of alcohol is associated with a later 

menopause. There is no correlation between age of 
menarche and age of menopause. In most studies, race, 
parity, and height have no influence on the age of 
menopause. 

The years before menopause that encompass the 
change from normal ovulatory cycles to the cessation of 
menses traditionally have been known as the perimenopausal 
transitional years, marked by irregularity of 
menstrual cycles. This time has now been defined as 
stage –2 (Table 16). Menarche is followed by approximately 
5–7 years of relatively long cycles at first, and 
then there is increasing regularity as cycles shorten to 
reach the usual reproductive-age pattern. In the 40s, 
cycles begin to lengthen again. The highest incidence of 
anovulatory cycles is among women younger than 20 
years and older than 40 years. In the longitudinal 
Massachusetts Women’s Health Study, women who 
reported the onset of menstrual irregularity were considered 
to be in the perimenopausal period of life (1). The 
median age for the onset of this transition was 47.5 years. 
Only 10% of women ceased menstruating abruptly, with 
no period of prolonged irregularity. The perimenopausal 
transition from reproductive to postreproductive status 
was, for most women, approximately 4 years in duration, 
with a range of 2–8 years. 

n TABLE 16. Stages and Nomenclature of Normal Reproductive Aging in Women 
Final Menstrual Period 

Stages –5 –4 –3 –2 –1 0 +1 +2 
Terminology Reproductive Menopausal Transition Postmenopause 
Early Peak Late Early Late* Early* Late 
Perimenopause 
Duration 
of stage 
Variable Variable a) 
1 yr 
b) 
4 yrs 
until 
demise 
Menstrual 
cycles 
Variable Regular 
to regular 
Variable 
cycle length 
(>7 days difference 
from 
normal) 
³2 skipped 
cycles and an 
interval of 
amenorrhea 
(³60 days) 
Amen x 12 mon 
None 
Endocrine Normal FSH ­ FSH ­ FSH ­ FSH 

*Stages most likely to be characterized by vasomotor symptoms. Abbreviation: ­ indicates elevated 

Soules MR, Sherman S, Parrott E, Rebar R, Santoro N, Utian W, et al. Executive summary: Stages of Reproductive Aging Workshop (STRAW). 
Fertil Steril 2001;874—878 


170 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

Hormone Production 

Contrary to older belief, estradiol levels do not gradually 
wane in the years before the menopause but instead 
remain in the normal range, although slightly elevated, 
until 6 months to 1 year before follicular growth and 
development cease (2–5). Women experiencing the perimenopausal 
transition actually have higher overall estro-
gen levels. This finding is explained logically as an 
increased ovarian follicular response to the elevated FSH 
secretion that occurs during these years (3, 6). 

As noted, most women experience a period of 2–8 
years before menopause when anovulation becomes 
prevalent. During this period, ovarian follicles undergo an 
accelerated rate of loss until eventually the supply of follicles 
is finally depleted. The accelerated loss begins 
when the total number of follicles is approximately 
25,000; in normal women, this occurs at approximately 
age 37–38 years. This loss correlates with a subtle but 
real increase in FSH and decrease in inhibin. The accelerated 
loss is probably secondary to the increase in FSH 
stimulation. These changes, including the increase in 
FSH, reflect the reduced quality and capability of aging 
follicles and their reduced secretion of inhibin, the granulosa 
cell product that exerts an important negative feedback 
influence over FSH secretion by the pituitary gland. 
Both inhibin A and inhibin B may be involved. Luteal 
phase levels of inhibin A and follicular phase levels of 
inhibin B decrease with aging and may antedate the rise 
in FSH. 

The inverse and tight relationship between FSH and 
inhibin indicates that inhibin is a sensitive marker of 
ovarian follicular competence and, in turn, that FSH measurement 
is a clinical assessment of inhibin. Thus, the 
changes in the later reproductive years (the decline in 
inhibin levels, allowing a rise in FSH) reflect diminishing 
follicular reactivity and a reduction in ovarian reserve as 
the ovary ages. The decrease in inhibin secretion by the 
ovarian follicles begins early (around age 35 years) but 
accelerates after age 40 years. This is reflected in the 
decrease in fecundity that occurs with aging. Recent studies 
suggest that the decline in the number of antral follicles 
that are present during the early follicular phase of 
the menstrual cycle is associated with the decline in 
oocyte number with aging. New markers of ovarian aging 
may be identified in the future. 

The perimenopausal years are a period during which 
postmenopausal levels of FSH (>20 IU/L) occur despite 
continued menstrual bleeding, whereas LH levels remain 
in the normal range. Occasionally, corpus luteum formation 
and function occur, and the perimenopausal woman 
is not safely beyond the risk of an unplanned and unexpected 
pregnancy until elevated levels of both FSH (>20 
IU/L) and LH (>30 IU/L) can be demonstrated. However, 
even under these circumstances, fluctuations can occur, 
with a period of ovarian failure followed by resumption 
of ovarian function. 

It can safely be said that shortly after menopause, 
there are no remaining ovarian follicles. Eventually there 
is a 10–20-fold increase in FSH and an approximately 
3-fold increase in LH, reaching a maximal level 1–3 years 
after menopause. This is followed by a gradual, but slight, 
decline in both gonadotropins. Elevated levels of both 
FSH and LH at this time in life are conclusive evidence 
of ovarian failure. Levels of FSH are higher than levels of 
LH because LH is cleared from the blood much faster 
(initial half-lives are approximately 20 minutes for LH 
and 3–4 hours for FSH), and perhaps because there is no 
specific negative feedback peptide for LH-like inhibin. 

Testosterone production decreases by approximately 
25% after menopause, but the postmenopausal ovary in 
most, but not all, women secretes more testosterone than 
the premenopausal ovary. With the disappearance of follicles 
and estrogen, the elevated gonadotropins drive the 
remaining stromal tissue in the ovary to secrete increased 
testosterone. The suppression of gonadotropins with 
GnRH agonist or antagonist treatment in postmenopausal 
women results in a significant decrease in circulating levels 
of testosterone, indicating the gonadotropin-dependent 
postmenopausal ovarian origin. The total amount of 
testosterone produced after menopause, however, is 
decreased because the amount of the primary source, 
peripheral conversion of androstenedione, is reduced. 
The early postmenopausal circulating level of 
androstenedione decreases approximately 62% from 
young adult life (7). The menopausal decline in the circulating 
levels of testosterone is not great, from no 
change in many women to as much as 15% in others (2, 
7, 8). Nevertheless, compared with young women, the 
overall exposure of postmenopausal women to androgens 
is lower (9). 

The postmenopausal ovary secretes primarily androstenedione 
and testosterone. After menopause, the circulating 
level of androstenedione is about one half that seen 
before menopause (10). Most of this postmenopausal 
androstenedione is derived from the adrenal gland, with 
only a small amount secreted from the ovary, although 
androstenedione is the principal steroid secreted by the 
postmenopausal ovary. Dehydroepiandrosterone and its 
sulfate, DHEAS, originating in the adrenal gland, decline 
markedly with aging. In the decade after menopause, the 
circulating levels of DHEA are approximately 70% 
lower, and levels of DHEAS are about 74% lower than 
the levels in young adult life (7). 

The circulating estradiol level after menopause is 
approximately 10–20 pg/mL, most of which is derived 
from peripheral conversion of estrone. This in turn is 
mainly derived from the peripheral conversion of 
androstenedione. The circulating level of estrone 
(approximately 30–70 pg/mL) in postmenopausal women 
is higher than that of estradiol. The average postmenopausal 
production rate of estrogen is approximately 
45 m g/24 h; almost all, if not all, is estrogen derived from 
the peripheral conversion of androstenedione. The andro



gen-to-estrogen ratio changes dramatically after 
menopause because of the more marked decline in estro-
gen, and an onset of mild hirsutism is common, reflecting 
this marked shift in the sex hormone ratio. With increasing 
age, a decrease can be measured in the circulating levels 
of DHEAS and DHEA, whereas the circulating 
postmenopausal levels of androstenedione, testosterone, 
and estrogen remain relatively constant (8, 10). 

Estrogen production by the ovaries does not continue 
beyond menopause. However, estrogen levels in postmenopausal 
women can be significant, principally 
because of the extraglandular conversion of androstenedione 
and testosterone to estrogen. The clinical impact of 
this estrogen varies from one postmenopausal woman to 
another, depending on the degree of extraglandular production 
and modified by a variety of factors. 

The percentage of androstenedione converted to estro-
gen correlates with body weight. Increased production of 
estrogen from androstenedione with increasing body 
weight is probably due to the ability of fat to aromatize 
androgens. This fact and a decrease in the levels of sex 
hormone–binding globulin (which results in increased 
free estrogen concentrations) contribute to the wellknown 
association between obesity and the development 
of endometrial cancer. Body weight, therefore, has a positive 
correlation with the circulating levels of estrone and 
estradiol (10). Aromatization of androgens to estrogens is 
not limited to adipose tissue, however, because almost 
every tissue tested has this activity. 

Menstrual Disturbances 

Throughout the perimenopausal period of life, there is a 
significant incidence of dysfunctional uterine bleeding. 
Although the greatest concern provoked by this symptom 
is that it is caused by endometrial neoplasia, the usual 
cause is nonneoplastic tissue that is displaying estrogen 
effects unopposed by progesterone. This condition results 
from anovulation in premenopausal women and from 
extragonadal endogenous estrogen production or estro-
gen administration in the postmenopausal woman. In all 
women—whether they are premenopausal or postmenopausal 
and whether they are or are not receiving 
hormone therapy—specific organic causes (neoplasia, 
complications of unexpected pregnancy, or bleeding from 
extrauterine sites) must be ruled out. In addition to a careful 
history and physical examination, an aspiration 
endometrial biopsy should be performed to evaluate dysfunctional 
uterine bleeding. 

Vasomotor Symptoms 

Approximately 75–80% of white women report hot flushes 
during menopause. In general, these hot flushes will 
diminish in 1–2 years, although in some women flushes 
can occur for longer than 5 years. Hot flushes last from 2 
minutes to 6 minutes. They are characterized by a generalized 
activation of the hypothalamic thermoregulatory 

MENOPAUSE 171 

center resulting in an increase in GnRH–LH release, an 
increase in sympathetic nervous system outflow, an 
increase in heart rate, vasodilatation of the small vessels 
in the face, an increase in sweating, and a drop in the core 
body temperature. The number of hot flushes can range 
from 5 to more than 15 episodes per day. Estrogen therapy 
is effective in relieving hot flushes usually within 3 to 
4 weeks in 95% of women; discontinuation of estrogen 
will result in resumption of hot flushes for a period (see 
“Effects on the Central Nervous System”). 

Psychophysiologic Effects 

The view that menopause has a deleterious effect on mental 
health is not supported in the psychiatric literature or 
in surveys of the general population. The concept of a 
specific psychiatric disorder (involutional melancholia) 
has been abandoned. Indeed, depression is less common, 
not more common, among middle-aged women, and 
menopause cannot be linked to psychologic distress 
(11–18). Longitudinal study of premenopausal women 
indicates that hysterectomy with or without oophorectomy 
is not associated with a negative psychologic 
impact among middle-aged women (19). Finally, longitudinal 
data from the Massachusetts Women’s Health Study 
establish that menopause is not associated with an 
increased risk of depression (20). 

A negative view of mental health at the time of 
menopause is not justified; many of the problems reported 
at menopause are due to the vicissitudes of life (21, 
22). Thus, problems are encountered frequently in early 
postmenopause, but a causal relationship with estrogen is 
unlikely. These problems include fatigue, nervousness, 
headaches, insomnia, depression, irritability, joint and 
muscle pain, dizziness, and palpitations. Both men and 
women at this stage of life express a multitude of problems, 
a fact that does not reveal a gender difference that 
could be explained by a hormonal cause. 

Emotional stability during the perimenopausal period 
can be disrupted by poor sleep patterns. Hot flushes do 
have an adverse impact on the quality of sleep. Estrogen 
therapy can improve the quality of sleep, decreasing the 
time to onset of sleep and increasing the amount of rapid 
eye movement sleep (23–25). Flushing may be insufficient 
to awaken a woman but sufficient to affect the quality 
of sleep, thereby diminishing the ability to handle the 
next day’s problems and stresses. An improvement in 
insomnia with estrogen treatment can be documented 
even in postmenopausal women who are reportedly 
asymptomatic (26). 

Thus, the overall quality of life reported by women 
can be improved by better sleep and alleviation of hot 
flushes. However, it is still uncertain whether estrogen 
treatment has an additional direct pharmacologic antidepressant 
effect or whether the mood response is an indirect 
benefit of relief of physical symptoms and, 
consequently, improved sleep. Various assessment tools 


172 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

for measuring depression have documented improvements 
with estrogen treatment in oophorectomized women. 

Cognition and Alzheimer’s Disease 

Up to three times as many women as men develop 
Alzheimer’s disease. In animal and cell models, estrogen 
is capable of protecting central nervous system function 
by means of multiple mechanisms. For example, estrogen 
protects against neuronal cytotoxicity induced by oxidation, 
reduces the serum concentration of amyloid P component 
(the glycoprotein found in Alzheimer’s 
neurofibrillary tangles), and increases synapses and neuronal 
growth, especially dendritic spine density (27–29). 
Progestational agents do not exert similar actions. 

Depending on the method of assessment, evidence for 
the beneficial effects of estrogen on cognition, especially 
on verbal memory, can be found in the literature (30, 31). 
However, the effects in healthy women are not impressive 
and perhaps are of little clinical value. Women in the 
Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging who were using 
estrogen performed better in a test of short-term visual 
memory (32). In a New York City cohort of women, the 
use of estrogen was associated with better performance 
on tests of cognition and better performance in verbal 
memory (33). Perhaps the lack of agreement is due to the 
variability in test vehicles and the specific aspects of 
memory function studied. Furthermore, individual variability 
is impressive; when improvements have been 
observed, they have not been large and perhaps have been 
of little clinical importance. In addition, any beneficial 
effects may be attenuated by progestational agents (31). 
Fatigue, irritability, headache, and depression are not 
thought to be estrogen-related phenomena. 

Cardiovascular Changes 

During the reproductive years, women are “protected” 
from coronary heart disease. For this reason, women lag 
behind men in the incidence of coronary heart disease by 
10 years, and for myocardial infarction and sudden death, 
women have had a 20-year advantage. The reasons for 
this protection are complex, but a significant contribution 
can be assigned to the higher HDL levels in younger 
women, an effect of estrogen. Throughout adulthood, 
HDL-cholesterol levels are approximately 10 mg/dL 
higher in women, and this difference continues throughout 
the postmenopausal years. Total cholesterol and 
LDL-cholesterol levels are lower in premenopausal 
women than in men; however, the levels gradually 
increase with aging, and after menopause they rise rapidly. 
After menopause the risk of coronary heart disease 
doubles for women; at about 60 years, the atherogenic 
lipids reach levels higher than the levels in men. 

Animal studies suggest that a potential contribution to 
the gender difference in the incidence and age of onset of 
cardiovascular disease is the favorable effect of estrogen 
on important endothelial events. Vasodilatory and 

antithrombotic activities can be attributed to endothelial 
production of nitric oxide and prostacyclin, a process 
favorably influenced by estrogen. Hypercholesterolemia 
adversely affects this important endothelial process, and 
estrogen protects this important endothelial function in 
the presence of hypercholesterolemia. Estrogen inhibits 
the oxidation of LDL and protects against the toxic 
effects of oxidized LDL on the endothelium. 

Observational studies and clinical trials indicate that 
the major determinants of blood lipid levels are the same 
for both sexes. A diet high in saturated fatty acids and 
cholesterol unfavorably increases blood lipid levels. 
Excess caloric intake and obesity decrease levels of HDL 
cholesterol and increase levels of total cholesterol, LDL 
cholesterol, and triglycerides. Smoking decreases HDL 
cholesterol levels (and also produces lower estrogen levels 
and an earlier menopause). Genetic defects of receptor-
mediated cholesterol uptake account for only a small 
percentage of hyperlipidemia in men and women. 

Adiposity of the trunk is a risk factor for coronary 
heart disease in women and is associated with a relatively 
androgenic hormonal state, hypertension, and disorders 
of lipid and carbohydrate metabolism. Central fat 
distribution in women is positively correlated with 
increases in total cholesterol, triglyceride, and LDL levels 
and negatively correlated with HDL levels. The 
atherogenic lipid profile associated with abdominal adiposity 
is at least partly mediated through an interplay 
with insulin and estrogen. It is worth noting that there is 
a strong correlation between the magnitude of the worsening 
in cardiovascular risk factors (lipid and lipoprotein 
changes, blood pressure, and insulin levels) and the 
amount of weight gained during the menopausal transition 
(34). Attention to weight gain during middle age is 
one of the most important components of good preventive 
health care. However, weight gain at menopause is not an 
effect of hormonal changes but rather reflects diet, exercise, 
and aging (34). 

Menopause and Bone 

Osteoporosis is a systemic skeletal disease characterized 
by microarchitectural deterioration of bone tissue, which 
leads to reduced bone mass and enhanced bone fragility. 
This leads to an increased risk of fracture in the absence 
of trauma. It is estimated that 13–18% of women in the 
United States who are aged 50 years and older have 
osteoporosis, resulting in 1.5 million fractures each year. 
The most common sites for fracture include lumbar vertebrae, 
distal radius, and femoral neck. The overall mortality 
from hip fracture alone is estimated to be 30%, with 
an annual health care cost of $7 billion. 

Bone is a dynamic, living tissue and is constantly 
remodeled to adapt to mechanical changes in weight 
bearing and other physical activities. Bone breakdown 
(resorption) requires the activity of multinucleated giant 
cells, called osteoclasts (Fig. 64), whereas bone forma



MENOPAUSE 173 


AB 

n FIG. 64. Structural bone changes with osteoporosis. (A) Normal bone. (B) 
Osteoporotic trabecular bone. 

tion is mediated by osteoblasts. Bone resorption is coupled 
to bone formation such that positive bone balance is 
achieved when skeletal maturity is attained (typically at 
age 25–35 years). Thereafter, bone mass declines at a 
slow, steady rate of 0.4% per year. After menopause, this 
rate increases to 2–5% per year for the first 5–10 years 
and then slows to 1% per year. Although estrogen, progesterone, 
and androgen receptors are present in bone, 
their specific roles have not been defined. 

The amount of bone at any point in time reflects the 
balance of the osteoblastic and osteoclastic activities, 
which are influenced by a multitude of stimulating and 
inhibiting agents. Both aging and a loss of estrogen lead 
to excessive osteoclastic activity. A decrease in calcium 
intake or absorption lowers the serum level of ionized calcium. 
This stimulates parathyroid hormone (PTH) secretion 
to mobilize calcium from bone by direct stimulation 
of osteoclastic activity. Increased PTH also stimulates the 
production of vitamin D to increase intestinal calcium 
absorption. Calcium increases and PTH levels return to 
normal. A deficiency in estrogen is associated with a 
greater responsiveness of bone to PTH. Thus, for any 
given level of PTH, there is more calcium removed from 
bone. This condition raises the level of serum calcium, 
which in turn lowers the level of PTH and decreases the 
vitamin D level and intestinal absorption of calcium. 

The subsequent risk of fracture from osteoporosis 
depends on bone mass at the time of menopause and the 
rate of bone loss following menopause. Although the 
peak bone mass is influenced by heredity and endocrine 
factors, it is now recognized that there is only a relatively 
narrow window of opportunity for acquiring bone 

mass. Almost all bone mass in the hip and the vertebral 
bodies will be accumulated in young women by late adolescence, 
so the years immediately following menarche 
(ages 11–14 years) are especially important. (Table 17 
lists sources of calcium in food.) Prophylaxis for osteoporosis 
should begin in adolescence, given the slow 
decline in bone mass density after age 30 years in most 
people. 

The onset of spinal bone loss begins in the 20s, but the 
overall change is small until menopause. Bone density in 
the femur peaks in the mid to late 20s and begins to 
decrease around age 30 years. In general, bone resorption 
and formation occur four to eight times as fast in trabecular 
bone as in cortical bone. Beyond age 30 years, 
trabecular resorption begins to exceed formation by 
approximately 0.7% per year. This adverse relationship 
accelerates after menopause; 2–5% of total bone mass 
will be lost each year. This accelerated loss will continue 
for approximately 5 years, after which bone loss is considerably 
diminished but continues as the aging-related 
loss. For the first 20 years following the cessation of 
menses, menopause-related bone loss can result in a 50% 
reduction in trabecular bone and a 30% reduction in cortical 
bone. 

In general, bone mass is higher in black and obese 
women and lower in white, Asian, thin, and sedentary 
women. Despite the greater bone mass (and lower fracture 
rates) in black women, the impact of osteoporotic 
fractures in this group is still considerable. Black women 
are subject to similar risk factors for osteoporosis (eg, 
thinness and high alcohol consumption), and most important, 
postmenopausal estrogen therapy is associated with 


174 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

n TABLE 17. Foods Containing Calcium 
Food Amount Calcium (mg) Fat (g) 


Milk and dairy products 
American cheese 1 oz 195 8.4 
Cheddar cheese 1 oz 211 9.1 
Swiss cheese 1 oz 219 7.1 
Ice cream—hard 1 cup 176 14.1 
Low-fat milk 1 cup 298 4.7 
Skim milk 1 cup 303 0.4 
Low-fat plain yogurt 1 cup 415 3.4 

Nuts 
Almonds 1 oz 66 16.2 
Sesame seeds, dried, hulled 3.5 oz 100 53.4 

Seafood 
Scallops, steamed 3.5 oz 115 1.4 
Shrimp, raw 3.5 oz 63 0.8 

Green leafy vegetables 
Broccoli, cooked 2/3 cup 88 0.3 
Kale, cooked, without stem 3/4 cup 187 0.7 
Spinach, cooked 1/2 cup 83 0.3 
Turnip greens, cooked 2/3 cup 184 0.2 

Other foods 
Chili con carne with beans 5 oz 61 9.9 
Cream of celery soup made with milk 1 serving 135 33.0 
Figs, dried 5 medium 126 1.3 
Slice of 12-inch cheese pizza 1 piece 144 4.4 
Pudding, chocolate 1/2 cup 147 6.6 
Raisins, dried, seedless 5/8 cup 62 0.2 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Preventing osteoporosis. ACOG Patient Education Pamphlet APO48. Washington, DC: 
ACOG, 1997 

protection. Japanese women demonstrate the same amount 
and pattern of bone loss after menopause as white women. 

Atrophic Changes 

Because of the extremely low estrogen production in the 
late postmenopausal stage or many years after castration, 
atrophy of vaginal mucosal surfaces takes place, accompanied 
by vaginitis, pruritus, dyspareunia, and stenosis. 
Genitourinary atrophy leads to a variety of symptoms that 
affect the ease and quality of living. Urethritis with 
dysuria, urgency incontinence, and urinary frequency are 
further results of mucosal thinning (in this instance, of the 
urethra and bladder). Vulvar dystrophies and vaginal 
relaxation with cystocele, rectocele, and uterine prolapse 
are not a consequence of estrogen deprivation. 

Although some argue that genuine stress incontinence 
will not be affected by treatment with estrogen, others 
contend that estrogen treatment improves or cures stress 

incontinence in more than 50% of patients because of a 
direct effect on the urethral mucosa. Most cases of urinary 
incontinence in elderly women are a mixed problem 
with a significant component of urge incontinence that 
can be improved by estrogen therapy. 

A decline in skin collagen content and skin thickness 
that occurs with aging can be considerably avoided by 
postmenopausal estrogen therapy. The effect of estrogen 
on collagen is evident in both bone and skin; bone mass 
and collagen decline in parallel after menopause, and 
estrogen treatment reduces collagen turnover and 
improves collagen quality. 

APPROACH TO THERAPY 

In our fast-paced environment, much of what women 
know about health care is gleaned from the mass media. 
In general, the more sensational an item is, the more noteworthy. 
For example, although breast cancer risk is a real 


and serious concern for all women, the fear of breast cancer 
seems to drive all decision making, particularly 
regarding hormonal options. The decision analysis with 
hormonal therapies largely contrasts the risks and mortality 
of cardiovascular disease (CVD) with those of breast 
cancer (35). No one standard regimen—hormonal or otherwise—
is recommended for all women. The key perspective 
in recommending a treatment regimen is that it 
should remain flexible and be individualized to the 
patient’s preferences. 

American women believe that the leading cause of 
death in women is breast cancer and attribute only a small 
percentage of deaths to CVD. In reality, the opposite is 
true. Statistics indicate that one in three women older 
than 65 years has some evidence of CVD. Despite public 
perception, the overall incidence of breast cancer has 
remained constant in recent years. Nevertheless, what is 
not commonly appreciated by those counseling patients is 
the age-associated relationship in the incidence of breast 
cancer. Although it has been widely asserted that the incidence 
of breast cancer in women is approximately one in 
eight, this is the lifetime risk. The age-specific data are 
quite different: 1 of 77 in the fourth decade and 1 of 32 in 
the fifth decade, rising to 1 of 45 when a woman is in her 
eighth decade (Table 18). Misperceptions about the magnitude 
of cancer risk may lead some women not to consider 
HRT for the prevention of other conditions that 

Percentage of 
all 
deaths 


50 


40 


30 


20 


10 


0 


MENOPAUSE 175 

actually have greater morbidity and mortality, as well as 
for the alleviation of menopausal symptoms. 

Because the case fatality rate of CVD is several times 
greater than that of breast cancer, even if the incidence of 
these two diseases were similar, many more women 
would die of CVD. Figure 65 shows the death rate 

n TABLE 18. Women Who Will Develop Breast 
Cancer: Risk According to Age 
Decade of Life Incidence 
Third 1 of 250 
Fourth 1 of 77 
Fifth 1 of 42 
Sixth 1 of 36 
Seventh 1 of 34 
Eighth 1 of 45 

Of the risk factors for breast cancer, age is the most significant, with 
the risk being greatest for women in their 70s. 

Source: Cancer Care Ontario. From Lobo RA. Treatment of the 
postmenopausal woman: where we are today. In: Lobo RA, ed. 
Treatment of the postmenopausal woman: basic and clinical 
aspects. 2nd ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins 
1999:655–659 

Deaths 
from 
cardiovascular 
disease 

Deaths 
from 
breast 
cancer 

Deaths 
from 
lung cancer 

Age Group 

n FIG. 65. Risks of breast cancer and lung cancer versus cardiovascular disease in various age categories. (Adapted from 
Phillips KA, Glendon G, Knight JA. Putting the risk of breast cancer in perspective. N Engl J Med 1999:340:141–144. Copyright 
© 1999 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved.) 

176 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

according to different ages (36). Soon after menopause, at 
age 50–54 years, the death rate for breast cancer decreases 
while the death rate for CVD rises steadily. The leading 
cause of cancer death in women is lung cancer (see Fig. 
65). By age 55, 20% of all deaths are caused by CVD; 
overall, 30–40% of women eventually will die of CVD. 

The various hormonal preparations available for treatment 
are listed in Box T. Also included are the selective 
estrogen receptor modulator raloxifene and other compounds 
such as bisphosphonates, tibolone, and human 
parathyroid hormone 1-34. 

Estrogen Replacement Regimens 

For the clinician and patient, the decision to start estrogen 
therapy need not involve a long-term commitment. For 
short-term treatment of symptoms, estrogen can be used 

at the lowest dose that can control hot flushes or can be 
administered via the vaginal route for symptoms of dryness 
or dyspareunia. Clinical guidelines will be modified when 
more data from prospective trials, such as the Women’s 
Health Initiative, become available in 2005 or 2007. 

Estrogen may be administered continuously (daily) or 
for 21–26 days each month. In recent years, a continuous 
regimen has been preferred unless this regimen leads to 
certain adverse effects, such as breast tenderness, bloating, 
or fluid retention. Because these adverse effects often 
are related to the estrogen dosage, there has been an 
increasing trend to use lower dosages of both estrogens 
and progestins. 

If the woman has a uterus, a progestin should be added 
to the regimen (Box U). For women who are totally intolerant 
of progestins (regardless of the dose and route of 
administration) and take unopposed estrogen, annual 

BOX T 
Common Treatments for Postmenopausal Women 

Estrogens 

Oral 
Oral CEE, 0.3, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25, and 2.5 mg 
Piperazine estrone sulfate, equivalent of 0.625, 1.25, 

and 2.5 mg 
Esterified, 0.3, 0.625, 0.9, 1.25, and 2.5 mg 
Micronized esterified, 0.5, 1, and 2 mg 


Transdermal 
Estradiol patches, 0.025, 0.0375, 0.05, 0.75, and 

0.10 mg/d 
Estradiol gel, 1.5 and 3 mg 
Vaginal 
Cream: CEE (0.0625%), estradiol (0.01%) 
Estradiol ring, 2 mg; vaginal tablets, 25 m g 

Parenteral 
Intramuscular injections should be avoided 

Progestins 

Oral 
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 2.5, 5, and 10 mg 
Norethindrone acetate, 5 mg 
Micronized progesterone, 100 and 200 mg 

Vaginal 
Micronized progesterone, 100 mg 
Progesterone gel, 4% and 8% 

Combinations 

Oral 
CEE + MPA (0.625 mg) + MPA (2.5 or 5 mg) 
CEE + MPA (0.45 mg + MPA ,1.5 mg)* 
Micronized estradiol (1 mg) + norethindrone acetate 

(0.5 mg) 
Ethinyl estradiol, 5 m g; norethindrone, 1 mg 
Transdermal 
Patch: 0.05 mg estradiol with 140 m g or 250 m g 
norethindrone acetate 

Androgens 

Oral 
Esterified estrogen and methyl testosterone 
(0.625/1.25 mg and 1.25/2.5 mg) 
Transdermal 
Patch, 150 m g/300 m g in development 

Bisphosphonates 

Alendronate, 5 and 10 mg daily; 35 and 70 mg weekly 
Risedronate, 5 mg 
Etidronate, 200 mg (intermittent) 

Selective estrogen receptor modulator 

Raloxifene, 60 mg 

Others 

Tibolone, 2.5 mg* 
Human parathyroid hormone 1-34* 


Abbreviations: CEE indicates conjugate equine estrogen; MPA, medroxyprogesterone acetate. 

* Awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

BOX U 
Options for Endometrial Protection 
with Progestogens 

Sequential for 12–14 days each month 

Continuous combined: daily dose 

Sequential combined: estrogen with progestogen daily for 

25 days 
Cyclophasic or “pulsed” 
Intermittent: every 3 months 
Intrauterine progestogen 


Adapted from Lobo RA. Progestogens. In: Lobo RA, Kelsey J, 
Marcus R, eds. Menopause, biology and pathobiology. San Diego: 
Academic Press, 2000:429–444 

endometrial biopsies are necessary. Alternatively, a progestin-
containing IUD can be used to prevent endometrial 
hyperplasia. The lowest possible dose of estrogen 
should be used under these circumstances, or an alternative 
therapy that is specific for symptoms should be considered. 


Box U outlines the use of sequential progestin administration 
where cyclic withdrawal uterine bleeding occurs 
but decreases with time, particularly if the dosages of 
estrogen and progestin are lowered (37). The most widely 
used regimens are oral continuous combined therapies 
that employ daily estrogen together with a progestin. A 
continuous combined transdermal method also is available. 
An intermittent or cyclophasic regimen of progestin 
(3 days on, 3 days off) recently has been introduced. 
Intermittent progestin administration (every 3 months) has 
been considered as an option, but it may result in heavy 
bleeding at these intervals and a greater risk of endometrial 
hyperplasia after several years. With all progestin regimens, 
the vaginal route also may be considered, using 
progesterone sequentially or continuously. Vaginal administration 
reduces the systemic concentration of progesterone, 
yet allows for a higher intrauterine concentration. 

Although any progestin can be considered, only natural 
progesterone is in wide use, in the form of suppositories, 
tablets, or a gel. The progesterone vaginal gel 
(4–8%) has become commercially available. Intrauterine 
delivery of progestin has been studied and provides direct 
suppressive effects on the endometrium while limiting 
systemic effects. One current progesterone-releasing IUD 
(Progestasert) must be inserted annually. The insertion of 
an IUD in postmenopausal women may be difficult. A 
smaller, levonorgestrel-releasing IUD (Mirena) is also 
available. Although progestins have the potential of attenuating 
some of the beneficial effects of estrogen on various 
parameters, lower doses of added progestin have not 

MENOPAUSE 177 

been shown to be detrimental overall and, in some circumstances, 
may be beneficial or synergistic in the control 
of hot flushes and bone density (38). However, effects 
on cardiovascular function (including blood flow and the 
rise of HDL cholesterol) and brain function may be negative. 


Clinical Indications for Hormone 
Replacement Therapy 

Before considering treatment, it is important to determine 
the symptoms present, patient risk factors, and family history 
for certain diseases. A complete examination and 
Pap test should be performed. 

EFFECTS ON THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Estrogen therapy is indicated primarily for the relief of 
vasomotor symptoms, or hot flushes, and vulvovaginal 
atrophy. It relieves hot flushes usually within 3 to 4 weeks 
in 95% of women. In general, the lowest effective dose to 
control vasomotor symptoms is warranted. Progestins 
such as norethindrone, megestrol acetate, and medroxyprogesterone 
acetate also can reduce hot flushes by 70%. 
Recent evidence suggests that lower doses of conjugated 
estrogen (0.45 mg in combination with 1.5 mg of 
medroxyprogesterone acetate) may be as effective as 
standard-dose therapy (39). When hot flushes are difficult 
to control, transdermal systems may offer an advantage 
for some women. Alternatives for treating hot flushes 
include phytoestrogens, clonidine, selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors, ergotamine, and black cohosh, but 
these alternatives are less effective. Recent blinded trials 
suggest that phytoestrogens and black cohosh have minimal 
effectiveness (see “Alternative Therapies for Menopause”). 


Hypoestrogenism can cause depressive symptoms that 
can be misdiagnosed as depression. Often these symptoms 
can be associated with fatigue, nervousness, 
headache, insomnia, irritability, and impaired short-term 
memory. As has been discussed, the alleviation of hot 
flushes with estrogen therapy can lead to improved regular 
sleep patterns and a report of better psychologic wellbeing. 


It has been postulated that decreases in endogenous 
estrogen levels are associated with an increased risk of 
dementia. Observational studies have suggested that 
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia occur less frequently 
in estrogen users and that estrogen use may 
improve cognitive performance. One epidemiologic 
study examined the relationship between long-term exposure 
to endogenous estrogens and the incidence of 
dementia (40). The study found no relationship between 
a longer reproductive period and a reduced risk of dementia 
in women who have a natural menopause. 

Recently a large randomized controlled trial of women 
with mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease showed no 
change in progression of dementia between women 


178 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

receiving estrogen or a placebo. Another randomized 
controlled trial demonstrated that estrogen users had a 
slightly greater decline on the Alzheimer’s Disease 
Assessment Scale (41, 42). Taken together, these studies 
suggest that once dementia has been established, neuronal 
cell death is already widespread, and estrogen probably 
has little effect in reestablishing normal neuronal 
cell function. 

The use of 21-carbon progestins, such as micronized 
progesterone and medroxyprogesterone acetate, may 
increase mood disturbances in some patients. Switching 
to other progestins, such as norethindrone or norgestimate, 
or altering the route of administration may reduce 
these adverse effects. 

OSTEOPOROSIS 

Osteoporosis causes dramatic changes in bone structure. 
Risk factors will identify only 30% of women with osteoporosis. 
Modifiable risk factors include limited physical 
activity, cigarette smoking, excessive alcohol consumption, 
and low calcium and vitamin D intake. 
Nonmodifiable risk factors include a family history of 
hip fractures and white or Asian race. In addition, other 
causes of bone loss include the use of corticosteroids, 
prolonged hypoestrogenism from the use of GnRH analogues, 
hyperthyroidism, multiple myeloma, and hyperparathyroidism. 


A 


The standard for bone mass determination (ie, bone 
mineral density) is the dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DXA) scan at the lumbar spine and hip sites (Fig. 66). 
The lumbar spine contains primarily trabecular or cancellous 
bone, which makes up 15% of the skeleton. Because 
this bone is less dense than cortical bone, it has a faster 
bone turnover rate; therefore, early, rapid bone loss can 
be determined by evaluation of this site. Cortical bone is 
dense or compact bone and makes up 85% of total bone 
in the skeleton. It is most abundant in the long-bone 
shafts of the appendicular skeleton. The greater 
trochanter and femoral neck contain both cortical and trabecular 
bone, and this site is ideal for the prediction of 
hip fracture risk in older women. Normative bone mineral 
density values for sex, age, and ethnic distribution have 
been determined and are available through the database 
of the third National Health and Nutrition Examination 
Survey (43, 44). 

The World Health Organization defines osteopenia 
and osteoporosis using DXA-determined bone density 
measurements as follows: Osteopenia is bone mineral 
density less than –1.0 SD below the young adult mean to 
–2.5 SDs. Osteoporosis is bone mineral density less than 
–2.5 SDs below the young adult mean. The T score represents 
the standard deviation from the young adult mean, 
whereas the Z score represents the standard deviation 
from the chronologic age mean values (Fig. 67). For 


B 


n FIG. 66. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry output. (A) Output of the typical lumar spine scan showing severe osteopenia. 
(B) Output of the hip indicating osteoporosis at the femoral neck. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 

MENOPAUSE 179 

T Score 
n FIG. 67. Distribution of bone measurements versus age using the T-score distribution. Data are generated with peripheral and 
central bone measurement devices. Note the similar trends for various measurement devices. Stiffness index is determined by 
quantitative ultrasonography. Abbreviation: BMD indicates bone mineral density. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD) 
example, if a patient’s T score based on her BMD is less 
than –2.5 and a fracture is present, the patient is said to 
have severe osteoporosis. Screening programs should 
include bone mineral density measurements in all postmenopausal 
women not receiving hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT), and if indicated, therapy to increase bone 
mineral density should be monitored. 

Other screening approaches are now available for the 
assessment of bone mineral density at peripheral skeletal 
sites, such as the finger, forearm, or heel (calcaneus). 
These methods use either X-ray absorptiometry, computed 
tomography, or ultrasonography. The preferred site for 
screening is the calcaneus, which is rich in trabecular 
bone and has an excellent predictive value for hip fracture. 
Although normative databases for these methods are 
being expanded, an abnormal finding on a screening test 
requires confirmation with a DXA scan. 

There are now several bone biochemical markers that 
measure bone degradation products in the urine and 
serum. The most widely used urine biomarkers, Ntelopeptide 
and C-telopeptide, are breakdown products of 
bone collagen and are considered markers for bone 
resorption. Unfortunately, variations in the day-to-day 
excretion of this peptide are relatively large, limiting its 
usefulness as a marker in predicting osteoporosis. 
However, it is useful in predicting an early response to 
antiresorptive therapies such as estrogen. 

A number of new therapeutic agents have been 
approved for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis. 
At the present time, all drugs approved for osteoporosis 
(Table 19) primarily inhibit bone resorption. 
Unfortunately, no drugs have been approved by the FDA 

to promote bone formation. Human parathyroid hormone 
(1-34) has shown promise in phase III trials for increasing 
bone density in patients with severe osteoporosis. 

Estrogens remain the most widely used agents for the 
prevention and treatment of menopausal osteoporosis. 
The systemic administration of estrogen through oral, 
transdermal, or transvaginal routes is effective in preventing 
bone loss. Many observational studies also show that 
estrogen use is associated with a reduction in hip fractures; 
however, prospective clinical trials addressing this 
issue are limited. Estrogen use also has been shown to 
reduce bone turnover in the mandible, resulting in a 
decreased incidence of tooth loss. The Women’s Health 
Initiative has a large randomized control trial (n = 27,000 
women) on HRT that will evaluate its effectiveness in 
preventing fractures at multiple sites. 

Estrogen has been shown to be beneficial in the prevention 
of osteoporosis. A wide range of doses have been 
shown to be efficacious, although a great deal of individual 
variation exists. The minimal dosages of estrogens 
required for the prevention of bone loss are listed in Table 

20. 
Adequate vitamin D intake (400 IU daily) and calcium 
intake (1,000–1,500 mg daily) also are important. An 
alternative treatment for osteoporosis is 60 mg/d of raloxifene, 
which has been shown to prevent bone loss and 
new spine fractures. Because of its selective estrogen 
receptor modulation, raloxifene does not stimulate the 
endometrium. However, it does not reduce hot flushes 
and actually may increase them. The potential effects on 
cardiovascular risk and cognitive function also remain 
unknown. Raloxifene, however, does lower LDL-choles



180 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

¦ 
TABLE 19. Recommended Doses of Bone Antiresorptive Agents Based on Randomized Clinical Trials 
Compound Class Prevention Dose Treatment Dose 
Calcium carbonate Calcium 1,500 mg/d 1,200 mg/d on estrogen 
1500 mg/d 
Calcitriol Vitamin D analogue 1 mg/d 1 mg/d 
Salmon calcitonin Calcium regulation Not approved 200 IU/d 
Alendronate Bisphosphonate 5 mg/d 10 mg/d 
70 mg/week 
Risedronate Bisphosphonate 5 mg/d 5 mg/d 
Raloxifene Selective estrogen 60 mg/d 60 mg/d 
receptor modulator 
Tibolone* Synthetic steroid 2.5 mg/d 2.5 mg/d 

*Awaiting approval by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. 

n TABLE 20. Minimally Effective Estrogen Dosage 
for Prevention of Bone Loss 
Preventive 
Formulation Dosage 
Conjugated equine estrogen 0.3 mg/d 
Esterified estrogen 0.3 mg/d 
Conjugated estrone 0.3 mg/d 
Micronized estradiol 0.5 mg/d 
Transdermal estradiol 0.025 mg/d 
Ethinyl estradiol 5 m g/d 

terol without affecting HDL-cholesterol, and it has 
caused other beneficial changes in cardiovascular risk 
factors. Pilot studies show that raloxifene, acting as an 
antiestrogen like tamoxifen, may inhibit the development 
of estrogen-sensitive breast tumors. 

Bisphosphonates are beneficial in the prevention and 
treatment of osteoporosis (Fig. 68). They are the most 
potent antiresorptive agents available. These compounds 
induce controlled cell death (apoptosis) of osteoclasts and 
effectively arrest bone resorption in a short time, even in 
bone cancer metastases. This option is attractive for 
women who have no other indications or symptoms for 
which estrogen or raloxifene therapy would be warranted 
or for women in whom estrogen may be contraindicated. 
The major concern with bisphosphonates is the propensity 
for gastric irritation, resulting in the need to take 
them in the upright position with an empty stomach. 
Unlike alendronate and risedronate, etidronate requires 
intermittent therapy and is not approved for the treatment 
of osteoporosis by the FDA. Doses of alendronate (5 mg 
for prevention and 10 mg for treatment of osteoporosis) 
now can be administered once weekly (35 mg and 70 mg) 

with an adverse effect profile similar to that of the lower 
daily dose. Other options for the treatment of osteoporosis 
include calcitonin, fluoride, tibolone, and human 
parathyroid hormone (1-34). 

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE 

Many investigators hypothesize that estrogen may confer 
protection from development of CVD. Multiple epidemiologic 
studies agree in reporting reduced rates of CVD 
among women on HRT: meta-analysis of 30 epidemiologic 
studies show a relative risk of 0.65 (95% confidence 
interval, 0.59–0.71); the Nurses’ Health Study, after 10 
years, found a relative risk of 0.56 (95% confidence interval, 
0.40–0.80); and the Nurses’ Health Study found a relative 
risk of 0.60 (95% confidence interval, 0.43–0.83) 
after 16 years (45). However, recent data from secondary 
prevention trials have not shown similar efficacy. A number 
of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the cardioprotective 
action based on animal and human studies: 

• 
Improvement in the lipid profile with decreased 
cholesterol, increased HDL, decreased LDL, and 
improvement in the LDL-to-HDL ratio 
• 
Improvement in insulin sensitivity and carbohydrate 
metabolism 
• 
Reduction in platelet adhesion and prevention of 
cholesterol accumulation in vessel walls 
• 
Reduction in arterial plaque formation 
• 
Vasodilatation of coronary arteries 
• 
Improvement in exercise tolerance 
• 
Reduction in circulating homocysteine levels 
• 
Increased antioxidant activity 
Recent observational data have suggested that lower 
doses (0.3 mg) of conjugated equine estrogen (CEE) may 
be as beneficial as 0.625 mg (45). For women with a 


MENOPAUSE 181 

O 
O 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
N 
N 
N 
CH3 
CH2 
CH2 CH2 NH2 
CH2 CH2 NH2 
CH3(CH2)4 
HO 
HO 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH OH 
CH2 
OH 
OH 
CH2 
OH 
OH 
H 
OH 
OH 
CI 
OH 
HO 
CI 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
HO 
CI 
HO 
OH 
OH 
N 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
S 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
O 
CH2 
CH3 
P 
C 
P 
P 
P 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
C 
P 
P 
C 
P 
P 
P 
P 
C 
HO 
HO 
HO 
n FIG. 68. Structure of bisphosphonates. (Courtesy of James H. Liu, MD)
strong family history of CVD, the choice to use estrogen 
may be influenced by the concept that it reduces CVD 
risk; however, there is no FDA-approved indication for 
estrogen in the prevention of CVD, and not all investigators 
agree about this role. Nevertheless, in the past the 
National Cholesterol Education Program guidelines have 
advocated the use of oral estrogen therapy in postmenopausal 
women as one possible strategy for lowering 
elevated cholesterol levels. No long-term data are available 
as yet regarding the use of raloxifene and cardiovascular 
risk. 

Despite carefully conducted prospective cohort studies, 
such as the Nurses’ Health Study, study biases inherent 
in the study design overestimate the cardioprotective 
benefits of HRT. Epidemiologists have classified these 
biases as the healthy-user bias, compliance bias, and 
healthy survivors bias. It is likely that women who choose 
estrogen therapy have health-conscious behaviors, are 
more compliant with medications, and have fewer medical 
contraindications to estrogen use. 

Two recent randomized clinical trials examined the 
effectiveness of HRT as secondary prevention in reducing 
the risk of myocardial infarction and CVD deaths in postmenopausal 
women with established heart disease. The 
Heart Estrogen/ Progestin Replacement Study trial studied 
2,763 menopausal women randomized to receive 

either 0.625 mg of CEE with 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone 
acetate daily or placebo (46). During the average 
follow-up time of 4.1 years, there was an increase in 
deaths from myocardial infarction or coronary heart disease 
during the first year in the HRT group (relative risk, 

1.52 [1.01–2.29]). However, during the overall duration 
of the study, there were no significant differences in 
number of deaths from myocardial infarction or coronary 
heart disease for women receiving the placebo or HRT. 
Fewer coronary heart disease events were observed in the 
HRT group during years 4 and 5 of the study. 
These findings in the trial are consistent with a recent 
report from the Data Safety Monitoring Board for the 
Women’s Health Initiative HRT trial (47). In this 10-year 
trial, more than 27,000 menopausal women aged 50–79 
years were randomized to receive either 0.625 mg of 
CEE, 0.625 mg of CEE with 2.5 mg medroxyprogesterone 
acetate, or a placebo. Subjects receiving either 
CEE or CEE with medroxyprogesterone acetate experienced 
a small but significant increase in the incidence of 
heart attacks, strokes, and deep vein thrombosis over the 
placebo group. The increase in thrombotic events in these 
women is consistent with recent data that suggest that a 
proinflammatory marker may be elevated in women who 
are at increased risk for cardiovascular events. Recent 
guidelines from the American Heart Association no 


182 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

longer recommend estrogen replacement therapy for 
secondary prevention of CVD; clinical trials on primary 
prevention are not yet available to demonstrate effectiveness 
(48). 

Another trial, the Estrogen Replacement and 
Atherosclerosis study, was a smaller randomized trial that 
examined coronary artery angiographic changes in 309 
women randomized to receive either 0.625 mg of CEE, 

0.625 mg of CEE plus 2.5 mg of medroxyprogesterone 
acetate, or placebo over 3 years (49). There were no overall 
differences in progression of coronary lesions among 
the three groups, although the study was probably not 
sufficiently robust to demonstrate small differences 
among the treatment groups. Taken together, these two 
randomized trials suggest that HRT is probably not effective 
in secondary prevention of CVD and does not 
improve survival for women with established CVD. 
Clinicians should be judicious in starting HRT in women 
with known heart disease. For primary prevention of 
CVD, HRT has been shown to be effective based only on 
observational data. Results from the Women’s Health 
Initiative hormone replacement trial, which will finish in 
2005, may help resolve these issues. 
For the treatment of hyperlipidemia, the judicious use 
of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A (HMG CoA) 
reductase inhibitors such as statins has been shown to be 
effective in reducing overall morbidity and mortality and 
in slowing the progression of angiographically evident 
disease in women with established CVD in multiple trials. 
The American Heart Association recommends that this 
approach be used as secondary prevention for CVD (48). 

With regard to primary prevention, recent data indicate 
that low-dose aspirin therapy is of benefit in preventing 
CVD. British investigators randomized 4,495 people (³ 50 
years old, mean = 64.4 years old; 2,583 women) to treatment 
with aspirin (100 mg daily) or no aspirin and with 
vitamin E (300 mg daily) or no vitamin E and followed 
them for a mean of 3.6 years (50). The subjects were at 
high risk for CVD, with hypertension (systolic blood pressure 
>160 mm Hg or diastolic blood pressure >95 mm 
Hg), hypercholesterolemia, diabetes mellitus, obesity, or a 
family history of myocardial infarction before age 55 
years. This trial was stopped early because it showed significant 
benefit of treatment with aspirin. With aspirin 
treatment, the risk for cardiovascular death was significantly 
lower when compared with controls (1.4% versus 
0.8%; relative risk, 0.56; 95% confidence interval, 
0.31–0.99), as was the risk for cardiovascular events 
(8.2% versus 6.3%; relative risk, 0.77; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.62–0.95). Patients taking aspirin, however, had 
significantly increased risk for severe gastrointestinal 
bleeding (1 death) (0.3% versus 1.1%; P <0.0008). 
Vitamin E had no effect on any end point followed. 

COLON CANCER AND MACULAR DEGENERATION 

Observational studies have reported a reduced risk of 
colorectal cancer in menopausal women who are current 

and past users of HRT. This protective effect increases 
with duration of use. At present, no clinical trials confirm 
this benefit. The postulated mechanism for this benefit is 
the estrogen-induced changes in bile acid composition. 

With aging, there is a decline in macular function. In 
observational studies, estrogen therapy has been reported 
to reduce macular degeneration and maintain visual acuity 
in menopausal women. A prospective trial to examine 
this potential benefit of HRT is in progress through the 
Women’s Health Initiative (47). At present, estrogen therapy 
has not been approved by the FDA for the prevention 
of colon cancer or the treatment of macular degeneration. 

Androgen Therapy 

Although androgen therapy has been prescribed for sexual 
dysfunction for many years, data regarding its safety 
and efficacy are incomplete, and physiologic androgen 
therapy has not been shown to consistently affect the 
libido. Patients most likely to benefit from androgen therapy 
are young women who have undergone oophorectomy. 
Although it is possible that other women 
experiencing decreased libido may benefit from a trial of 
androgen therapy, the lack of definitive data should lead 
to a cautious approach. In general, lower doses of oral 
preparations are preferred. Appropriate monitoring for 
side effects, including lipoprotein alteration, should be 
undertaken. 

Phytoestrogens 

Phytoestrogens are a class of plant-derived estrogen-like 
compounds conjugated to glycoside moieties. 
Phytoestrogens are not biologically active in their native 
forms unless taken orally. After oral ingestion, colonic 
bacteria cleave the glycosides, producing active compounds 
that are subject to the enterohepatic circulation. 
Phytoestrogens like raloxifene are considered to be in the 
class of selective estrogen receptor modulators and bind 
to estrogen a and estrogen b receptors. These compounds 
can produce estrogen-like effects in some tissues, whereas 
in other tissues they can produce estrogen-blocking 
effects. 

Few randomized trials have examined the efficacy of 
phytoestrogens on menopausal symptoms such as hot 
flushes. Investigators in one study reported that soy isolate 
treatment reduced hot flushes by more than 40% at 
12 weeks and was significantly better than placebo (51). 
However, estrogen treatment reduced hot flushes by more 
than 80% in the same study. In two small studies, phytoestrogens 
were reported to reduce total cholesterol levels 
in women with high cholesterol levels; however, these 
effects were not confirmed by other studies. Soy compounds 
appear to have little effect on bone metabolism, 
although they may have weak antiresorptive effects on 
bone turnover. In general, phytoestrogens are 1,000- to 
10,000-fold less potent than estradiol. 


MENOPAUSE 183 

Compliance Issues 

Adherence to long-term HRT and other therapies is 
important in the treatment of chronic diseases such as 
osteoporosis. However, less than 20% of women remain 
on HRT for more than 5 years. Reasons for discontinuation 
of HRT include unanticipated vaginal bleeding, 
breast tenderness, weight gain, perceived risks of estro-
gen, and an improvement in symptoms. Strategies to 
improve compliance should be implemented before a 
patient begins therapy. To reduce misunderstandings, a 
careful discussion between the patient and health care 
provider should cover the clinical indications, benefits, 
and adverse effects of treatments. A telephone call at 
6 weeks of therapy by a nurse or health care provider to 
discuss adverse effects or review other new concerns may 
improve long-term compliance. 

Risks and Contraindications 

Among the treatment options that have been discussed, 
only the risks and contraindications associated with hormonal 
use will be covered here. Estrogen use is associated 
with increased mitotic activity and density on 
mammography. In contrast to what happens in endometrial 
tissue, progestins do not oppose the action of estro-
gen on breast tissue. For example, in premenopausal 
women, increasing progesterone levels during the luteal 
phase of the menstrual cycle is associated with increased 
mitotic activity. These physiologic responses to sex 
steroids by breast tissue have led to increased concerns 
regarding the link between estrogen and estrogen–progestin 
use and breast cancer. 

A recent reanalysis of 51 epidemiologic studies by the 
Collaborative Group on Hormone Factors in Breast 
Cancer in more than 52,705 women with breast cancer 
and 108,411 women without breast cancer using the original 
data sets indicates that there is little risk of cancer in 
HRT users with up to 5 years of estrogen use (52). 
Thereafter, there is a relative risk of 1.023 per year of 
estrogen use in menopausal women. This risk is similar to 
the increase in incidence of breast cancer associated with 
a delay in menopause for 1 year (relative risk, 1.028). The 
relative risk for estrogen users after 5 years was 1.35. 
Moreover, this increased risk disappears 5 years after discontinuation 
of hormone treatment. 

In addition, two recent epidemiologic studies have 
examined the association between combination estrogen–
progestin regimens and the risk of breast cancer. One 
study that examined 45,355 postmenopausal women 
found that women taking estrogen alone had a 1.2-fold 
increase (confidence interval, 1.0–1.4) in risk of breast 
cancer, whereas women taking estrogen plus a progestin 
in a sequential regimen had a 1.4-fold risk increase (confidence 
interval, 1.1–1.8) (53). In the second study, 
women using combined HRT had a higher risk (odds 
ratio, 1.24; confidence interval, 1.07–1.45) than those 
using estrogen alone (odds ratio, 1.06; confidence inter


val, 0.97–1.15), but this difference was not significant 
(54). The use of sequential progestin regimens versus 
continuous progestin regimens also was associated with a 
nonsignificant, but higher, risk (odds ratio, 1.38 versus 
1.09). 

Based on the findings of the first study, the projected 
absolute lifetime risk for nonestrogen users in menopause 
is approximately 10 cases of breast cancer per 100 
women (53). With unopposed estrogen use, it would 
increase to 12 cases per 100 women, and it would 
increase to 14 cases per 100 women for combined HRT. 
Taken together, these studies suggest general agreement 
that HRT is associated with a slight, but significant, risk 
of breast cancer. This risk would have to be balanced by 
the potential benefit of relief of menopausal symptoms 
and the prevention of heart disease. 

Continuous combined regimens result in irregular 
bleeding for the first 6–9 months, particularly in younger 
women (55). This, combined with fear of cancer, may 
lead to early discontinuation of HRT. Thereafter, the 
majority (85%) of women have amenorrhea. Sequential 
regimens induce cyclic uterine bleeding, but it continues 
for many years unless lower doses of both estrogen and 
progestin are used. 

Endometrial hyperplasia occurs with the use of unopposed 
estrogen at a rate of approximately 20% per year 
with standard doses (56). Particularly in the first year, virtually 
all the hyperplasias are of the simple cystic variety. 
The use of added progestin essentially eliminates this 
increased risk. 

Gallbladder disease is more prevalent with oral ERT 
(an increase of 1.5–2-fold). This fact should be considered 
in women who are contemplating the use of estrogen 
therapy. 

Thrombosis and thromboembolic disease are increased 
twofold to threefold in women who receive standard doses 
of oral estrogens. They appear early (in the first year), and 
the actual risk is relatively small, occurring in 25 of 
100,000 women. The risk may be less with nonoral estro-
gen and with lower doses. Women with a history of thrombosis 
or thromboembolism, particularly if it occurred with 
prior hormone use, should not receive standard therapy. If 
there are no alternatives for the treatment of symptoms, 
low-dose transdermal treatment or vaginal estrogen treatment 
may be considered after a thorough evaluation for 
thrombophilias. Raloxifene carries similar risks as estro-
gen in terms of thrombosis. 

Estrogen treatment is relatively contraindicated in the 
presence of hormonally sensitive neoplasia (breast and 
uterus). In women with well-differentiated adenocarcinoma 
of the endometrium stage I, estrogen therapy can be 
used in severely symptomatic women. Similarly, in 
women with previously treated breast cancer, estrogen 
therapy can be considered in severely symptomatic 
women with their consent (57). 

Estrogen therapy is relatively contraindicated in 
women with liver disease and those who have significant 


184 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

hypertriglyceridemia (>250 mg/dL), including women 
with diabetes mellitus who have this profile. In this setting, 
nonoral estrogen therapy may be considered and is 
viewed to be beneficial in women with relatively uncomplicated 
diabetes mellitus. Although estrogen generally 
tends to lower blood pressure, some women may exhibit 
an idiosyncratic blood pressure rise with certain doses of 
oral estrogen. Changing the dose or switching to a non-
oral route of administration is usually advantageous. 

Women who have significant CVD, such as severe 
atherosclerosis with coronary occlusion, may have an 
increased risk with a standard dose of estrogen (46), particularly 
if administered within 1 year of a myocardial 
infarction. In these women, hormones should be prescribed 
cautiously and on an individual basis. 

ALTERNATIVE THERAPIES 
FOR MENOPAUSE 

Alternative medicine encompasses a number of systematic 
medical practices based on physical assessments that 
differ from physiology as it is taught in Western medical 
institutions. Examples include traditional Chinese 
medicine, a system defining health in terms of the balance 
of an essential life force called Qi (pronounced 
“chee”). Acupuncture is said to support wellness and to 
treat disease by regulating the flow of Qi along meridians 
that course through the body. Mind–body systems of 
medicine support health by using conscious and unconscious 
influences of mind over bodily processes. 
Manipulative and body-based practices include chiropractic, 
osteopathy, and massage. Meditation, hypnosis, 
music, and prayer fall into the area of mind–body practice. 
Somewhat related to mind–body medicine are socalled 
energy-modulating modalities, which are said to 
reorder bioelectric fields of the body. Examples include 
therapeutic touch, Qi Gong treatment, and the use of 
magnets. The most recognizable and widely employed 
alternative medical practices are biologically based therapies 
like botanical medicines, dietary supplements, vitamins, 
minerals, and orthomolecular medicine. 

Estimates are that between 30% and 60% of women 
use so-called alternative interventions for the symptoms 
of menopause, including “natural” estrogens, plant estro-
gens (which should more correctly be termed “phyto-
SERMs,” because they function as selective estrogen 
receptor modulators), herbal medicines, and acupuncture. 
Botanicals, herbals, and many steroid products are sold 
over the counter, and some do in fact exert significant 
hormonal activity. The use of botanicals to alleviate the 
symptoms of menopause is extremely popular. This popularity 
is fostered by the notion that plant sterols might 
provide all the benefits of estrogen replacement therapy 
without the attendant risks of neoplasm or venous thrombosis. 
Unfortunately, many plant products recommended 
for menopause have performed poorly in clinical trials. 

Nonetheless, they continue to be promoted heavily in 
advertising campaigns and enjoy great popularity engendered 
by the erroneous assumption that tradition and 
folklore are proofs of success and safety. 

Botanical Medicines 

PROBLEMS WITH BOTANICAL MEDICINES 

The Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 
1994 classifies most botanical medicines as food supplements 
and removes them from regulatory oversight and 
scrutiny by the FDA. Adulteration, contamination, and 
poor quality control in their harvesting, manufacture, 
and formulation yield products of questionable efficacy 
and safety. The FDA has determined that more than 25% 
of Chinese patent medicines are adulterated with hidden 
pharmaceutical drugs. These kinds of deficiencies make 
it difficult for consumers and practitioners to employ 
botanicals with confidence and security. Furthermore, 
clinical trial data obtained using one brand of herbal 
product cannot necessarily be extrapolated to other 
brands using the same plant. Results of studies using 
whole plant material cannot be extrapolated to extracts or 
isolates derived from the same plants, because clearly, 
something may be lost in processing the material. In contrast 
to the regulatory process in the United States, the 
German government has established Commission E, an 
agency to oversee manufacture, distribution, and safety of 
botanical medicines. The agency also publishes a series 
of monographs that describe the botanicals, their clinical 
indications, and their dose ranges (58). 

Although most of the plant medicines recommended 
for menopause appear to be harmless, products may be 
adulterated or contaminated. Practitioners treating 
menopausal women must be acquainted with these products 
and their potential to harm or to heal. 

BOTANICALS AND MENOPAUSE 

Many of the botanicals used for menopause have been 
employed for centuries, if not millennia. Most commonly, 
botanicals are suggested to help with the so-called 
neurovegetative complaints: vasomotor symptoms, sleep 
disturbances, fatigue, mood changes, and sexual dysfunction. 


Botanicals recommended for vasomotor symptoms 
include soy, black cohosh, evening primrose oil, dong 
quai, ginseng, red clover, and belladonna. There are three 
principle types of plant phytoestrogens. The isoflavones, 
particularly genistein and daidzein, are plant sterol 
molecules found in soy, garbanzo beans, and other 
legumes and are the most common human food sources 
of phytoestrogens. Lignans are a constituent of the cell 
wall of plants and become bioavailable through the action 
of intestinal bacteria on cereal grains. The highest 
amounts are found in seeds used as vegetable oil sources, 


most notably flaxseed or linseed. Coumestans are found 
in red clover, sunflower seeds, and bean sprouts and are 
known to have estrogenic effects in grazing animals. Red 
clover is also the richest known source of isoflavones. 

Observational studies have shown that people who eat 
isoflavone-rich diets have decreased rates of coronary 
heart disease and sex steroid–related malignancies. Diets 
rich in isoflavones have beneficial effects on lipids, with 
intake on the order of 47 g/d correlating with a statistically 
significant 9.3% reduction in total cholesterol, a 
12.9% reduction in LDL cholesterol, and a 10.5% decline 
in triglycerides. However, there are no interventional 
studies demonstrating that a shift to plant protein–based 
diets at midlife can alter cardiovascular mortality. 

Although red clover, sunflower seeds, and bean 
sprouts are known to have estrogenic effects in grazing 
animals, evidence of estrogenic effects in humans are less 
convincing. There are at least eight studies in the literature 
at this time on the use of soy-based isoflavones for 
menopausal flushing. All are of very short duration, 3 
months or less, and all use different types of soy containing 
different amounts of isoflavones. Although data are 
limited, it appears that very large amounts of soy in the 
form of intact protein with active isoflavones must be 
eaten each day to control hot flashes. At least 40–80 mg 
of active isoflavones appears to provide about a 50% 
reduction in women with mild to moderate symptoms. 
Evidence for isoflavone isolates, like red clover or soybased 
isoflavone tablets, is less compelling. 

Botanicals taken to improve mood include chaste 
tree, St. John’s wort, and kava. Although no studies have 
been done with menopausal women specifically, chaste 
tree has demonstrated benefits in women with PMS and 
might hold some promise for treating symptoms such as 
mood changes experienced in perimenopause. In aggregate 
studies in more than 1,500 patients, St. John’s wort 
has been shown to ease symptoms of mild to moderate 
depression (59). However, St. John’s wort was not effective 
in treating major depression (60). Saint John’s wort 
can cause profound up-regulation of the cytochrome 
system and can affect the metabolism of many drugs, 
particularly sedatives, narcotics, immunosuppressants, 
and steroids. Kava has sedative properties and has been 
studied in Germany for menopausal complaints—anxiety 
in particular (61). One study demonstrated a profound 
reduction in Hamilton anxiety scores, and a 
separate study showed that kava was as effective as two 
kinds of benzodiazepines. Note that kava can cause 
intoxication and should not be used with other sedatives, 
narcotics, or alcohol. Recent reports from Europe 
have found more than 50 cases of hepatic failure associated 
with kava use. Germany, France, and England have 
now banned its use. 

The herbs valerian, lavender, and passion flower all 
have been used for centuries as sleep remedies. Studies of 
valerian, the quality of which cannot be assessed, report 

MENOPAUSE 185 

mixed results, with subjective improvements in sleep 
quality and latency (62), but minimal or no change in 
sleep as determined by electroencephalography. In a 
study of seven patients currently on medication for sleep 
disorders, inhaled lavender oil caused an improvement in 
sleep times equal to those of the prior drug therapy after 
a washout period. 

Although many botanicals are said to be aphrodisiacs, 
none has been studied adequately in women to allow us 
to recommend it to treat loss of libido during perimenopause 
and menopause. The most common products 
suggested are ginseng, chaste tree, ginkgo, and yohimbe. 
Ginkgo may be helpful in reversing the loss of libido 
associated with the use of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors. 

USING BOTANICALS 

Botanicals should be clearly labeled with the name of the 
herb, part of the plant used, batch or lot number, expiration 
date, and name and address of manufacturer. 
Practitioners should let patients know that they are open 
to discussing the use of alternative therapies. They should 
advise patients to discontinue all herbal medicines at least 
2 weeks prior to elective surgery, because these preparations 
can affect the pharmacokinetics of anesthetic drugs 
(63). Practitioners should inquire about the use of 
herbals, botanicals, and other supplements at every 
patient encounter and update the patient’s medical record 
regularly (64). Commonly used herbs, along with their 
pharmacologic effects and adverse effects, are listed in 
Table 21. 

Mind–Body Alternatives 

The rubric alternative medicine includes a vast array of 
practices other than herbal medicine. Meditation is useful 
for treating anxiety and pain syndromes. Yoga, although 
not proven as a specific treatment for menopause, helps to 
maintain strength and flexibility. Acupuncture has been 
shown to alter afferent neuronal transmission to pain centers 
in the brain, and it clearly has a role in the management 
of pain syndromes and chronic pain. 

Conclusion 

In the broadest sense, alternative medical systems may be 
viewed as bodies of knowledge and practice that strive to 
promote health and well-being. These practices should 
not be dismissed or denigrated outright because of overpromotion, 
distortion, or misrepresentation made by a 
limited segment of the alternative medicine community. 
The judicious use of alternative practices of proven efficacy 
in concert with conventional menopause medicine 
may improve communication, satisfaction, and outcomes 
in health. 


186 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

¦ 
TABLE 21. Commonly Used Herbs, Pharmacologic Effects, and Adverse Effects 
Common Name Putative Pharmacologic Effects Adverse Effects Evidence-Based Support 
Black cohosh 
(Remifemin Menopause, 
20 mg twice daily) 
Relief of vasomotor symptoms, 
anxiety, mild depression, and 
dysmenorrhea 
Gastric discomfort, 
headaches, nausea, 
and dizziness 
Randomized trial showing 
lack of efficacy* 
Soy supplements Selective estrogen receptor 
modulator; relief of hot flushes; 
modest lowering of lipids 
Possible stimulation of 
breast cancer cells 
Effective in reducing hot 
flushes by 50%†; 
mild effect on lipids‡ 
Evening primrose oil Relief of vasomotor symptoms, 
premenstrual syndrome, and 
mastalgia 
Anticoagulant Randomized trial showing 
no effect§ 
Dong quai Relief of vasomotor symptoms Randomized trial showing 
no effect½½ 
Ginseng Relief of vasomotor symptoms 
and loss of libido; reduction 
of stress 
Hypoglycemia; risk of 
bleeding (anticoagulant) 
Randomized trial showing 
no effect# 
St. John’s wort Relief of mild depression Induction of cytochrome 
P450, resulting in increased 
metabolism of drugs 
Effective in mild depresion**; 
not effective in 
major depression†† 
Valerian root Sedative Increased effects of 
benzodiazepines 
No clear evidence of effect‡‡ 

* Jacobson JS, Troxel AB, Evans J et al. Randomized trial of balck cohosh for the treatment of hot flashes among women with a history of breast 
cancer. J Clin Oncol 2001;19:2739–2745 
( ) 
†Albertazzi P, Pansini F, Bonaccorsi G, Sanotti L, Forini L, DeAloysio D. The effect of dietary soy supplementation on hot flushes. Obstet Gynecol 
1998;91:6–11 
( ) 
‡Anderson JW, Johnstone BM, Cook-Newell ME. Meta-analysis of the effects of soy protein intake on serum lipids. N Engl J Med 
1995;333:276–282 
( ) 
§Chenoy R, Hussain S, Tayob Y, O’Brien PM, Moss MY, Morse PF. Effect of oral gamolenic acid from evening primrose oil on menopausal flushing. 
BMJ 1994;308:501–503 


( ) 
½½ Hirata JD, Swiersz LM, Zell B, Small R, Ettinger B. Does dong quai have estrogenic effects in postmenopausal women? A double-blind, placebo-
controlled trial. Fertil Steril 1997;68:981–986 


( ) 
# Wiklund IK, Mattsson LA, Lindgren R, Limoni C. Effects of a standardized ginseng extract on quality of life and physiologic parameters in symptomatic 
postmenopausal women: a double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Swedish Alternative Medicine Group. Int J Clin Pharmacol Res 
1999;19:89–99 


( ) 
**Liske E. Therapeutic efficacy and safety of Cimicifuga racemosa for gynecologic disorders. Adv Ther 1998;15:45–53 


( ) 
††Shelton RC, Keller MB, Gelenberg A, Dunner DL, Hirschfeld R, Thase ME, et al. Effectiveness of St. John’s wort in major depression: a randomized 
trial. JAMA 2001; 285:1978–1986 
( ) 
‡‡U.S. Pharmacopeia Botanical Monograph series: information for the health care professional and consumer. Rockville, Maryland: US 
Pharmacopeial Convention Inc, 1998. 
References 
FSH rises in perimenopausal women. Clin Endocrinol 
1998;48:809–813 


( ) 
1. McKinlay SM, Brambilla DJ, Posner JG. The normal 
4. Burger HG, Dudley EC, Hopper JL, Groome N, Guthrie JR, 
menopause transition. Maturitas 1992;14:103–115 

Green A, et al. Prospectively measured levels of serum fol


( ) 
2. Rannevik G, Jeppsson S, Johnell O, Bjerre B, Laurell-Borulf 
licle-stimulating hormone, estradiol, and the dimeric inhib-
Y, Svanberg L. A longitudinal study of the perimenopausal ins during the menopausal transition in a population-based 
transition: altered profiles of steroid and pituitary hormones, cohort of women. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1999;84: 
SHBG and bone mineral density. Maturitas 1995;21: 103–113 


(button) 
4025–4030 


( ) 
3. Burger HG, Cahir N, Robertson DM, Groome NP, Dudley E, 
5. Burger HG, Dudley E, Mamers P, Groome N, Robertson 
Green A, et al. Serum inhibins A and B fall differentially as DM. Early follicular phase serum FSH as a function of age: 

MENOPAUSE 187 

the roles of inhibin B, inhibin A and estradiol. Climacteric 21. Dennerstein L, Smith AM, Morse C. Psychological well2000;
3:17–24 being, mid-life and the menopause. Maturitas 1994;20:1–11 



(button) 
6. Santoro N, Brown JR, Adel T, Skurnick JH. Characterization 
22. Mitchell ES, Woods NF. Symptom experiences of midlife 
of reproductive hormonal dynamics in the perimenopause. J women: observations from the Seattle Midlife Women’s 
Clin Endocrinol Metab 1996;81:1495–1501 
Health Study. Maturitas 1996;25:1–10 


( ) 
( ) 
7. Labrie F, Bélanger A, Cusan L, Gomez JL, Candas B. 
23. Schiff I, Regestein Q, Tulchinsky D, Ryan KJ. Effects of 
Marked decline in serum concentrations of adrenal C19 sex 

estrogens on sleep and psychological state of hypogonadal 

steroid precursors and conjugated androgen metabolites 

women. JAMA 1979;242:2405–2407 


( ) 
(button) 
during aging. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1997;82:2396–2402 

8. 
Jiroutek MR, Chen MH, Johnston CC, Longcope C. 
Changes in reproductive hormones and sex hormone-binding 
globulin in a group of postmenopausal women measured 
over 10 years. Menopause 1998;5:90–94 
( ) 
9. Zumoff B, Strain GW, Miller LK, Rosner W. Twenty-four 
hour mean plasma testosterone concentration declines with 
age in normal premenopausal women. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 1995;80:1429–1430 
( ) 
10. Meldrum DR, Davidson BJ, Tataryn IV, Judd HL. Changes 
in circulating steroids with aging in postmenopausal 
women. Obstet Gynecol 1981;57:624–628 
( ) 
11. Hällström T, Samuelsson S. Mental health in the climacteric. 
The longitudinal study of women in Gothenburg. Acta 
Obstet Gynecol Scand (Suppl) 1985;130:13–18 
( ) 
12. Gath D, Osborn M, Bungay G, Iles S, Day A, Bond A, et al. 
Psychiatric disorder and gynaecological symptoms in middle 
aged women: a community survey. Br Med J (Clin Res 
Ed) 1987;294:213–218 
( ) 
13. McKinlay SM, McKinlay JB. The impact of menopause 
and social factors on health. In: Hammond CB, Haseltine 
FP, Schiff I, eds. Menopause: evaluation, treatment, and 
health concerns: proceedings of a meeting held in Bethesda, 
Maryland, April 21–22, 1988. New York: Alan R. Liss, 
1989 
14. Matthews KA, Wing RR, Kuller LH, Meilahn EN, Kelsey 
SF, Costello EJ, et al. Influences of natural menopause on 
psychological characteristics and symptoms of middle-aged 
healthy women. J Consult Clin Psychol 1990;58:345–351 
(button) 
15. Koster A. Change-of-life anticipations, attitudes, and experiences 
among middle-aged Danish women. Health Care 
Women Int 1991;12:1–13 
( ) 
16. Holte A. Influences of natural menopause on health complaints: 
a prospective study of healthy Norwegian women. 
Maturitas 1992;14:127–141 
( ) 
17. Kaufert PA, Gilbert P, Tate R. The Manitoba Project: a reexamination 
of the link between menopause and depression. 
Maturitas 1992;14:143–155 
( ) 
18. Dennerstein L, Smith AM, Morse C, Burger H, Green A, 
Hopper J, et al. Menopausal symptoms in Australian 
women. Med J Aust 1993;159:232–236 
( ) 
19. Everson SA, Matthews KA, Guzick DS, Wing RR, Kuller 
LH. Effects of surgical menopause on psychological characteristics 
and lipid levels: the Healthy Women Study. 
Health Psychol 1995;14:435–443 
( ) 
20. Avis NE, Brambilla D, McKinlay SM, Vass K. A longitudinal 
analysis of the association between menopause and 
depression. Results from the Massachusetts Women’s 
Health Study. Ann Epidemiol 1994;4:214–220 
( ) 
24. Wiklund I, Karlberg J, Mattsson LA. Quality of life of postmenopausal 
women on a regimen of transdermal estradiol 
therapy: a double-blind placebo-controlled study. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1993;168:824–830 
( ) 
25. Polo-Kantola P, Erkkola R, Helenius H, Irjala K, Polo O. 
When does estrogen replacement therapy improve sleep 
quality? Am J Obstet Gynecol 1998;178:1002–1009 
( ) 
26. Limouzin-Lamothe MA, Mairon N, Joyce CR, Le Gal M. 
Quality of life after the menopause: influence of hormonal 
replacement therapy. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170: 
618–624 
( ) 
27. Behl C, Skutella T, Lezoualc’h F, Post A, Widmann M, 
Newton CJ, et al. Neuroprotection against oxidative stress 
by estrogens: structure-activity relationship. Mol Pharmacol 
1997;51:535–541 
( ) 
28. Hashimoto S, Katou M, Dong Y, Murakami K, Terada S, 
Inoue M. Effects of hormone replacement therapy on serum 
amyloid P component in postmenopausal women. 
Maturitas 1997;26:113–119 
( ) 
29. Woolley CS, Weiland NG, McEwen BS, Schwartzkroin PA. 
Estradiol increases the sensitivity of hippocampal CA1 
pyramidal cells to NMDA receptor-mediated synaptic 
input: correlation with dendritic spine density. J Neurosci 
1997;17:1848–1859 
( ) 
30. Sherwin BB. Estrogen effects on cognition in menopausal 
women. Neurology 1997;485(Suppl 7):S21–S26 
( ) 
31. Rice MM, Graves AB, McCurry SM, Larson EB. Estrogen 
replacement therapy and cognitive function in postmenopausal 
women without dementia. Am J Med 
1997;103(3A):26S–35S 
( ) 
32. Resnick SM, Metter EJ, Zonderman AB. Estrogen replacement 
therapy and longitudinal decline in visual memory. A 
possible protective effect? Neurology 1997;49:1491–1497 
(button) 
33. Jacobs DM, Tang MX, Stern Y, Sano M, Marder K, Bell 
KL, et al. Cognitive function in nondemented older women 
who took estrogen after menopause. Neurology 1998;50: 
368–373 
( ) 
34. Wing RR, 
Matthews KA, Kuller LH, Meilahn EN, 
Plantinga PL. Weight gain at the time of menopause. Arch 
Intern Med 1991;151:97–102 
( ) 
35. Lobo RA. Treatment of the postmenopausal woman: where 
we are today. In: Lobo RA, ed. Treatment of the postmenopausal 
woman: basic and clinical aspects. 2nd ed. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 1999: 
655–659 
36. Phillips KA, Glendon G, Knight JA. Putting the risk of 
breast cancer in perspective. N Engl J Med 1999;340: 
141–144 
( ) 

188 REPRODUCTIVE ENDOCRINOLOGY 

37. Lobo RA. Progestogens. In: Lobo RA, Kelsey J, Marcus 
ER, eds. Menopause—biology and pathobiology. San 
Diego: Academic Press, 2000:429–444 
38. Recker RR, Davies KM, Dowd RM, Heaney RP. The effect 
of low-dose continuous estrogen and progesterone therapy 
with calcium and vitamin D on bone in elderly women. A 
randomized, controlled trial. Ann Intern Med 1999;130: 
897–904 
( ) 
39. Utian WH, Shoupe D, Bachmann G, Pinkerton JV, Pickar 
JH. Relief of vasomotor symptoms and vaginal atrophy 
with lower doses of conjugated equine estrogens and 
medroxyprogesterone acetate. Fertil Steril 001;75:1065–
1079 
( ) 
40. Geerlings MI, Ruitenberg A, Witteman JC, van Swieten JC, 
Hofman A, van Duijn CM, et al. Reproductive period and 
risk of dementia in postmenopausal women. JAMA 2001; 
285:1475-1481 
( ) 
41. Henderson VW, 
Paganini-Hill A, Miller BL, Elble RJ, 
Reyes PF, Shoupe D, et al. Estrogen for Alzheimer’s disease 
in women: randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Neurology 2000;54:295–301 
( ) 
42. Mulnard RA, Cotman CW, Kawas C, van Dyck CH, Sano 
M, Doody R, et al. Estrogen replacement therapy for treatment 
of mild to moderate Alzheimer disease: a randomized 
controlled trial. Alzheimer’s Disease Cooperative Study. 
JAMA 2000;283:1007–1015 [erratum JAMA 2000;284:2597] 
43. Dunn LB, Damesyn M, Moore AA, Reuben DB, Greendale 
GA. Does estrogen prevent skin aging? Results from the 
First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES I). Arch Dermatol 1997;133:339–342 


( ) 
44. Looker 
AC, Orwoll ES, Johnston CC Jr, Lindsay RL, 
Wahner HW, Dunn WL, et al. Prevalence of low femoral 
bone density in older U.S. adults from NHANES III. J Bone 
Miner Res 1997;12:1761–1768 
( ) 
45. Grodstein F, Manson JE, Colditz GA, Willett WC, Speizer 
FE, Stampfer MJ. A prospective, observational study of 
postmenopausal hormone therapy and primary prevention 
of cardiovascular disease. Ann Intern Med 2000;133: 
933–941 
( ) 
46. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T, Furberg C, Herrington D, Riggs 
B, et al. Randomized trial of estrogen plus progestin for 
secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in postmenopausal 
women. Heart and Estrogen/Progestin 
Replacement Study (HERS) Research Group. JAMA 
1998;280:605–613 
( ) 
47. What you should know about hormones and cardiovascular 
health. WHI HRT Update. Bethesda, Maryland: NHLBI, 
2001. Available at http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/whi/hrt-en.htm. 
Retrieved January 8, 2002 
( ) 
48. Mosca L, Collins P, 
Herrington DM, Mendelsohn ME, 
Pasternak RC, Robertson RM, et al. Hormone replacement 
therapy and cardiovascular disease: a statement for healthcare 
professionals from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation 2001;104:499–503 
( ) 
49. Herrington DM, Reboussin DM, Brosnihan KB, Sharp PC, 
Shumaker SA, Snyder TE, et al. Effects of estrogen replacement 
therapy on the progression of coronary-artery 
atherosclerosis. N Engl J Med 2000;343:522–529 
( ) 
50. 
de Gaetano G; Collaborative Group of the Primary 
Prevention Project. Low-dose aspirin and vitamin E in people 
at cardiovascular risk: a randomized trial in general 
practice. Lancet 2001:357: 89–95 
( ) 
51. Albertazzi P, Pansini F, Bonaccorsi G, Zanotti L, Forini E, 
DeAloysio D. The effect of dietary soy supplementation on 
hot flushes. Obstet Gynecol 1998;91:6–11 
( ) 
52. Breast cancer and hormone replacement therapy: collaborative 
reanalysis of data from 51 epidemiological studies of 
52,705 women with breast cancer and 108,411 women 
without breast cancer. Collaborative Group on Hormonal 
Factors in Breast Cancer. Lancet 1997;350:1047–1059 
53. Schairer C, Lubin J, Troisi R, Sturgeon S, Brinton L, 
Hoover R. Menopausal estrogen and estrogen-progestin 
replacement therapy and breast cancer risk. JAMA 2000; 
283:485–491 
( ) 
54. Ross RK, Paganini-Hill A, Wan PC, Pike MC. Effect of 
hormone replacement therapy on breast cancer risk: estro-
gen versus estrogen plus progestin. J Natl Cancer Inst 2000; 
92:328–332 
( ) 
55. Archer DF, 
Pickar JH, Bottiglioni F, Menopause Study 
Group. Bleeding patterns in postmenopausal women taking 
continuous combined or sequential regimens of conjugated 
estrogens with medroxyprogesterone acetate. Menopause 
Study Group. Obstet Gynecol 1994;83:686–692 
( ) 
( ) 


56. Woodruff JD, Pickar JH. Incidence of endometrial hyperplasia 
in postmenopausal women taking conjugated estro-
gens (Premarin) with medroxyprogesterone acetate or 
conjugated estrogens alone. The Menopause Study Group. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1994;170:1213–1223 
( ) 
57. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. 
Hormone replacement therapy in women with previously 
treated breast cancer. ACOG Committee Opinion 226. 
Washington, DC: ACOG, 1999 
58. Blumenthal M, ed. The complete German Commission E 
monographs: therapeutic guide to herbal medicines. Austin, 
Texas: American Botanical Council, 1998 
59. Linde K, Ramirez G, Mulrow CD, Pauls A, Weidenhammer 
W, Melchart D. St. John’s Wort for depression—an 
overview and meta-analysis of randomised clinical trials. 
BMJ 1996;313:253–258 
( ) 
60. Shelton RC, 
Keller MB, Gelenberg A, Dunner DL, 
Hirschfeld R, Thase ME, et al. Effectiveness of St. John’s 
wort in major depression: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA 2001;285:1978–1986 
( ) 
61. 
Jamieson DD, Duffield PH, Cheng D, Duffield AM. 
Comparison of the central nervous system activity of the 
aqueous and lipid extract of kava (Piper methysticum). 
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1989;301:66–80 
( ) 
62. Houghton PJ. The scientific basis for the reputed activity of 
Valerian. J Pharm Pharmacol 1999;51:505–512 
( ) 
63. Ang-Lee MK, Moss J, Yuan C. Herbal medicines and perioperative 
care. JAMA 2001;286:208–216 
( ) 
64. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Use 
of botanicals for management of menopausal symptoms. 
ACOG Practice Bulletin 28. Washington, DC: ACOG, 2001 
( ) 

(Película: Video_1)
Audiovisual Aids 


n VIDEO 1. Endometrial dating. (Narrated by Edward E. Wallach, MD; courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

(Película: VIDEO_2)
n VIDEO 2. Endometrial ablation: Loop resection (Goldfarb HA. Treatment of severe uterine bleeding: combined 
hysteroscopic and laparoscopic technique [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1996); Roller ball (Goldfarb HA. Treatment of severe uterine bleeding: combined 
hysteroscopic and laparoscopic technique [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of 
Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1996); and Use of the YAG laser (Jamieson W. YAG laser photoablation of 
the endometrium—an alternative to hysterectomy in selected cases [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1989) 

(Película: Video_3)
n VIDEO 3. Complications of operative laparoscopy. (Childers JM. Complications and management of 
gynecologic operative laparoscopy [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists, 1995) 

(Película: VIDEO_4)
n VIDEO 4. Laparoscopic surgery of adhesions. (Ory SJ. Laparoscopic infertility surgery [CD-ROM]. 
Washington, DC: American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, 1989) 

(Película: VIDEO_5)
n VIDEO 5. Surgery for endometriosis. (Narrated and videotaped by D. Alan Johns, MD. [American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Precis: gynecology. 2nd ed. CD-ROM. Washington, DC: ACOG, 
2001]) 

(Película: VIDEO_6)
n VIDEO 6. Office hysteroscopy. (Siegler AM. Office hysteroscopy [CD-ROM]. Washington, DC: American 
College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists [CD-ROM], 1986) 

Images 



n IMAGE 1. Clitoromegaly in a patient with 45,X/46,XY karyotype. 
(Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb AF. 
Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 
Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:5.14 with permission) 
n IMAGE 2. Young child with true hermaphroditism. (
((A
AA) 
)) Two-month-old child with frank sexual ambiguity: 
enlarged genital tubercle, a gonad in the left labioscrotal pouch, unfused labioscrotal pouches, and a single 
opening under the enlarged genital tubercle. (
((B
BB) 
)) The gonad proved histologically to be an ovotestis. (Tho SP. 
Sexual ambiguity. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. 
Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:2.22 with permission) 

n IMAGE 3. Streak gonad. (Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. 
Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:5.14 with permission) 

n IMAGE 4. Complete androgen insensitivity. The phenotype is that of a normal female with complete breast 
development, scant pubic hair, and a blind vagina with no müllerian system. Serum testosterone levels are in 
the male range (high range), and the karyotype is 46,XY. (Plouffe L Jr. Delayed sexual maturation. In: Goldfarb 
AF. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 1. Pediatric and adolescent gynecology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 
1998:5.15 with permission) 

n IMAGE 5. Endometrial dating: early menstruation. n IMAGE 6. Endometrial dating: early menstruation. 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 7. Endometrial dating: early–mid-menstrua-
tion. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 8. Endometrial dating: early–mid-menstrua-
tion. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 9. Endometrial dating: mid-menstruation. n IMAGE 10. Endometrial dating: late menstruation– 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) early proliferation. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 11. Endometrial dating: later proliferative 
phase. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 12. Endometrial dating: late proliferativephase, 15 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD)

n IMAGE 13. Endometrial dating: late proliferative n IMAGE 14. Endometrial dating: late proliferative 
phase, 15 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) phase. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 15. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 18 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 16. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 19 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 17. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 19 n IMAGE 18. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 20 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 19. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 20 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 20. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 21. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 n IMAGE 22. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 21 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 23. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 22 n IMAGE 24. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 23 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 25. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 24 n IMAGE 26. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 24 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 27. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 25 n IMAGE 28. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 26 
days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 29. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, n IMAGE 30. Endometrial dating: secretory phase, 26 
26–27 days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) days. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 31. Arias-Stella reaction (ectopic pregnancy). 
(Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 32. Acanthosis nigricans. (Courtesy of Richard Legro, MD) 

n IMAGE 33. Clinical features of a woman with Cushing’s disease caused by a pituitary adenoma. (
((A
AA) 
)) 
Moon facies and malar flush. (
((B 
BB a
aan
nnd 
dd C
CC) 
)) Obesity with central adiposity and thin legs. (
((D
DD) 
)) Violaceous abdominal 
striae more than 1 cm in width. (Yen SS, Jaffe RB, Barbieri RL. Reproductive endocrinology: physiology, 
pathophysiology, and clinical management. 4th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 1999:529) 

n IMAGE 34. Endometrioma or “chocolate cyst.” (Courtesy of Michael Blumenfeld, MD) 
n IMAGE 35. Endometriosis. The appearance may range from clear vesicles to peritoneal 
defects, to classic “powder-burn” marks. (Courtesy of Michael Blumenfeld, MD) 

n IMAGE 36. Diagnosis of endometriosis. (
((A
AA) 
)) Endometriosis implants are first identified by laparoscopy. 
(
((B
BB) 
)) The diagnosis is confirmed by histologic findings of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine 
cavity. (Thornton MH, Bello SM, Israel R. Endometriosis. In: Mishell DR Jr. Atlas of clinical gynecology. Vol. 3. 
Reproductive endocrinology. Philadelphia: Current Medicine, 1998:14.6 with permission) 
n IMAGE 38. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 37. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 39. Septate uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
n IMAGE 40. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Ricardo 
Wallach, MD) 

Azziz, MD) 

n IMAGE 41. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 42. Didelphic uterus. (Courtesy of Edward E. 
Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 43. Bicornuate uterus. (Courtesy of William 
H. Kutteh, MD) 
n IMAGE 44. T-shaped uterus. (Courtesy of Ricardo 
Azziz, MD) 
n IMAGE 45. Filling defect, fibroid. (Courtesy of 
Edward E. Wallach, MD) 
n IMAGE 46. Filling defect, synechiae. (Courtesy 
of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

n IMAGE 47. Involuted fibroid. (Courtesy of William H. Kutteh, MD) 
n IMAGE 48. Salpingitis isthmica nodosa. (Courtesy of Ricardo Azziz, MD) 

n IMAGE 49. Asherman’s syndrome, uterine factors. (Courtesy of Edward E. Wallach, MD) 

Linking Instructions 

Click on the specific section, slide, or video listing in Contents for quick access to 
the material. 

Click on highlighted in-text citations to tables, figures, boxes, slides, and videos 
for linking to the cited material. To return to the text, click on the heavy black 
arrow pointing left on the bar at the top of the screen. 

To view MEDLINE abstracts of referenced journal articles, click on the icon at the 
end of the references. To return to the text, click on the heavy black arrow 
pointing left on the bar at the top of the screen. 

Use the software’s search function for quick access to the text you’re seeking. 


Index 


Note: Page numbers followed by letters b, 
f, and t refer to boxes, figures, and 
tables, respectively. 

A 

Abnormal uterine bleeding (AUB), 69–73 
etiology of, 69–70, 69b 
evaluation of, 70–71 
in postmenopausal women, 73 
treatment of, 71–72 

Abortion, spontaneous. See Pregnancy 

loss 
Acanthosis nigricans, 89 
Acne 

androgen excess and, 84, 85 
oral contraceptives and, 164 
polycystic ovary syndrome and, 87 
treatment of, 91, 92 

Activin, 53 
Acupuncture, 184, 185 
Addison’s disease, 112 
Adenoma, silent subtype III, 82 
Adrenal gland(s), 105–106 

androgen deficiency, 111 
androgen excess, 106–111 
androgen-secreting tumors of, 88, 89 
autoimmune destruction of, 112 
cortisol deficiency, 112–113 
cortisol excess, 111–112 
disorders of, 105–113 
histology of, 105f 
steroid synthesis in, 106, 107f 

Adrenal hyperplasia. See Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia 

Adrenal insufficiency, 112–113 
diagnosis of, 112 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 95–96 
treatment of, 113 

Adrenal medulla pheochromocytoma, 113 
Adrenarche, 38, 42 
b -Adrenergic blocking agents, 104 
African Americans 

heritable diseases in, 125 
pubertal development in, 42 
Age 
and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 

concentrations, 106, 106f 
and fertility, 124 
and in vitro fertilization, prognosis 

with, 142 
maternal, and chromosome disorders, 20 
of menarche, 38 
of menopause, 169 

Alcohol consumption 
and menopause, 169 
and pregnancy loss, risk of, 159 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Alendronate, for osteoporosis, 180t 
Allele-specific oligonucleotide 
hybridization, 24–25, 27f 
Alloimmune factors, and pregnancy loss, 

159 
Alopecia, androgenic, 84, 85, 85f,92 
Alprazolam, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Alzheimer’s disease, 172, 177–178 
Ambiguous genitalia, 35–37 

diagnosis of, 35–37, 37b 
differential diagnosis of, 35, 36f 
etiology of, 35 
21-hydroxylase deficiency and, 108, 

110f 
physical examination for, 37 
therapy for, 37 


Amenorrhea, 67–68 
causes of, 68, 68b 
hypothalamic, 73–79, 74f 
laboratory evaluation of, 68, 69f 
pituitary tumors and, 82 
postpill, 67 
primary, 43, 47, 48, 67 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
secondary, 67 
virilization and, 85 

American Society for Reproductive 
Medicine (ASRM), 142 
classification of endometriosis, 
118f–119f 
ethics committee of, 150, 151, 152 
Anabolic steroids, for gonadal dysgenesis, 
45 
Androgen(s), 83. See also specific 

androgens 
biosynthesis from cholesterol, 84f 
therapy with, in menopause, 182 

Androgen deficiency, adrenal, 111 

Androgen excess, 83–93 
adrenal, 106–111 
differential diagnosis of, 85–90 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
signs and symptoms of, 83f, 83–85 
treatment of, 90–93 

Androgen index, 12 
Androgen insensitivity syndrome, 3, 


48–49 
complete, 49 
differential diagnosis of, 47 
incomplete, 49 


Androgen-receptor antagonists, 91 
Androgen replacement therapy, and 

libido, 12 
Androgen-secreting tumors, 88–89 
Androgenic alopecia, 84, 85, 85f,92 
Android fat distribution, 88 

5a -Androstane-3a ,17b -diol glucuronide, 
13–14 

Androstenedione, 83 
conversion to testosterone, 11 
measurement of levels of, 13 

Aneuploidy, 19, 20 
Angelman’s syndrome, 22–23 
Annealing, 24 
Anorexia nervosa 

and amenorrhea, 73, 79 

and bone density, 77 
Antagon, 137t 
Antiandrogen therapy, for adrenal hyper


plasia, 110–111 
Anticipation phenomenon, 22, 24 
Antidepressants 

for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 79 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 
and prolactin levels, 15 

Antihypertensive agents, and prolactin 
levels, 15 
Antiphospholipid antibody syndrome, 
158, 159t 
Antiseizure medications, interaction with 

contraceptives, 163, 164b, 165 
Antithyroid agents, 103, 104 
A.P.L., 137t 
Arcuate nucleus, 54 
ART. See Assisted reproductive tech


nology 
Asherman’s syndrome, 158, 158f 
Ashkenazi Jews, heritable disorders in, 

23, 27–28, 90, 110, 125 
Aspirin 
for antiphospholipid antibody syn


drome, 158 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for hyperthyroidism, 104 


ASRM. See American Society for 

Reproductive Medicine 
Assays, endocrine, 8–18 
Assisted hatching, 145–146 
Assisted reproductive technology (ART), 

141–148 

controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 
with intrauterine insemination, 
compared with, 140–141 

with endometriosis, 121 
ovulation induction in, 138 
success rates with, 142 
team of professionals in, 141–142 

AUB. See Abnormal uterine bleeding 
Autocrine factor, 3, 7 
Autoimmune disorders, and pregnancy 

loss, 158 
Autoimmune ovarian failure, 95 
Autosomal disorders, 21–22 


190 INDEX 

B 

Balding, androgen excess and, 84, 85, 

85f, 92 
Basic fibroblast growth factor, 7 
Benzodiazepines, for hypothalamic 

amenorrhea, 79 

Birth defects 
maternal serum testing for, 10 
risk factors for, 20–21 

Bisphosphonates 
after menopause, 176b 
structure of, 181f 
to treat osteoporosis, 180, 180t 

Black cohosh, 186t 
Blastocyst culture techniques, 151 
Bone loss. See also Osteoporosis 

with hyperprolactinemia, 81 
with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
in menopause, 172–174 

Bone measurements, T-score distribution, 

178–179, 179f 
Botanical medicines, 184–185, 186t 
Breast cancer 

oral contraceptives and, 163 

risks of, 174–175, 175t 
age and, 175t 
versus cardiovascular disease, 175f, 

175–176 

Breast development 
delayed, 43 
precocious, 42, 42f 
Tanner staging of, 39–41, 40f 

Bromocriptine 

therapy with 
for hyperprolactinemia, 80, 81, 133 
and prolactin levels, 60 
for ovulation induction, 137t 
for recurrent pregnancy loss, 160t 
for silent subtype II adenoma, 82 

vaginal route of administration, 80, 
140 
Buspirone, for premenstrual syndrome, 
64, 65t 
Busulfan, and ovarian function, 20 

C 

Cabergoline 
for hyperprolactinemia, 81 
for ovulatory dysfunction, 133, 137t 

Caffeine, and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Calcium 
foods containing, 174t 
supplementation 
for osteoporosis prevention, 179, 180t 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64 

cAMP. See Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 


Cancer. See also specific types 
genetic basis of, 23 
heritable, identification of individuals 

at risk for, 30 
polycystic ovary syndrome and risk 
of, 87 

Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 
protection from, estrogen and, 180–182 
risk of 

versus breast and lung cancer, 175f, 

175–176 
after menopause, 172, 175–176 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 88 

CBAVD. See Congenital bilateral 
absence of the vas deferens 
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 142 

Central nervous system, hormone 
replacement therapy and, 
177–178 

Cervical stenosis, 130, 134 
Cervicitis, chronic, 130 
Chaste tree, 185 
Chemotherapy, and genetic disease, 20 
Chinese patent medicines, 184 
Chlamydia 

and pregnancy loss, 159 

testing for, 142 
Chlorambucil, and ovarian function, 20 
Cholesterol, 

and ovarian steroids, 53 
androgen biosynthesis from, 84f 
Chromosomes. See also X chromosome; 

Y chromosome 
disorders of, 20, 21, 156–157 
structure of, 19 


Chromotubation, 132 
Circadian rhythms, and premenstrual 
syndrome, 64 
Citalopram, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Clitoris, of newborn, 37 
Clitoromegaly, 33, 85, 110f 
Clitoroplasty, 37 
Clomid, 137t 
Clomiphene citrate 

as cause of infertility, 134 
challenge test, 16 
contraindications to, 137 
ovulation induction with, 133, 


137–138, 137t 

therapy with 
for adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
for oligospermia, 132 


Clomipramine, for premenstrual syn


drome, 64, 65t 
Cloning, 152–153 
COH-IUI. See Controlled ovarian hyper


stimulation with intrauterine 
insemination 

Colon cancer 
hereditary nonpolyposis, 23 
hormone replacement therapy and 

reduced risk of, 182 

Congenital adrenal hyperplasia, 35, 108 
diagnosis of, 13, 35 
nonclassic (late-onset), 89–90, 

108–111 
treatment of, 37 


Congenital bilateral absence of the vas 

deferens (CBAVD), 127 
Consent for reproductive technologies, 150 
Contraception, hormonal, 162–167 

and abnormal bleeding, 70 
emergency, 167 
implants, 166–167 
injectable, 165 
intrauterine devices, 165–166 
noncontraceptive benefits, 164b 
oral. See Oral contraceptives 
and other medications, 164b 
transdermal patch, 166 
vaginal ring, 166 


Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with 
intrauterine insemination (COHIUI), 
140–141 

Corona radiata, 53 
Corpus albicans, 60 
Corpus luteum, during luteal phase, 58–60 
Corticosteroids, therapy with 

for adrenal gland disorders, 106, 108t, 
110 

for ovarian factor infertility, 133 
Corticotropin deficiency, 112, 112f 
Corticotropin-releasing factor–pituitary 

corticotropin–adrenal axis, 112f 
Corticotropin-secreting tumors, 82, 111 
Cortisol 

deficiency, 112–113 
excess, 111–112 
levels of 


with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 76 

measurement of, 14 
Cox-1 gene, 114, 114t 
Cox-2 gene, 114, 114t 
Craniopharyngiomas, 82 
Cushing’s syndrome, 89 

causes of, 82, 111 
screening for, 14 
treatment of, 112 


CVD. See Cardiovascular disease 
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
(cAMP), 3 
Cyclophosphamide, and ovarian func


tion, 20 
Cyproterone acetate, 91 
Cystic fibrosis 

screening for, 24 
sperm abnormalities and, 146 


D 

D-chiro-inositol, 92, 140 

Danazol 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
contraindications to, 117 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for premenstrual syndrome, 65t, 66 

Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA), 83 
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate 

(DHEAS), 83 
age and concentrations of, 106, 106f 
measurement of levels of, 13 


INDEX 191 

Denaturation, 24 

Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 
chip technology, 27f, 27–28, 30 
in genes, 19f 
mitochondrial, mutations in, 22 
molecular genetic techniques involving, 

24–28 
mutations in, causes of, 20 
structure of, 18 


Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(DMPA), 71–72, 165 
Depot progestin, androgen-suppressive 
therapy with, 90 

Depression. See also Antidepressants 
menopause and, 171 
treatment of, St. John’s wort for, 185 

Desensitization, 56 
Desogestrel, in oral contraceptives, 163 
Dexamethasone 

suppression test, 89 
therapy, for adrenal hyperplasia, 110, 


111 
DHEA. See Dehydroepiandrosterone 
DHEAS. See Dehydroepiandrosterone 

sulfate 

Diabetes 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87–88 
and postpartum thyroiditis, 105 
and pregnancy loss, 157 

Diet 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 
therapeutic 

with dysmenorrhea, 116 

with polycystic ovary syndrome, 92 
Dihydrotestosterone, 13, 33, 83 
Dilation and curettage, for abnormal 

uterine bleeding, 72 
Diuretics, for premenstrual syndrome, 
64, 65t 
DMPA. See Depot medroxyprogesterone 

acetate 
DNA. See Deoxyribonucleic acid 
Dong quai, 186t 
Donor(s), ethical issues involving, 151 
Donor gametes, 133, 146. See also Ovum 

donation 

Dopamine agonist therapy 
for hyperprolactinemia, 81 
for ovulatory dysfunction, 133, 137t, 140 

Dosage-sensitive sex reversal, 46 
Dostinex, 137t 
Dot blots, 24–25, 27f 
Down-regulation, 56 
Down syndrome, 20, 21 
Drospirenone, 91, 162–163 
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry scan, 

178, 178f 
Dyslipidemia, polycystic ovary syndrome 
and, 88 

Dysmenorrhea, 115–116 
with endometriosis, 116 
treatment of, 116 

Dysmorphic children, 30 

E 

Eating disorders, and amenorrhea, 73, 

76, 79 
Ectopic pregnancy, diagnosis of, 17 
Eflornithine hydrochloride, 91 
Ejaculatory failure, treatment of, 132 
Elcometrine, in oral contraceptives, 

162 

Embryo(s) 
“abandoned,” discarding of, 150 
cryopreservation of, 145, 148 
culture of, in in vitro fertilization, 

143–144 
ethical issues related to manipulation 
of, 150 
micromanipulation of, 145–146 

Embryo transfer (ET) 
with endometriosis, 121 
in in vitro fertilization, 144, 145f 

Emergency contraception, 167 
Empty-sella syndrome, 82–83 
Endocrine pathway, 3 
Endometrial ablation, 72 
Endometrial cancer, polycystic ovary 

syndrome and, 87 
Endometrial hyperplasia, 131 
hormone replacement therapy and risk 
of, 183 
treatment of, 134–135 

Endometriosis, 116–121 
classification of, 118f–119f 
diagnosis of, 117 
and infertility, 116, 121, 136 
signs and symptoms of, 116–117 
treatment of, 117–121, 120t, 136 

Endometritis, chronic, 131, 134 
Endometrium 
assessment of, with abnormal uterine 
bleeding, 70 
changes during menstrual cycle, 

60–61 
Epidermal growth factor, 7 
Epsilon-aminocaproic acid, 71 
Eskimos, adrenal hyperplasia in, 

110 

Estradiol 
measurement of, 10 
in perimenopause, 170 
potency of, 6 
transdermal, for premenstrual syn


drome, 66 
Estradiol cypionate, in injectable contraceptives, 
165 

Estriol 
versus estradiol, 6 
measurements of, 10 

Estrogen 
effects on cognition, 172 
effects on reproductive tract, 60 
mechanism of action, 6, 7f 
and menstrual cycle, 51 
in oral contraceptives, 162 
and pubertal maturation, 7 

Estrogen (continued) 

therapy with 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for osteoporosis, 179, 180t 

in transdermal patch, 166 
Estrogen receptors, 6, 7 
Estrogen replacement therapy 

clinical indications for, 177–182 
compliance issues with, 183 
for gonadal dysgenesis, 45 
with hyperprolactinemia, 81 
after menopause, 176–177, 176b 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 95 
and protection from cardiovascular 

disease, 180–182 
risks and contraindications with, 


183–184 
ET. See Embryo transfer 
Ethical issues 

in genomic medicine, 30 

in infertility management, 149–153 
Ethical principles, 149b 
Ethinyl estradiol 

in emergency contraceptive pills, 167 
in oral contraceptives, 162, 163 
Ethnicity and genetic disorders, 125. 

See also Race 
Eugenics, positive, 152 
Eugonadism, 46–47 
Euploidy, 19 
Evening primrose oil, 186t 
Exercise 

and amenorrhea, 73, 76 

therapeutic 
with dysmenorrhea, 116 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 

92 
Exons, 18 

F 

Fertinex, 138t 
Fetal aneuploidy, women at increased 

risk of, identifying, 10 
Fetus, sexual differentiation in, 33–34 
FHA. See Functional hypothalamic 

amenorrhea 
Fimbriolysis, 135 
Fimbrioplasty, 135 
Finasteride, 92 
FISH. See Fluorescent in situ hybridiza


tion 
Fludrocortisone therapy, for adrenal 
insufficiency, 113 
Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH), 
25–27, 27f 
Fluoxetine, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Flutamide, 91, 92 
Follicle(s) 

atresia of, 51–52, 58 
dominant, development of, 57 
oocyte growth in, 52–53 
structure and classification of, 51, 52f 


192 INDEX 

Follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) 
ovulation induction with, 138, 138t 
levels of 

elevated, on cycle day 3, 157 
in hypothalamic amenorrhea, 75 
measurement of, 15–16 
in perimenopause, 170 
in polycystic ovary syndrome, 86 

mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
during menstrual cycle, 57–60, 59f 
mutations in, as cause of premature 

ovarian failure, 94 
Follistatin, 53 
Follistim, 138t 
fos proto-oncogene, 23 
Fragile X syndrome, 22, 23 
Frameshift mutation, 23 
French-Canadian descent, heritable dis


eases in, 125 
FSH. See Follicle-stimulating hormone 
Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea 

(FHA), 73 
behavioral factors in, 76 
diagnosis of, 77 
luteinizing hormone pulse patterns in, 

75, 75f 
pathogenesis of, 74f, 75–76 
treatment of, 77–79 


G 

G protein, 3 
Gallbladder disease, hormone replacement 
therapy and risk of, 183 
Gamete donation, 133. See also Ovum 

donation 
disclosure versus privacy in, 151 
patient selection, 146 


Gamete intrafallopian transfer (GIFT), 

147 
Ganirelix acetate, 137t 
Gene(s), 18 

cancer-causing, 23 
mutations of, types of, 23–24 
structure of, 19f 


Gene therapy, 29–30 
Genetic attributes, enhancement of, 152 
Genetic counseling, indications for, 125b 
Genetic diagnosis, preimplantation, 145, 

148 

Genetic diseases 
diagnosis of, 28 
inheritance of, 21–23 
prenatal diagnosis of, 28–29 
screening for, 125 

Genital tuberculosis, 131 

Genitalia, ambiguous, 35–37 
diagnosis of, 35–37, 37b 
differential diagnosis of, 35, 36f 
etiology of, 35 
21-hydroxylase deficiency and, 108, 110f 
physical examination for, 37 
therapy for, 37 

Genomic imprints, 22 

Genomic medicine, 28–30 
Germline mosaicism, 23 
Gestational trophoblastic disease, diag


nosis of, 17 
Gestodene, in oral contraceptives, 163 
GIFT. See Gamete intrafallopian transfer 
Ginkgo, 185 
Ginseng, 186t 
Glucocorticoids, for hyperthyroidism, 104 
Glucose intolerance, with polycystic 

ovary syndrome, 88 
GnRH. See Gonadotropin-releasing hor


mone 
Gonadal dysgenesis, 43–46 
Gonadarche, 38 
Gonadotropin(s), exogenous 

estradiol level after, 10 
with infertility, 130, 133, 134 
and multiple gestations, 151 
ovulation induction with, 138–139, 143 
preparations of, 138t 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
analogues of, 4 
hypothalamic secretion of, 54–57 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
pulsatile administration of, 133, 139–140 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH) agonists, 4–5 
ovarian stimulation with, 143 
synthesis of, 5 
trade name for, 137t 
treatment with 


for androgen excess, 90 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for precocious puberty, 43 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 
prior to endometrial ablation, 72 

Gonadotropin-releasing hormone 

(GnRH) pulse generator, 73–74 
Gonads, sexual differentiation of, 32, 32f 
Gonal-F, 138t 
Granulosa cell(s), 53, 58, 60 
Granulosa cell tumors, 10, 89 
Graves’ disease, 100 

neonatal, 103f, 104 
treatment of, 103–104 
Growth factors 
in intraovarian signaling systems, 
53–54 
in reproductive cycles, 7–8 
Growth hormone, therapy with, for 

gonadal dysgenesis, 45 
Growth-hormone secreting tumors, 82 
Guanine nucleotide-binding protein 

(G protein), 3 
Gynoid obesity, 88 

H 

HAIR-AN syndrome. See 
Hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, 
and acanthosis nigricans 
syndrome 

hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotropin 

Health care provider, ethical issues con


cerning, 151 
Hilar cells, 52 
Hilus cell tumors, 89 
Hirsutism, 83f, 83–84 

evaluation of, 91 
hormone levels in, 12, 13–14 
17a -hydroxyprogesterone levels in, 

12 

testosterone levels in, 12 
idiopathic, 90 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
during pregnancy, 90 
treatment of, 91–92, 93, 110–111 
virilization and, 85 

HLA. See Human leukocyte antigen 
hMG. See Human menopausal 
gonadotropin 

Hormone(s). See also specific types 
action of, 3–8 
duration of exposure versus dose, 6 
measurements of, 8–18 
ovarian, 53, 54f, 55f 
in pubertal development, 38 

Hormone replacement therapy. See also 

Estrogen replacement therapy 
clinical indications for, 177–182 
compliance issues with, 183 
versus phytoestrogens, 182 
risks and contraindications with, 

183–184 
HPA axis. See Hypothalamic–pituitary– 
adrenal axis 
HPO axis. See Hypothalamic–pituitary– 
ovarian axis 

Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 
false-positive test results, 18, 18f 
measurement of levels of, 17–18 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
for ovulation induction, 137t 

Human genome mapping project, 28–30 
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) sharing, 
and pregnancy loss, 159 

Human menopausal gonadotropin (hMG) 
composition, 138t 
ovulation induction with, 138 

Human parathyroid hormone, 179 
Humegon, 138t 
Hybridization, 24 
Hydrocortisone therapy, for adrenal 

insufficiency, 113 
Hydrosonography, 130–131 
11-Hydroxylase deficiency, 35, 37 
21-Hydroxylase deficiency, 35, 

106–108, 109f 
and ambiguous genitalia, 108, 110f 
diagnosis of, 110 

17a -Hydroxyprogesterone 
elevated levels of, 35 
measurement of levels of, 12–13 

Hyperandrogenism, insulin resistance, 
and acanthosis nigricans (HAIRAN) 
syndrome, 89 


INDEX 193 

Hyperemesis gravidarum, hyperthyroidism 
with, 104 
Hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, 

43–46 
Hyperinsulinemia, 084 
Hyperprolactinemia, 14, 79–83 

causes of, 15, 79, 79b 
evaluation of, 80 
treatment of, 80–81, 140 


Hyperthecosis, 89 

Hyperthyroidism, 102–104 
causes of, 102 
diagnosis of, 103 
postpartum, 104–105 
in pregnancy, 104 
signs and symptoms of, 102b 
treatment of, 103–104 

Hypogonadism, 43 
chromosomal causes of, 21 
hypergonadotropic, 43–46 
hypogonadotropic, 46 

Hypogonadotropic hypogonadism, 46 
Hypophysectomy, transsphenoidal, 81 
Hypothalamic amenorrhea, 73–79 

behavioral factors in, 76 
diagnosis of, 77 
luteinizing hormone pulse patterns 

with, 75, 75f 
pathogenesis of, 74f, 75–76 
treatment of, 77–79 


Hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal (HPA) 
axis, 38 
Hypothalamic–pituitary–ovarian (HPO) 

axis, 38, 42 
Hypothalamus, function of, 74 
Hypothyroidism, 100–102 

causes of, 100–101 
congenital, 101, 101f 
diagnosis of, 101 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 

95–96 
postpartum, 104–105 
and pregnancy loss, 157 
signs and symptoms of, 102b 
treatment of, 101–102 


Hysterectomy 
psychologic impact of, 171 
therapeutic 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71, 

72 
for endometriosis, 120 
for premenstrual syndrome, 66 

Hysterosalpingography, 130, 130f, 131, 
131f, 136, 142 

Hysteroscopy 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 70, 72 
for uterine factor infertility, 131, 134, 

135f 

Ibuprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
IGF. See Insulinlike growth factor 
IGF-binding proteins, 54 

In vitro fertilization (IVF), 141, 142–148 
candidates for, 142 
COH-IUI compared with, 141 
complications of, 144–145 
embryo culture in, 143–144 
embryo transfer in, 144, 145f 
with endometriosis, 121 
insemination in, 143 
multiple pregnancies with, 144–145, 

151 
oocyte retrieval in, 143, 144f 
ovarian stimulation and monitoring in, 

143 
precycle tests in, 142 
salpingectomy with, 135 
success rate reporting in, 150 
success rates of, 146–147 
with unexplained infertility, 136 


Incidentaloma, 82 
Infections, diagnosis of, genome 
sequencing and, 30 
Infectious agents, and pregnancy loss, 
159 

Infertility, 124–153 
with adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
cervical factor, 130, 134 
with endometriosis, 116, 121, 136 
evaluation of, 16, 124–132, 142b 
genetic causes of, 29t 
history and physical examination with, 

125, 126b 
male factor, 126–128, 132–133 
management of, 132–136 


ethical issues in, 149–153 

future directions in, 148–149 
ovarian factor, 128–130, 133–134 
peritoneal factor, 132, 136 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
tubal factor, 131–132, 135 
unexplained, 136 
uterine factor, 130–131, 134 

Inheritance 
of genetic diseases, 21–23, 28 
nonclassic patterns of, 22–23 

Inhibin, 53, 57, 57f 
Insulin resistance 
in polycystic ovary syndrome, 85, 87, 
92–93 

and pregnancy loss, 157 
Insulin-sensitizing agents, 140 
Insulinlike growth factor (IGF), 7 
Interferon-d , and pregnancy loss, 159 
Intracrine factor, 3 
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection, 145, 

146, 146f 
Intrauterine devices (IUDs), hormonereleasing, 
165–166 

Intrauterine insemination (IUI) 
with cervical factor infertility, 130, 134 
controlled ovarian hyperstimulation 

with, 140–141 
with male factor infertility, 133 


Introns, 18 
Iron-deficiency anemia, hormonal contraception 
and decrease in, 164 
Iron therapy, with abnormal uterine 

bleeding, 71 
Isoflavones, 184 
Isotretinoin, 92 
IUDs. See Intrauterine devices 
IUI. See Intrauterine insemination 
IVF. See In vitro fertilization 

J 

jun proto-oncogene, 23 

K 

Kallmann’s syndrome, 46, 56 
Kava, 185 
Kennedy’s disease, 49 
Ketoconazole, androgen-suppressive 

therapy with, 91 
Ketoprofen, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Klinefelter’s syndrome, 20, 21 

L 

Labioscrotal fusion, 37 
Laparoscopy 

diagnostic, 142 
with peritoneal infertility, 136 
with tubal infertility, 132 


operative 
for endometriosis, 120 
for gamete intrafallopian transfer, 

147 

Laser vaporization 
for endometriosis, 120 
for hair removal, 91 

Lavender, 185 
LDL. See Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
Leber’s hereditary optic neuropathy 

(LHON), 22 
Leiomyomas, and pregnancy loss, 158 
Leuprolide acetate, 137t 
Levonorgestrel 

in emergency contraceptive pills, 167 
implants, 166–167 
intrauterine devices, 165–166 

Levothyroxine, 101–102, 104 
Leydig’s cell hypoplasia, 35, 46 
LH. See Luteinizing hormone 
LHON. See Leber’s hereditary optic neu


ropathy 
Libido, hormonal changes and, 12 
Liddle test, 14, 82 
Lignans, 184–185 
Liver disease 

as contraindication to estrogen therapy, 
183 
oral contraceptives and, 163 
Low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, 
53 
Lubs syndrome, 49 


194 INDEX 

Lung cancer, risks of, versus cardiovas


cular disease, 175f, 176 
Lupron, 137t 
Luteal phase, 58–60 

inhibin levels in, 57, 57f 
premenstrual syndrome in, 61–66 

Luteal phase defect 
diagnosis of, 11, 128 
and pregnancy loss, 157 

Luteinization, 58 

Luteinizing hormone (LH) 
measurement of levels of, 16–17 
mechanism of action of, 3–5, 4f 
and ovarian steroidogenesis, 53 
pulse patterns, with hypothalamic 

amenorrhea, 75, 75f 
Lyonization, 33 

M 

McCune–Albright syndrome, 3, 42 
Macular degeneration and hormone 
replacement therapy, 182 
Magnesium supplementation, for premenstrual 
syndrome, 64 
Mayer–Rokitansky–Küster–Hauser 

syndrome, 47 
Meditation, 185 
Mediterranean descent, heritable diseases 

in, 125 

Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
in oral contraceptives, 162 
treatment with 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for premenstrual syndrome, 65t, 

66 
Mefenamic acid, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Megestrol acetate, in oral contraceptives, 

162 
Meiosis, 20, 33f 
MELAS. See Mitochondrial myopathy, 

encephalopathy, lactic acidosis, 
and strokelike symptoms 

Menarche 
age of, 38 
delayed, 43, 46 

Menopause, 169–186 
alternative therapies for, 184–185, 

186t 
atrophic changes in, 174 
and bone loss, 172–174, 173f 
cardiovascular changes in, 172 
and cognition, 172 
estradiol levels after, 10 
follicle-stimulating hormone levels 

after, 15, 16 
management of, 174–184 
nomenclature for, 169t 
physiology of, 169–174 
premature. See Premature ovarian 

failure 
psychophysiologic effects of, 171–172 
testosterone production after, 11 
vasomotor symptoms of, 171 

Menstrual cycle, 51 
anovulatory, ovulatory, and luteal 
insufficiency, 78f 
dysfunction in, hypothyroidism and, 

101 
follicular phase of, 11, 57 
gonadotropin regulation of, 57–60, 59f 
luteal phase in, 58–60 

inhibin levels in, 57, 57f 

premenstrual syndrome in, 61–66 
ovulation in, 58 
steroid production during, 53 

Menstruation 
abnormal, 67–73 
disturbances, in perimenopause, 171 
pain with (dysmenorrhea), 115–116 

Mental health, menopause and, 171 
MERRF. See Myoclonus epilepsy with 

ragged red fibers 
Mestranol, in oral contraceptives, 162 
Metformin, 140 

for ovarian factor infertility, 133 

for polycystic ovary syndrome, 92–93 
Methimazole, 103, 104 
Methotrexate therapy, for ectopic preg


nancy, 17 
Metrodin, 138t 
Mind-body medicine, 184, 185 
Minoxidil, 92 
MIS. See Müllerian-inhibiting substance 
Miscarriage(s). See also Pregnancy loss 

diagnosis of, 17 

use of term, 156 
Missense mutation, 23 
Mitochondrial inheritance, 22 
Mitochondrial myopathy, encephalopathy, 

lactic acidosis, and strokelike 

symptoms (MELAS), 22 
Mitosis, 19 
Mitotane, for Cushing’s syndrome, 112 
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis, 21 
Molar pregnancy, 18 
Molecular genetic tools, 24–28 
Moliminal symptoms, 61, 64 
Monosomy, 19, 20 
Müllerian aplasia, 47–48 

diagnosis of, 47 
treatment of, 48 
Müllerian-inhibiting substance (MIS), 
33, 34 
Multiple pregnancy 
with controlled ovarian hyperstimula


tion, 141, 141f 
with in vitro fertilization, 144–145, 151 
with ovulation induction, 137, 139 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
with reproductive technologies, 

150–151 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, 131 
Mycoplasma hominis, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 
Myoclonus epilepsy with ragged red 
fibers (MERRF), 22 

Myoma(s) 
and infertility, 130, 134 
intrauterine submucosal, 131f 

Myomectomy, therapeutic 
with abnormal uterine bleeding, 72 
with uterine factor infertility, 134 

Myotonic dystrophy, 23, 24 

N 

Naltrexone, for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 
79 
Natural killer cells, and pregnancy loss, 

159 
Neosalpingostomy, 135 
Nitrogen mustard, and ovarian function, 

20 
Nonsense mutation, 23 
Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs 

(NSAIDs) 
for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for hyperthyroidism, 104 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t 

Normegestrol, in oral contraceptives, 162 
Norplant, 166–167 
Novarel, 137t 
NSAIDs. See Nonsteroidal antiinflam


matory drugs 
Nuclear antigens, and pregnancy loss, 
158 

O 

Obesity 
android pattern of, 88 
gynoid pattern of, 88 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87, 92 

Online Mendelian inheritance in Man 
database, 28 

Oocyte(s) 
cryopreservation of, 148–149 
growth of, 52–53 
micromanipulation of, 145–146 
retrieval, in in vitro fertilization, 143, 

144f 
Oophorectomy, for endometriosis, 120 
Oral contraceptives 

adverse effects of, 163–164 
combination, 162–164 
contraindications to, 163 
interaction with other medications, 

163, 164b 
noncontraceptive benefits of, 164b 
progestin-only pill, 164–165 
therapy with 

for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for adrenal hyperplasia, 111 
androgen-suppressive, 90 
for dysmenorrhea, 116 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
for hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
with in vitro fertilization, 143 
after menopause, 176b 
for premenstrual syndrome, 66 


INDEX 195 

Ornithine decarboxylase, inhibition of, 91 
Osteopenia, 178 
Osteoporosis, 172, 173f, 178–180 

hyperthyroidism and, 103 
risk factors for, 178 
screening for, 178–179 
treatment of, 179–180 


agents for, 180t 
with corticosteroids, 106 


Ovarian cancer, mutations in transforming 
growth factor b signaling 
pathway and, 8 

Ovarian cysts, and abnormal bleeding, 70 

Ovarian drilling 
in treatment of hirsutism, 93 
in treatment of infertility, 133 

Ovarian failure 
autoimmune, 95 
diagnosis of, 16 
premature, 93–96, 94b, 94f 
radiation and, 20 

Ovarian hyperstimulation, controlled, 
with intrauterine insemination, 
140–141 

Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 
classification of, 139t 
management of, 139b 
ovum donation and, 148 
risk of 

with ovulation induction, 137, 
138–139 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 
Ovarian reserve, testing of, 16, 128–130, 

129f 
Ovarian tissue, cryopreservation of, 149 
Ovariectomy, for premenstrual syndrome, 

66 

Ovaries, 51–54 
androgen-secreting tumors of, 88–89 
differentiation of, 33 
intraovarian signaling systems, 53–54 
steroidogenic pathway in, 53, 54f, 55f 

Ovulation 
detection of, 16 
follicular development during, 10 
induction of, 133, 136–141 

agents used for, 137–140, 137t 
for control of anovulatory bleeding, 

71 
with hypothalamic amenorrhea, 77 
with polycystic ovary syndrome, 87 

in menstrual cycle, 58 
progesterone levels after, 11 
suppression of, to treat premenstrual 

syndrome, 64 
Ovulation-predictor kits, 16–17, 128 
Ovulatory dysfunction, 77, 78f, 128–130 

classification of, 136–137 
treatment of, 133–134 


Ovum donation, 147–148 
compensation for, 151 
and ovarian hyperstimulation syn


drome, 148 

Ovum donation (continued) 
to postmenopausal women, 152 
to recipients with Turner’s syndrome, 

142 
risks in, 151 
success rates with, 95 


Oxandrolone, for gonadal dysgenesis, 45 

P 

Para-aminomethylbenzoic acid, 71 
Paracrine factor, 3, 7 
Parlodel, 137t 
Paroxetine, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Passion flower, 185 
PCOS. See Polycystic ovary syndrome 
PCR. See Polymerase chain reactions 
Pelvic inflammatory disease 

and peritoneal infertility, 132 
and tubal infertility, 131 
Pergolide mesylate, for hyperprolac


tinemia, 81 
Pergonal, 138t 
Perimenopause, 169, 169t, 170–171 
Pheochromocytoma, adrenal medulla, 113 
Phospholipids, autoantibodies to, and 

pregnancy loss, 158, 159t 
Phytoestrogens, 182, 184–185 
Pioglitazone, 140 
Pituitary disorders, 79–83, 111 
PMDD. See Premenstrual dysphoric 

disorder 
PMS. See Premenstrual syndrome 
POF. See Premature ovarian failure 
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), 

85–88 
clinical features of, 86–87 
diagnosis of, 17, 85–86 
differential diagnosis of, 12, 85, 110 
with eugonadism, 47 
infertility associated with, treatment 

of, 133 
insulin resistance in, 85, 87, 92–93 
long-term sequelae of, 87–88 
management of, 95–96 
tests for, 86, 87t 

Polymerase chain reactions (PCR), 24, 26f 
Polymorphisms, 28 
Polyps, endometrial, 134, 158, 158f 
Postcoital test, 130, 142 
Posthumous reproduction, 152 
Postmenopausal women 

abnormal uterine bleeding in, 73 
ovum donation to, 152 
treatment for, 176b 


Postpartum thyroid disease, 104–105 
Prader–Willi syndrome, 22 
Precocious puberty, 42f, 42–43 
Preconceptional counseling, 143b 
Preconceptional screening, 125b, 142b 
Pregnancy 

abnormal, diagnosis of, 17–18 
estradiol levels during, 10 


Pregnancy (continued) 
hirsutism and virilization during, 90 
hyperthyroidism in, 104 
multiple. See Multiple pregnancy 
progesterone levels during, 11 
prolactin levels during, 15 
radiation exposure during, 20 
testosterone levels during, 12 
thyroid hormone deficiency in, 102 

Pregnancy loss, 156–160 
alloimmune abnormalities and, 159 
autoimmune causes of, 158 
chromosomal abnormalities and, 21, 

156–157 
congenital uterine abnormalities and, 

157 
definition of, 156 
endocrinologic causes of, 157 
evaluation for, 159–160 
genetic causes of, 156–157 
recurrent 


diagnosis and management of, 160t 
etiology of, 156–159 
follow-up for, 160 

risk of recurrence of, 156 
Pregnyl, 137t 
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis, 145, 148 
Premature ovarian failure (POF), 93–96, 

94f 
diagnosis, 93–94 
etiology of, 93–95, 94b 
receptor abnormalities and, 3 
therapy for, 95 


Premenstrual dysphoric disorder 
(PMDD), 61, 62, 62b 

Premenstrual syndrome (PMS), 61–66 
diagnosis of, 62, 62b 
symptom diary in, 61, 63f 
symptoms of, 61–64, 62t 
treatment of, 64–66, 65t 

Profasi, 137t 

Progesterone 
effects on reproductive tract, 60 
measurement of, 10–11 
secretion during luteal phase, 60 
therapy with, for premenstrual syn


drome, 64 
Progestin(s) 
in combination oral contraceptives, 
162–163 
in estrogen replacement therapy, 

176–177, 176b, 177b 
in transdermal patch, 166 
treatment with 


for abnormal uterine bleeding, 71 
for endometriosis, 117, 136 
Progestin challenge test, for premature 
ovarian failure, 95 
Progestin-containing intrauterine 

devices, 71 
Progestin-only pill, 164–165 
Progestin replacement therapy, for poly


cystic ovary syndrome, 95 


196 INDEX 

Prolactin 
measurement of levels of, 14–15 
regulation dysfunction. See Hyperpro


lactinemia 
Prolactinomas, 79–81, 90 
Propylthiouracil, 103, 104 
Prostaglandins, 113–115 

biosynthesis of, 114f 
mechanism of action, 114–115 
receptors and signal transduction, 115t 
role in reproduction, 115b 
structures of, 113f 

Protein hormones. See also specific 
hormones 

measurement of levels of, 14–18 

mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
Proto-oncogenes, 23 
Pseudohermaphroditism, 35 
Psychiatric disorders, versus premenstrual 

syndrome, 61–62 

Puberty, 38–41 
abnormalities of, 42–49 
delayed, 43, 46, 46b 
dyssynchronous, 47–48 
estrogen in, 7 
follicle-stimulating hormone levels in, 

15 
hormonal levels in, 38 
precocious, 42f, 42–43 
sequence of, 38, 39t 
Tanner staging of, 39–41, 40f, 41f 
testosterone levels in, 11 
timing of, 38, 39f 

Pubic hair development 
delayed, 47 
precocious, 42 
Tanner staging of, 41, 41f 

Pyridoxine (vitamin B6), 64 

Q 

Qi Gong treatment, 184 

R 

Race 
and bone mass, 173 
and genetic disorders, 125 
and puberty, timing of, 38 

Radiation, and genetic disease, 20 
Radioactive iodine therapy, 104 
Radioiodine, 103 
Raloxifene, 182 

biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 
in treatment of osteoporosis, 179–180, 

180t 
ras proto-oncogene, 23 
5a -Reductase inhibitors, 91–92 
Reifenstein’s syndrome, 49 
Reproductive freedom, right to, 149–150 
Reproductive process, components of, 

124 
Reproductive years, estradiol measurements 
during, 10 

Repronex, 138t 
RET proto-oncogene, 23 
Retinoids, 92 
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) 

in genes, 19f 
structure of, 18 
Rifampin, interaction with oral contra


ceptives, 163 
Risedronate, for osteoporosis, 180t 
RNA. See Ribonucleic acid 
Robertsonian translocation, 21 
Rofecoxib, for dysmenorrhea, 116 
Rokitansky syndrome, 46 
Rosiglitazone, 140 

S 

St. John’s wort, 185, 186t 
Saline ultrasonography, 130–131, 132 
Salivary measurements, of steroid levels, 

9–10, 14 
Salpingectomy, with in vitro fertilization, 

135 
Salpingitis isthmica nodosa, 131 
Selective estrogen receptor modulators 

(SERMs), 3 
biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 


Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 
65t 

Semen analysis, 126–127, 127t, 142 
SERMs. See Selective estrogen receptor 

modulators 
Serophene, 137t 
Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor, 89 
Sertraline, for premenstrual syndrome, 

64, 65t 
Sex-determining region of Y chromosome 
(SRY), 33, 34 
Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), 

10 
Sex hormone-binding protein, 5 
Sex reversal, dosage-sensitive, 46 
Sex selection, 151, 152 
Sexual abuse, and abnormal bleeding, 70 
Sexual differentiation 

in fetus, 33–34 

gonadal, 32, 32f 
Sexual dysfunction, diagnosis of, 12 
SHBG. See Sex hormone-binding 

globulin 

Signal transduction pathways, 3 
of growth factors, 7–8 
tissue specific, 7 

Silver’s syndrome, 42 
Single nucleotide polymorphisms, 28 
Smads, 8, 9f 
Smoking 

and menopause, 169 
and pregnancy loss, risk of, 159 
Society for Assisted Reproductive 
Technology, 142 
Somatomedins, 54 

Sonohysterography, 70, 130–131 
Southeast-Asian descent, heritable 

diseases in, 125 
Southern blot analysis, 24, 25f 
Sperm 

cryopreservation of, 148 
donor, insemination with, 133 
intracytoplasmic injection of, 145, 

146, 146f 
Spironolactone, 91, 92 
SRY. See Sex-determining region of Y 

chromosome 
Stem cell research, 150 
Sterilization reversal, 135 
Steroid hormones. See also specific 

hormones 
adrenal secretion of, 106, 107f 
effects on female reproductive tract, 

60–61 
measurements of, 8–10 
mechanism of action, 5f, 5–7 


nonclassic, 6–7, 8f 

updated model of, 7f 
ovarian, 53, 54f, 55f 
secretion by corpus luteum, 58, 60 
therapy with, for antiphospholipid 

antibody syndrome, 158 

Stress 
and hypothalamic amenorrhea, 76 
and premenstrual syndrome, 64 

Subdermal contraceptive implants 
(Norplant), 166–167 
Surrogacy, ethical issues involving, 151, 

152 
Swyer syndrome, 21, 45 
Synechiae, intrauterine, 131f, 134, 158, 

158f 

T 

Tamoxifen 
biologic effects of, 6 
structure of, 6f 

Tanner staging of puberty, 39–41, 40f, 

41f 
Tay-Sachs disease, 23 
Testes, differentiation of, 33 
Testosterone, 83 

measurement of levels of, 11–12 

and sexual differentiation in fetus, 33 
TET. See Tubal embryo transfer 
TGFb . See Transforming growth factor b 
Theca cells, in corpus luteum, 58 
Theca externa, 51, 52f 
Theca interna, 51, 52f 
Thelarche, premature, 42 
Therapeutic touch, 184 
Thiazolidinediones, 92–93, 140 
Thrombophilic problems, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 
Thrombosis, risk of 
hormone replacement therapy and, 
183 
oral contraceptives and, 163 


INDEX 197 

Thromboxane A2, 115 
Thyroid antigens, and pregnancy loss, 
158 
Thyroid disease(s), 100–105. See also 

Hyperthyroidism; Hypothyroidism 
diagnosing, 100 
postpartum, 104–105 
signs and symptoms, 102b 

Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 100 
mechanism of action, 3–5, 4f 
tumor secreting, 82 

Thyroxine (T3), 100 

Tibolone 
for osteoporosis, 180t 
for premenstrual syndrome, 64, 65t, 

66 
Tranexamic acid, 71 
Transdermal contraceptive patch, 166 
Transforming growth factor b (TGFb ), 

7, 8, 9f 
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy, 81 
Triiodothyronine (T3), 100 
Trimegestone, in oral contraceptives, 

162 
Triplet repeat expansion, 23–24 
Trisomy, 19, 20, 21 
Trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), 20, 21 
Trophoblastic disease, evaluation of, 

18 
TSH. See Thyroid-stimulating hormone 
Tubal embryo transfer (TET), 147 
Tubal occlusive disease, 131 
Tuberculosis, genital, 131 
Tuberculous endometritis, 134 
Tumor necrosis factor-a , and pregnancy 

loss, 159 

Tumor suppressor genes, mutations of, 23 

Turner’s syndrome, 43–44, 44f, 45 
egg donation recipients with, 142 
karyotype for, 21 

U 

Ultrasonography, diagnostic, 130, 

131–132 
Uniparental disomy, 22 
Ureaplasma urealyticum, and pregnancy 

loss, 159 

Uterine abnormalities 
and infertility, 130, 130f, 131f 
congenital, and pregnancy loss, 157, 

157f 

Uterine bleeding, abnormal, 69–73 
etiology of, 69–70, 69b 
evaluation of, 70–71 
in postmenopausal women, 73 
treatment of, 71–72 

Uterus, congenital absence of, 46, 47 

V 

Vagina 
congenital absence of, 46, 47–48 
hemiobstructed, 48 

Vaginal atresia, 48 
Vaginal ring, contraceptive, 166 
Valerian, 185, 186t 
Vas deferens, congenital bilateral 

absence of, 127 
Vascular endothelial growth factor, 7 
Virilization, 85 

with 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 110f 
during pregnancy, 90 

Visual impairment 
menopause and, 182 
pituitary tumors and, 82 

Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine), 64 

W 

Waist-to-hip ratio, 88 

Weight gain, at menopause, 172 

Wilms’ tumor suppressor gene, 45 

World Health Organization 
classification of ovulatory disorders, 
136–137 
criteria for normal sperm morphology, 
126–127, 127t 
definition of osteopenia and osteoporosis, 
178 

X 

X chromosome 
abnormalities of, and polycystic ovary 
syndrome, 95 
fragile X syndrome, 22, 23 
privation of, 43–44, 45 

Y 

Y chromosome 
microdeletions of sections of, 128, 146 
physical map of, 34f 
sex-determining region of, 33, 34 

Yoga, 185 

Yuzpe regimen, 167 

Z 

Zona granulosa, 51, 52f 
Zona pellucida, 51, 52f, 53 
Zygote intrafallopian transfer, 147 


