Ultrasound of Congenital 
Fetal Anomalies 

Ultrasound of Congenital 
Fetal Anomalies 
Differential Diagnosis and Prognostic Indicators 
Dario Paladini MD 
Head, Fetal Cardiology Unit 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
University Federico II of Naples 
Naples 
Italy 
Paolo Volpe MD 
Head, Fetal Medicine Unit 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Hospital Di Venere 
Bari 
Italy 

© 2007 Informa UK Ltd 
First published in the United Kingdom in 2007 by Informa Healthcare, Telephone House, 69–77 Paul Street, London, 
EC2A 4LQ. Informa Healthcare is a trading division of Informa UK Ltd. Registered Office, 37/41 Mortimer Street, 
London W1T 3JH. Registered in England and Wales Number 1072954. 
Tel: +44 (0)20 7017 5000 
Fax: +44 (0)20 7017 6336 
Website: www.informahealthcare.com 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior permission of the 
publisher or in accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 or under the terms of any 
licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1P 0LP. 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that all owners of copyright material have been acknowledged in this 
publication, we would be glad to acknowledge in subsequent reprints or editions any omissions brought to our attention. 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that drug doses and other information are presented accurately in this 
publication, the ultimate responsibility rests with the prescribing physician. Neither the publishers nor the authors can 
be held responsible for errors or for any consequences arising from the use of information contained herein. For detailed 
prescribing information or instructions on the use of any product or procedure discussed herein, please consult the 
prescribing information or instructional material issued by the manufacturer. 
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Data available on application 
ISBN 10: 0 415 41444 X 
ISBN 13: 978 0 415 41444 9 
Distributed in North and South America by 
Taylor & Francis 
6000 Broken Sound Parkway, NW, (Suite 300) 
Boca Raton, FL 33487, USA 
Within Continental USA 
Tel: 1(800) 272 7737; Fax: 1(800) 374 3401 
Outside Continental USA 
Tel: (561) 994 0555; Fax: (561)361 6018 
E-mail: orders@crcpress.com 
Distributed in the rest of the world by 
Thomson Publishing Services 
Cheriton House 
North Way 
Andover, Hampshire SP10 5BE, UK 
Tel: +44 (0)1264 332424 
E-mail: tps.tandfsalesorder@thomson.com 
Composition by C&M Digitals (P) Ltd, Chennai, India 
Printed and bound in India by Replika Press Pvt Ltd 

Dedications 
To my father and Carmen 
To my father, Pia and my daughters, Grazia and Francesca 
v 

Contents 
Preface ix 
Foreword by Yves Ville xi 
Acknowledgments xiii 
1. Anatomic survey of the fetus and its relationship to gestational 
age – what can be seen and cannot be seen 1 
2. Central and peripheral nervous system anomalies 11 
3. Craniofacial and neck anomalies 63 
4. Cystic hygroma and non-immune hydrops fetalis 103 
5. Congenital heart disease 113 
6. Thoracic anomalies 183 
7. Anomalies of the gastrointestinal tract and abdominal wall 207 
8. Urinary tract anomalies 231 
9. Skeletal dysplasias and muscular anomalies: a diagnostic algorithm 267 
10. Chromosomal and non-chromosomal syndromes 301 
Appendix 337 
Index 353 
vii 

Preface 
‘All you were craving to find in a textbook and could not’: this could represent the philosophy of this 
volume. We tried to answer the questions which remained unanswered during our training in fetal medicine 
some 20 years ago. In fact, this book was conceived with the purpose to provide some help to the 
operators confronted everyday with the challenging task of ultrasound diagnosis of fetal malformations. 
In our early experience with fetal ultrasound, we have felt on our skin the unpleasant sensation of looking 
at something unusual or wrong without been able to tell what it is, unable to put a name to it. The 
most frequently asked questions with which the fetal medicine trainee/expert is confronted with everyday 
are: ‘Is the finding real or merely an artefact’? ‘Is the diagnosis correct’? ‘Is it hereditary’? ‘Is it correctable’? 
‘Which other lesions should it be differentiated from’? ‘Which are the management options 
and what is the prognosis?’ However, to be able to find the description of an abnormal ultrasound finding 
in a textbook, one generally has to search by the definite diagnosis…which has not been made yet! 
This uneasy feeling was the first factor that pushed us to design this volume in its present format, i.e. 
with an ample part dedicated to fetal anomalies ‘by scanning view’. We have tired to describe, for all 
major ultrasound planes – organ after organ – what can be considered as a normal view and what can 
not; in other words how each particular ultrasound view can differ from its normal appearance and what 
are the corresponding diagnoses. From ultrasound sign to final diagnosis is the mission of this book, for 
it is in this way the diagnostic process goes and not the other way round. To further ease the consultation 
process, we have included plenty of illustrated diagnostic flowcharts. 
Another wish of our training days was to actually see the malformed babies, and not just imagine them 
on the basis of the ultrasound findings. However, despite the number of textbooks published on fetal 
anomalies since those days, in very few are we able to find a detailed echoanatomic correlation. Relatively 
few images of specimens are given to illustrate the real aspect of major malformations altering the external 
aspect of the fetus. This, we felt, was another issue we strongly wanted to deal with in detail. As a result a 
whole imaging archive, covering years and years of pictures shot just after termination of pregnancy to 
illustrate rare and less rare abnormalities has been included in the present volume, taking care to portray 
the anomaly/abnormal feature as it appears on ultrasound. 
Finally, everybody working in prenatal diagnosis knows that this represents a multidisciplinary field in 
which genetics, neonatology, human dysmorphology, fetal medicine, pediatric and cardiac surgery comes 
together in order to provide the unfortunate couple with a reliable estimate of the diagnosis, the cause of 
the anomaly, the possible treatments if available, the chances of survival, and the recurrence risk in subsequent 
pregnancies. This is why, in the second part of each chapter, the single malformations are treated in 
detail, providing the key information regarding all the above mentioned items in a structured, readerfriendly 
way. 
At the end, if the reader was found in this book at least some of the items he/she was craving to find in a 
textbook and could not, it would mean that our training, and trainers have taught us something. 
Dario Paladini 
Paolo Volpe 
ix 

Foreword 
FETAL IMAGING: A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE FUTURE 
The first years of this century probably qualify as being mutational for fetal imaging, and this outstanding 
review of the ability and performance of fetal ultrasound imaging is being timely published. 
Screening and diagnosis are the two faces of fetal imaging. They differ mainly because of their indications, 
the level of expertise they require and, to a certain extent, the complexity of the technology supporting 
the imaging modality. These largely determine the availability of the investigation, its reproducibility 
and accuracy. The number of, and gestational age at which these examinations are performed are not driven 
only by technical and developmental factors, but also by economic and social considerations, as well as 
legal aspects surrounding termination of pregnancy. As a result, screening has moved towards earlier gestations 
while diagnostic accuracy is increasing at later gestations, when [TOP] is either not an options or has 
stopped being relevant to the management of the pregnancy. Ultrasound screening in pregnancy can be seen 
as the offer to check the largest number of pregnancies, by the largest number of operators for simple and 
reproducible criteria in order to make important choices on the management of pregnancy and delivery. 
Most established screening programs claim figures of around 40–70% sensitivity (for a 5% false-positive 
rate) for different conditions such as congenital heart defects and Down syndrome. However divergent 
their directions can be, both screening and diagnosis are demanding an ever increasing knowledge of fetal 
development and mastering of the technology. 
The impact of 3D ultrasound has gradually developed over and above that of a new look at already welldocumented 
fetal structures. Outside a small group of pioneers, promotion of 3D technology has perceived 
as an expensive and obsessive campaign to demonstrate that poor 2D images obtained with an inconveniently 
large transducer could be put together into a grumpy fetal face, to be presented as a breakthrough in 
fetal imaging. However, over the last 5 years this ultrasound modality has overcome these technical, as much 
as cultural challenges. Image quality has gained respect from the most demanding operators and the commercial 
often has become diverse and competitive. At the same time, 3D-champions have moved away from 
pretty faces and into virtual dissection of the relevant fetal anatomy. This approach is now continuously raising 
the level of expertise of diagnostic ultrasound and perhaps more importantly, it is proving to be a 
remarkable incentive and tool for education. 
At the beginning of this century, a multiplanar approach of ultrasound was mostly considered eccentric 
or unnecessary, and rarely was this concept seen as either innovative or logical. In the old days, registrars 
were often described as having either surgical or obstetric skills. However, many of us have noticed that we 
now also see ultrasound skills burgeoning in first year trainees and a five-year follow-up often proves as 
right. It is not by chance that ultrasound has gradually moved away from being an exclusive and select 
apprenticeship, to become a discipline that can be learned while providing the culture and the tools of quality 
assessment we have long been missing. The frontier between education and research is often subtle, 
especially owing to the critical importance of subjectivity and reproducibility, two extreme and antagonistic 
components of ultrasound examination. Education is therefore likely to remain the most significant individual 
contribution each one of us can make to the improvement of perinatal care. 
xi 

xii FOREWORD 
Screening and diagnosis address two different issues. However there is a continuum between them, so 
much so that it is often difficult to draw a clear separation line. One aspect can benefit from the other when 
this continuum transforms into a progressive, pragmatic and didactic approach of diagnosis. The diagnosis 
path is absent from most textbooks. The essence of this book, ‘from the ultrasound sign to the diagnosis’, 
clearly exposes these principles and makes it an invaluable help in the ultrasound room, as well as the being 
starting material for a through investigations of any particular anomaly or risk factors. The extensive use of 
illustrated flowcharts to highlight differential diagnoses, as well as identification of the abnormalities from 
specific ultrasound features, will become significant assets in prenatal diagnosis. 
Another strong point of this volume is the continuous effort to include 3D images for most diagnoses, 
and especially those that are most likely to benefit from this development, including cranial sutures, skeleton, 
fetal brain and heart. In fact, what was long seen as alien with the most uncertain future within the 3D 
family has become the most spectacular and dynamic field of research and development. The fetal heart 
remains the greatest fantasy in the ‘brain’ holding the transducer. STIC and all its by-products provide the 
best examples of both didactic and antiphobic tools that can help overcome the challenge fetal echocardiography 
remains to most sonologists and sonographers. The important distinctive feature of this book, in 
comparison with other textbooks presenting 3D ultrasound images, is that these are only included if they 
are an objective added value to the diagnosis or its demonstration to colleagues of other specialties 
involved. 3D rendered images of craniofacial and brain anomalies, or cast-like reconstructions of cardiac 
defects are shown only if they are useful and not just to demonstrate that 3D ultrasound can also make the 
diagnosis: there is no reference to 3D if the diagnosis can be made confidently by 2D ultrasound. 
Whether 3D will make important breakthroughs in ultrasound screening remains questionable. Fetal 
heart examination is likely to represent the most sensitive indicator of the effectiveness of screening policies. 
Although gestational age is a critical factor for performance, which makes different countries very unequal, 
a technique that is both highly educational and accessible to telemedicine is more likely to succeed. 
Finally, ultrasound-anatomical correlates presented side by side with 2D and/or 3D ultrasound images, 
and relevant details of specimens from termination of pregnancy from extensively documented cases are a 
great teaching tool. Rare chromosomal and non-chromosomal syndromes are also introduced and 
described using the same methodology, and are more likely to make an impact on the readers than the usual 
long and dry list of features usually encountered in these abnormalities. 
The only book worth sitting in our ultrasound rooms has long been the Smith’s Recognizable Patterns Of 
Human Malformation by Kenneth Lyons Jones for its ability to gather the critical number and description 
of the most common anomalies to be identified in utero. However the ultrasound part of the mutational era 
I was referring to in the introduction of this preface is best illustrated by this book that will soon become a 
classic of this century. 
Professor Yves Ville 
Editor in Chief of Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 
Service de Gynecologie et Obstetrique 
CHI Bissy 
Université Paris Ouest St Bissy 
France 

Acknowledgments 
We would like to thank our colleagues and friends doctors Gianluca Campobasso, Valentina De Robertis, Gabriella 
Sglavo and Michele Vassallo for their valuable and fundamental help in retrieving all pictures and clinical files. 
We would also like to thank our friend, geneticist, Mattia Gentile. 
Finally, we would like to thank the following colleagues and units for providing us the MRI scans contained in this 
book: 
–Prof Marco Salvatore and Dr Mario Quarantelli 
Biostructure and Bioimaging Institute 
National Research Council 
Naples, Italy 
–Prof Maurizio Resta 
Dept of Neuroradiology 
SS Annuziata Hospital 
Taranto, Italy 
xiii 

In this first chapter of a book dedicated to the ultrasound 
diagnosis of fetal anomalies, we have decided 
to underscore the evolving nature of some lesions, paying 
attention to the gestational age at which the different 
abnormalities can be detected. In particular, Table 1.1 
shows the earliest detection period, the period in which 
the anatomic structure is confidently visualized and the 
anatomic structures that can be visualized only late in 
gestation (or only after birth) for developmental reasons. 
Another important premise regards the gestational age 
at which the anatomic scan should be performed. It is 
important to understand that different health politics and 
sociocultural factors influence this aspect of prenatal diagnosis: 
available funds, health politics, legislation regarding 
termination of pregnancy (not allowed; allowed only 
before viability; allowed also in the 3rd trimester, if severe 
anomalies are present). According to the way in which 
these factors interact, the ultrasound screening for congenital 
anomalies is carried out routinely or only on demand 
and in the 1st or the 2nd trimester. However, in most 
countries in which the national health system or insurance 
provide economic coverage for the anomaly screening, 
this is carried out in midtrimester, usually at 18–21 weeks’ 
gestation. A significant exception is Israel, where due to 
various factors, the anomaly scan is often anticipated to 
the end of the 1st trimester, by transvaginal ultrasound. 
Chapter 1 
Anatomic survey of the fetus and its 
relationship to gestational age – what 
can be seen and cannot be seen 
THE 12–14 WEEKS 
EXAMINATION (TABLE 1.2) 
Congenital anomalies can be divided into those clearly 
detectable at this gestational age and those which are 
not, with the latter group being detected only by experienced 
operators. 
Fetal head. The ossification of the calvarium is evident, on 
the transthalamic view, from 12 weeks of gestation 
onwards. Hence, anencephaly (Figure 1.1) can be reliably 
diagnosed at this gestational age. However, care should 
Table 1.1 This shows for each anatomic structure the 
earliest gestational age (blue +) at which it is possible 
to visualize it and the ideal gestational age (black +) for 
its visualization (the latter is identified on the basis of 
the best compromise between ease of recognition and 
diagnostic accuracy) 
12–14 19–21 >28 
Anatomic structure weeks weeks weeks 
Calvarium ++ + 
Cerebral midline 
and falx ++ + 
Cerebellum NP ++ 
Corpus callosum NP ++ + 
Gyri and sulci NP NP ++ 
Spine (NTD) + + 
Heart (4-chambers 
and outflows) + + 
Stomach + + 
Abdominal wall ++ + 
Kidney and bladder + + 
Limbs (long bones) ++ + 
Extremities ++ + 
NP, organs for which development is completed only 
relatively late in gestation; as a consequence their assessment 
earlier in gestation may not be possible. 
1 

be taken here, considering that the aspect of this lesion 
early in gestation is different from the classic 2ndtrimester 
aspect: in fact, at the end of the 1st trimester, the 
cerebral hemispheres are still present, although in direct 
contact with the amniotic fluid (exencephaly). By the 2nd 
trimester, the cerebral parenchyma has been destructed 
by repeated trauma against the uterine walls and by contact 
with the amniotic fluid; this transforms the exencephaly 
into anencephaly. The only anomalies that may 
sometimes give the same impression, early in gestation, 
are the skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe 
hypomineralization of the calvarium, such as achondrogenesis, 
osteogenesis imperfecta type II or hypophosphatasia 
(see Table 9.3 in Chapter 9): in this case, the 
skull may not be evident, but this is due to the lower calcium 
content. Another important issue to be considered is 
that at this gestational age, and until 18 weeks, the lower 
part of the cerebellar vermis has not yet developed. As a 
consequence, there is a physiologically wide communication 
between the fourth ventricle and the cisterna magna. 
Therefore, a false diagnosis of Dandy–Walker variant can 
be made if the normal times of the cerebellum development 
are not taken into consideration. This diagnosis 
should not be made until 18 weeks’ gestation, unless an 
evident cystic posterior fossa is detected. 
Another malformation that may be confidently diagnosed 
in the 1st trimester is holoprosencephaly. In fact, 
the falx is already present and evident on ultrasound at 
12 weeks of gestation, and therefore its absence, which is 
one of the features typical of alobar and semilobar holoprosencephaly, 
can be reliably detected (see Chapter 2). 
If we now consider the anomalies of the fetal neck, 
then nuchal translucency, cystic hygroma and 
hydrops should be taken into account. With regard 
to the cystic hygroma (Figure 1.2a), it should be considered 
that cases detected in the 1st trimester are etiologically 
different from those detected in the 2nd 
trimester, in terms of incidence and prevalence and 
type of chromsomal aberrations (see Chapter 4). 
Cystic hygroma represents a relatively simple diagnosis 
at 12–14 weeks’ gestation. Paradoxically, the more 
severe cases may fail to be diagnosed: in these cases, 
2 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 1.2 Congenital anomalies confidently detectable at 12–14 
weeks’ gestation. (a) Cystic hygroma, on the axial transthalamic view: 
the image demonstrates the conspicuous lymphangiectasia of the posterior 
neck region (arrowheads). (b) Omphalocele, with the liver 
(arrow) inside the sac; sagittal view. (c) Complete posterior urethral 
valves. The low magnification view demonstrates the huge megacystis 
that fills most of the abdomen; due to the extremely severe distension, 
the bladder (Bl has ruptured, producing urinary ascites (asc). 
a
b
c 
Figure 1.1 Congenital anomalies confidently detectable at 12–14 
weeks’ gestation: anencephaly, at 13 weeks. (a) Midsagittal lowmagnification 
view of the fetus, showing the absence of the calvarium 
(arrows); (b) surface rendering showing the classic ‘frog’ face 
aspect, due to the concurrent absence of the calvarium and the 
moderate macrophthalmia, often present in anencephaly. 
a b 

the outer cutaneous contour may be in close contact 
with the uterine wall, due to the oligohydramnios and 
the large retronuchal swelling, and therefore the hypoechoic 
hygroma may escape diagnosis if its thin septa 
are not recognized (see Figure 4.2a). Finally, it should 
be underlined that the hygroma, especially if non-septated, 
may be transient and regress almost completely 
by the 2nd trimester, sometimes evolving into a nuchal 
edema. In these cases, the feto/neonatal outcome may 
also be good, but a significant percentage of cases are 
associated with Noonan syndrome or Noonan-like 
phenotype.1 As far as nuchal translucency (NT) is concerned, 
illustration of this important marker of chromosomal 
anomalies is beyond the scope of this book. 
We think it useful only to underline here that measurement 
of NT is not an integral part of the 12–14 weeks 
scan. Screening of chromosomal anomalies by NT measurement 
with or without biochemistry should be 
requested by the parent or proposed by the examiner 
prior to the ultrasound examination. Should such 
screening be required, it must be performed according 
to the protocol set up by the Fetal Medicine 
Foundation.2 This screening procedure includes not 
only relatively simple sonographic measurements but 
also pre- and post-test counseling sessions. 
Trunk and abdomen. Most thoracic (pulmonary) 
anomalies appear only in the 2nd or even the 3rd (some 
cases of congenital diaphragmatic hernia) trimester. 
Only a moderate to severe hydrothorax can be detected 
at 12–14 weeks’ gestation. With regard to congenital 
heart disease, only very experienced operators are able 
to detect cardiac lesions at this gestational age, by 
transvaginal or transabdominal ultrasound. However, 
it should be recalled here that an enlarged NT with a 
normal karyotype represents an indication for early 
fetal echocardiography, since it is associated in up to 
30% of the cases with a cardiac defect. Among abdominal 
and wall malformations, both omphalocele (Figure 
1.2b) and gastroschisis can be recognized early in gestation, 
because of the favorable fetal lie: in fact, at 
12–14 weeks’ gestation, the limbs are more frequently 
abducted, giving a good view of the abdominal wall. 
However, care should be taken in diagnosing an 
omphalocele at 12 weeks’ gestation, since the physiologic 
herniation of the bowel in the cord regresses only 
at the end of the 11th week. Therefore, if an omphalocele 
containing only bowel loops is suspected at that 
gestational age, it is safer to wait 1 or 2 weeks in order 
to get a confirmation of the diagnosis. 
An anomaly that is extremely difficult to recognize 
early in gestation is bilateral renal agenesis. This difficulty 
arises because the kidneys can be visualized, but 
not always as confidently as they should. In addition, 
the important sign that always leads to this diagnosis in 
the 2nd trimester, namely severe oligohydramnios, 
develops only after 16 weeks’ gestation, because until 
that time the amniotic fluid is produced uniquely by 
ultrafiltration and the contribution of the fetal urine to 
its maintainance is marginal. 
On the contrary, a megacystis from complete urethral 
valves or urethral atresia (Figure 1.2c) is strikingly 
evident at 12 weeks, regardless of the rather normal 
amount of amniotic fluid, due to the severe enlargement 
of the bladder in the fetal abdomen: often, the whole 
abdomen of the fetus is occupied by the megacystis. For 
further details, see the description of this anomaly in 
Chapter 8. 
Osteomuscular system. At 12 weeks’ gestation, all long 
bones are visible on ultrasound. Therefore, the lethal 
skeletal dysplasias, characterized by severe micromelia 
(see Figure 9.8 in Chapter 9) and often hypomineralization, 
are generally recognizable. 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 3 
THE MIDTRIMESTER ANOMALY SCAN (TABLE 1.2) 
As already mentioned, in most countries, the survey 
of the fetal anatomy needed to perform a screening 
of congenital anomalies is carried out in the 2nd 
trimester, usually between the 18th and 21st weeks 
of gestation. In this regard, the ideal time for the 
sonographic assessment of fetal anatomy should be 
at 24–26 weeks’ gestation, to give an optimal balance 
between the amount of amniotic fluid and the 
volume and developmental stage of the fetal organs. 
In most cases where the timing of the anomaly 
scan is shifted, this is due to the fact that in those 
countries where there is a legal time limit for termination 
of pregnancy, this is usually set at 22–24 
weeks’ gestation, which represent the limit of 
fetal viability. Usually, the examination protocol 
includes: 
• a biometric assessment usually consisting of biparietal 
diameter, head circumference, abdominal circumference, 
and femur length 
• anatomic assessment that, depending on different 
national guidelines, consists of visualization of all or 
part of the following structures: 
– head: skull, cerebral hemispheres, falx, cerebellum 
and cisterna magna, lateral ventricles, orbits, lips, 
and facial profile 
– thorax: 4-chamber view (with or without outflows) 
and the lungs 

– abdomen: stomach, liver, bowel, kidneys and 
bladder, and abdominal wall 
– limbs: presence of the four limbs and of the extremities 
– spine 
• evaluation of the fetal adnexa, placenta and amniotic 
fluid 
Pretest information. Prior to the scan, the woman 
should be informed about the potential diagnostic 
accuracy of the examination, of its screening nature, 
and of the technical and practical limitations of the 
ultrasound examination. In addition, it is useful to 
inform the couple that the scan will not have a predefined 
duration, but that this depends on several factors, 
including acoustic window limitations (e.g. maternal 
obesity) and fetal lie. 
Acoustic window impairment. The diagnostic accuracy 
of midtrimester screening for the detection of congenital 
anomalies will be illustrated below. Here, we wish to 
underline how important it is, for medicolegal reasons, 
to describe in the report and to express in the pre- and 
post-test counseling the existence of any factor that may 
reduce the diagnostic accuracy of the ultrasound examination. 
These include maternal and fetal limitations. 
Maternal causes of impaired acoustic window. The most 
important factor that may greatly reduce the diagnostic 
potential of a transabdominal ultrasound examination is 
the presence of maternal obesity, which, unfortunately, is 
becoming a real problem due to the increased prevalence 
of this condition in the populations of the developed countries. 
The impairment of the acoustic window exhibits a 
positive linear correlation with the thickness of the 
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue.3 It is common 
experience, however, that in some cases resolution and 
penetration are also significantly reduced in the absence of 
evident maternal overweight, probably due to individual 
differences in subcutaneous adipose tissue water and fat 
content. Another factor that may limit the diagnostic 
accuracy of the midtrimester scan is an increased tone or 
contracture of the abdominal musculature, usually due to 
maternal anxiety. The presence of striae rubrae from dysmetabolic 
conditions or of large abdominal scars or burns 
can also have a significant impact on the quality of the 
ultrasound examination. Finally, the most frustrating condition 
to be confronted with in the course of an ultrasound 
examination is, in our experience, a previous 
abdominoplasty. In this case, several concurrent factors 
contribute to the limitation of diagnostic accuracy: the 
extensive cleavage of the whole abdominal subcutaneous 
tissue from the underlying muscular fascia associated with 
a long cutaneous surgical wound scar, residual abdominal 
fat, and a dramatic increase in abdominal firmness represent 
a frustrating although not insurmountable problem. 
Fetal causes of impaired acoustic window. The most 
common cause of (fortunately transient) impairment of 
the acoustic window is represented by an unfavorable 
fetal lie: an anterior spine, especially if associated with a 
transverse lie, makes assessment of the heart and the craniofacial 
area often impossible. However, in these cases, it 
is often sufficient to rescan the woman after 20–60 
minutes to let the fetus change its position and remove the 
cause of the acoustic window impairment. Fetal crowding 
is also a potential cause of acoustic window impairment, 
with the degree of impairment increasing with the number 
of fetuses. Another factor that can significantly limit the 
diagnostic accuracy of the midtrimester scan is an abnormal 
amount of amniotic fluid. In particular, severe oligohydramnios, 
from premature rupture of membranes 
or renal anomalies, and severe polyhydramnios, from 
fetal anomalies, twin-to-twin-transfusion syndrome, or 
4 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 1.2 Average gestational age at diagnosis for 
most common anomalies 
<18 18–21 >28 
Congenital anomaly weeks weeks weeks 
Anencephaly +++ -(+) - 
Hydrocephaly + ++ +++ 
Microcephaly NP + +++ 
Holoprosencephaly ++ +++ - 
Agenesis of the 
corpus callosum NP + +++ 
Dandy-Walker 
complex NP +++ + 
Spina bifida + +++ + 
Congenital heart 
disease ++ +++ ++ 
Diaphragmatic 
hernia + ++ ++ 
CAML and 
sequestration NP +++ + 
Esophageal atresia NP ++ ++ 
Duodenal atresia NP ++ +++ 
Ileo-jejunal atresia NP + +++ 
Omphalocele +++ +++ + 
Gastroschisis +++ +++ + 
Bilateral renal 
agenesis NP +++ - 
ARPKD + ++ + 
Multycystic kidney + +++ + 
Posterior urethral 
valves +++ + - 
Limb reduction 
defects +++ +++ - 
NIHF ++ +++ - 
Tumors (all sites) NP + +++ 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; 
CAML, cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung; NIHF, 
non-immune hydrops fetalis; NP, assessment not possible. 

idiopathic, can be responsible for an impairment of the 
acoustic window for different reasons: in oligohydramnios, 
the natural contrast agent represented by the amniotic 
fluid is absent and, in addition, the limbs are often 
adducted, and these two factors usually limit the assessment 
of the fetal limbs and heart. With severe polyhydramnios, 
the increased fetal movements and the 
significant increase in the distance between the transducer 
and the fetal body are the two main limitations. 
The abdominal acoustic windows. It is useful to know 
that the normal anatomy of the human abdominal wall 
provides a few preferential ‘channels’ to exploit in the 
case of an impaired acoustic window. These preferential 
points of access are characterized by a reduced amount 
of subcutaneous adipose tissue with a consequently 
reduced transducer–fetus median distance. Two of these 
anatomic regions are the periumbilical area, where 
there is virtually no adipose tissue and which may be 
exploited if no air is left between the transducer and the 
actual maternal umbilicus, and the lateral regions of the 
abdomen (i.e. iliac fossae), where the mean thickness of 
the abdominal adipose tissue is less than in the hypogastric 
area (between the symphysis and the umbilical 
area). To take advantage of this type of approach, the 
patient may be asked to roll onto one side (which one 
depends on the position of the fetus) in order to better 
expose the lateral abdominal area to the operator. 
Often, using this type of approach, the increased muscular 
resistance offered by some patients (see above) also 
tends to be reduced. A third preferential point of access 
is the suprapubic area/fold. In general, at 20–22 weeks 
with the fetus in the vertex position, the fetal head may 
be approached through the suprapubic area, while the 
craniofacial anatomy may be assessed through the periumbilical 
area. A useful hint may be to use the maternal 
bladder as a wedge: a full bladder will push the uterus 
(and the fetus) upwards, towards the umbilical area; on 
the contrary, an empty bladder may allow the fetal head 
to descend into the pelvis, where it can be explored 
through the suprapubic window. 
The 3rd-trimester examination. This ultrasound scan 
usually aims at the recognition of growth restriction. A 
second endpoint is the detection of late-onset congenital 
anomalies. 
Evolving and late-onset malformations (Figure 1.3 and 
Table 1.3). The term ‘evolving’ may indicate two conditions: 
(i) that a malformation may potentially arise late 
in gestation (late onset), because it is due to an arrest in 
the development/growth of a given anatomic structure 
(microcephaly or semilunar valve stenosis); or (ii) that it 
is already present at midtrimester but has the potential 
to progress toward more severe stages in the 3rd 
trimester (diaphragmatic hernia, semilunar valve 
stenoses, or upper renal obstructive lesions). As a result, 
the midtrimester anomaly can be unremarkable in all 
conditions covered by the former definition. A partial 
list of the most common evolving lesions is given in 
Table 1.3. 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 5 
Figure 1.3 Evolving (late-onset) malformations: a few examples of 
evolving lesions are shown. (a) Microcephaly: compare the reduced 
head area (<3 standard deviations) with the normal abdominal area. 
(b) Aortic coarctation: the axial 3-vessel and trachea view shows the 
severely hypoplastic aortic arch (tubular hypoplasia). (c) Left-sided 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia: the presence in the thorax of the 
stomach is evident. (d) Jejunal atresia: extremely severe dilatation of 
jejunal loops. (e) Aneurysm of the vein of Galen: on the transventricular 
view, the huge midline vascular lake, consistent with the diagnosis 
of aneurysm of the vein of Galen, is highlighted on power 
Doppler. 
a
b c 
d e 
3D ULTRASOUND 
Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound has become an integral 
part of the ultrasound assessment of a large number 
of fetal anomalies. It represents for the new century 
what Doppler velocimetry represented for the 1980s 

6 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 1.3 The most common (but not all) late-onset 
(>24 weeks’ gestation) malformations 
In a significant Also only 
Congenital number of after 
anomaly Always cases birth 
Hydrocephalus + 
Microcephaly + + 
Agenesis of the 
corpus callosum + 
Semilunar valve 
stenosis + + 
Aortic coarctation + + 
Cardiomyopathy+ + 
Premature closure 
of DA + 
Patent DA + 
Diaphragmatic 
hernia + + 
Esophageal atresia + + 
Duodenal atresia + + 
Ileojejunal atresia + 
Meconium ileus + + 
ARPKD + 
ADPKD + + 
Vesico-ureteral 
reflux + + 
Achondroplasia + 
Arthrogryposis 
(FADS) + 
Vein of Galen 
aneurysm + 
Tumors (all sites) + 
ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; DA, 
ductus arteriosus. 
and 1990s – an enormous contribution to the field of 
fetal medicine. Unfortunately, the clinical use of 3D 
ultrasound has been in part obstructed by its use (misuse?) 
to display portraits of the fetal face. The heavy 
marketing campaign launched some years ago by all 
producers of 3D ultrasound equipment has led to a 
misunderstanding in the population that since 3 is 
‘better’ than 2, then 3D ultrasound should see more and 
better than 2D ultrasound. While this may be partly true 
in those cases in which a fetal malformation has been 
detected, and only for some organ systems, as explained 
in the various chapters, the use of 3D ultrasound in the 
screening setting so far has not been validated at all. In 
this section, we will illustrate briefly the approach to 3D 
ultrasound, from the volume acquisition procedure to 
offline navigation and reconstruction. Of all the currently 
available techniques and imaging modes, we will 
illustrate only those petinent to the diagnosis of fetal malformations. 
In addition, it should be pointed out that the 
names and the techniques used by the various producers 
of 3D ultrasound systems differ. Since all 3D ultrasound 
images in this book have been obtained with General 
Electric–Kretz equipment, the terms and the procedures 
described here relate to the equipment and technologies 
developed by this manufacturer. 
Volume acquisition procedure. The volume acquisition 
procedure is based on the particular technology of volumetric 
transducers. The acquisition of the volume is based 
on the movement of the array housed inside the transducer: 
when the procedure is activated, this array performs 
a slow, single sweep, automatically recording one 
single 3D dataset. This volume consists of a high number 
of 2D frames (or slices). Once the volume has been 
acquired, it can be processed directly on the ultrasound 
system or, more comfortably, offline, on a PC, with the 
help of dedicated software. 
Quality of the volume. The quality of the acquired 
volume depends first of all on all the usual limitations 
due to the physics of ultrasound (maternal obesity, 
fetal lie, etc.), which obviously apply to 3D ultrasound 
too. In addition, the quality of the volume is conditioned 
by the presence/absence of fetal movements during 
the acquistion time: the more movements that 
occur, the less adequate is the acquired volume. 
Another important factor affecting the quality of the 
volume is involuntary movement of the hand holding 
the transducer during the acquisition. However, an 
easy and fast way to assess the quality of an acquired 
volume consists in assessing how many abnormal 
‘waves’ are present on the b window (the upper-right 
end-side one) on the multiplanar screen (Figure 1.4). 
Multiplanar imaging. This image modality represents the 
key approach to the study of fetal anatomy in normal 
and abnormal conditions. In the three windows, the 
three orthogonal planes are displayed (Figure 1.5): using 
the cursors, it is possible to navigate the volume, reproducing 
all possible views on the three planes; in addition, 
to better assess the relationships between different 
anatomic structures, it is possible to move the dedicated 
caliper on one plane and evaluate the corresponding 
changes on the other two planes. 
Surface mode. From the acquired dataset, it is possible 
to retrieve all the information needed to reconstruct the 
surface appearance of a given structure (surface mode). 
The combination of various filters and thresholds allows 

one to obtain the desired mixture of contrast, light, and 
transparency (Figure 1.6). 
Maximum mode. If the degree of transparency is 
increased, and the maximum-mode option is activated, 
the soft tissues become transparent and the fetal skeleton 
is displayed (Figure 1.7). 
Volume Contrast Imaging C (coronal). This application 
allows quick display on screen of the plane 
coronal to the one the operator is insonating in 2D. In 
gynecologic ultrasound it is able to provide impressive 
images of the normal and abnormal uterine cavity. In 
obstetrics, its use is of crucial importance for the assessment 
of cranial sutures (Chapter 3), thoraco-abdominal 
topographic anatomy (Figure 6.10), and of limb 
abnormalities (Figure 1.8). 
ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 7 
Figure 1.4 Overall quality of the volume. It is possible to assess 
the overall quality of the acquired volume by looking at the b window 
(top right). The number of the vertical artefacts (arrows) corresponds 
to the number of gross fetal movements. In this case, 
from the regular rhythm of the artefacts it can be deduced that the 
STIC volume was acquired during a period of fetal breathing. 
Figure 1.6 Three-dimensional ultrasound – surface mode. Using 
the surface mode, and adjusting threshold and filters, it is possible to 
display the surface of the fetal face. This example is the same as in 
Figure 1.5, a 32-week-old fetus of Afro-American origin: note the 
typical ethnic features. 
Figure 1.7 Three-dimensional ultrasound – maximum mode. 
This image modality allows one to ‘see through’ the soft tissues, 
displaying the fetal bones. This example shows the upper spine 
with the occipital bone (Occ) and the scapulae (S) on the left and 
the lower spine with the iliac wings (Sa) on the right. 
a b 
c 
Figure 1.5 Three-dimensional ultrasound – multiplanar imaging. 
Once the 3D volume is opened, the three orthogonal planes are 
shown. By moving the small caliper (yellow in a, red in b, blue in 
c), it is possible to assess in detail the anatomic structure of interest. 
This example illustrates the multiplanar rendering of a normal 
fetal face at 32 weeks of gestation. 
a b 
c 

Inversion mode. This is one of the latest developments. 
It can be used to assess sonolucent structures (vessels, 
cavities, etc.). In fact, its algorithm inverts the color code 
assigned to black and white pixels (voxels in 3D). The 
final output is a cast-like image of the studied structure; 
originally developed for the heart, it can also be applied 
to cystic structures (Figure 1.9). 
Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This image 
modality is a new way of displaying diagnostic information 
contained in a static or dynamic 3D dataset. In 
particular, it allows 2D slices to be displayed from any 
given volume, on any of the three orthogonal planes 
similar to CT or MR scans (Figure 1.10). This display 
mode can be advantageously used to demonstrate 
brain or cardiac fetal anomalies and to evaluate ovarian 
tumors or endometrial cavity abnormalities in 
gynaecologic ultrasound. 
High definition flow. The algorithm of this particular 
power Doppler application has been designed to penetrate 
very small vessels with extremely reduced dimensions 
and low blood velocities. It is of great advantage 
not only to assess the cerebral blood supply in normal 
and abnormal condition, but to display virtually all 
parenchymal circulation (Figure 1.11.) 
B-flow. B-flow imaging is a new technique which 
employs digitally encoded sonographic technology to 
provide direct visualization of blood flows in gray scale. 
It displays simultaneously both tissue morphology and 
blood flow using the same gray-scale schemes. This leads 
to a higher frame rate and better spatial resolution in 
comparison with power and color Doppler. In addition, 
it shows good depiction of small vessels and, due to its 
non-Doppler derived origin, it is not angle dependent 
(Figures 5.23, 5.56c and 5.57). 
Other image modalities. Many possible combinations 
of rendering modes are available. The Cardio-STIC 
technique developed for the study of the fetal heart is 
described in Chapter 5. 
8 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 1.9 Three-dimensional ultrasound – inversion mode. This 
image modality allows one to create cast-like reconstructions of 
hollow anatomic structures. (a) Lateral cerebral ventricles in earlyonset 
severe hydrocephalus. Note the oval ‘defect’ represented by 
the choroid plexus. (b) Four-chamber view of a normal heart. The 
arrows indicate the leaflets and the chordae tendinae of the atrioventricular 
valves. 
Figure 1.8 Volume contrast imaging C (Coronal). (a) Occipital 
cephalocele at 19 weeks gestation. The VCI-C shows the parietooccipital 
sutures and the small cephalocele (arrows). (Occ, occipital 
bone; Pa, parietal bones) (b) normal hand bones and soft tissues at 
24 weeks of gestation. 
a b a
b 
OUTLINE OF THIS BOOK 
The rationale behind this book is the concept that, in 
everyday practice, what raises the suspicion of a fetal 
anomaly is an abnormal view – that is, the ‘non-normal 
appearance’ of a conventional scanning view. This is 

ANATOMIC SURVEY OF THE FETUS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO GESTATIONAL AGE 9 
why, in each chapter, the first part does not consist of 
the classic nosologic approach, but rather of a section 
dedicated to the various ultrasound views necessary to 
assess each organ. Then, the abnormal aspect of each 
view is illustrated, and the anomalies possibly responsible 
for the abnormal aspect of the ultrasound view 
are illustrated. In several cases, the first part of the 
chapter is further enriched with diagnostic flowcharts 
that may help in the differential diagnosis by sign. For 
example, these flowcharts illustrate all anomalies to 
be ruled out in the case of non-visualization of the 
fetal stomach (Figure 7.7) or bladder (Figure 8.8), or, 
Figure 1.10 Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). Carcinoma of the right choroid plexus at 35 weeks gestation. The image shows the 
large malignant tumor (T) infiltrating the brain posteriorly (arrowheads) with secondary hydrocephalus (lv, lateral ventricles; arrow, 4th ventricle). 
The multislice, tomographic imaging allows assessment on the single panel of images the extension of the tumor and its relationship 
with the surrounding anatomic structures. 
a b 
Figure 1.11 High definition flow (HD flow). The HD flow is able to show very small vessels with low velocity. (a) Pulmonary arterial and 
venous blood flow at 28 weeks gestation (Ao, descending aorta arrows; pulmonary veins). (b) Transvaginal transfontanellar view of cerebral 
blood vessels at 24 weeks gestation. (BA, basilar artery; PCA, pericallosal artery; SS, sagittal sinus) 

10 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
in the case of micromelia, which additional signs 
should be sought to make a differential diagnosis 
among all skeletal dysplasias possibly associated with 
micromelia (Figure 9.8). The philosophy behind this 
approach – from sign to diagnosis – is mantained in 
all chapters. 
The second part of each chapter is dedicated to the 
illustration of the various abnormalities. Again, to 
maintain the practical approach, for each anomaly a 
summarizing box is given at the beginning, and the 
various headings then include; Definition, Etiology 
and pathogenesis, Ultrasound diagnosis, Risk of 
chromosomal anomalies, Risk of non-chromosomal 
syndromes, Obstetric management, Postnatal therapy, 
and Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Of particular 
interest, under the Ultrasound diagnosis heading, 
important subheadings give the differential diagnosis 
with anomalies featuring similar ultrasound signs and 
the ultrasound prognostic indicators. 
In conclusion, we did not intend to write an extensive 
textbook on fetal anomalies – there are already excellent 
ones available – instead, our idea was to produce a versatile 
text that might be consulted in everyday practice 
and that might help in difficult situations. 
REFERENCES 
1. Nisbet DL, Grifin DR, Chitty LS. Prenatal features of Noonan 
syndrome. Prenat Diagn 1999; 19: 642–7. 
2. Snijders RJM, Noble P, Sebire N, Nicolaides KH. UK multicentre 
project on assessment of risk of trisomy 21 by maternal age and 
fetal nuchal-translucency thickness at 10–14 weeks of gestation. 
Lancet 1998; 352: 343–6. 
3. De Vore GA, Medearis AL, Bear MB, et al. Fetal echocardiography: 
factors that influence imaging of the fetal heart during 
the second trimester of pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 1993; 12: 
659–63. 

Timing of examination. Ultrasound screening for fetal 
brain malformations is performed at 19–22 weeks’ gestation. 
For the assessment of the fetal brain, the 2nd trimester 
anomaly screening scan includes the following axial planes: 
transthalamic, transventricular, and transcerebellar.1–3 
This has become the standard approach. However, major 
developmental events occur in the second half of the gestational 
period, including neuronal proliferation, migration 
and organization; and the same is true for acquired lesions, 
such as hemorrhage and tumors, which usually occur late 
in gestation. Therefore, although it is possible to detect most 
fetal brain anomalies in the 2nd trimester, migration, proliferation 
and organization4,5 disorders as well as acquired 
lesions can become apparent only in the 3rd trimester. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes. The screening 
examination for anomalies of the central nervous system 
(CNS) is performed by abdominal ultrasound, mainly 
using transverse scanning planes that are easily obtained. 
Coronal and sagittal views are more difficult to obtain, and 
often require a transvaginal scan, but they may become 
necessary in a targeted examination (fetal neurosonogram) 
in patients with an increased risk of CNS anomalies.6,7 
Transvaginal ultrasound with high-frequency transducers 
has been used in the 1st trimester of pregnancy to study the 
development of the fetal brain, monitoring its typically fast 
morphologic changes, and to detect the presence of some 
early-detectable brain malformations (anencephaly, alobar 
holoprosencephaly, etc.). Later in gestation, when the fetus 
is in the vertex position, the vaginal approach can be 
extremely helpful in the evaluation of complex malformations 
and of normal and abnormal midline structures. In 
fact, due to the proximity between the transducer and the 
fetal head and to the consequent use of higher-frequency 
transducers in comparison with transabdominal scanning, 
the fetal brain can be better evaluated, and coronal and 
sagittal views are much more easily obtained, in a similar 
fashion as neonatal transfontanellar ultrasound.6 
Brain anomalies by scanning view. The axial scans used 
in the midtrimester screening of brain malformations are 
as follows. 
Axial transventricular view and related malformations. 
This is the most cephalad axial scan plane of the fetal 
head. It allows visualization of the sonolucent lateral ventricles 
with the echoic choroid plexuses, filling the ventricular 
bodies and atria (Figure 2.1a) and of the Cavum Septi 
Pellucidi (CSP). To exclude the presence of ventriculomegaly, 
the width of the atria is measured at the level of 
the glomus of the choroid plexus. The measurement is 
made perpendicular to the ventricular axis by positioning 
the calipers on the inner sides of the echogenic ventricular 
walls (inner to inner borders) and should be less than 
10 mm. The site for the measurement, at the level of the 
glomus, is chosen because, regardless of the etiology, 
dilatation of the lateral ventricle generally involves the 
caudal portion (atrium and posterior horn) first.2 The 
10 mm cutoff applies throughout gestation; any measurement 
of 10 mm or more indicates the presence of ventriculomegaly 
(Figures 2.1b and 2.2). As mentioned above, the 
body of the choroid plexus typically occupies most of the 
ventricle; a separation of the choroid plexus from the 
medial ventricular wall by 3 mm or greater may represent 
another sign indicating the presence of ventriculomegaly 
(Figure 2.1b); in a few cases, this sign has also been associated 
with an abnormal outcome, even in the presence of 
normal atrial size. Morphologic evaluation of the cerebral 
ventricles allows the operator to detect midline defects 
such as holoprosencephaly (single or partially separated 
ventricles: Figure 2.1c) and to suspect agenesis of the corpus 
callosum (colpocephaly: Figure 2.1d). Alobar holoprosencephaly 
is in fact characterized by a single common 
ventricle, whereas in semilobar holoprosencephaly the 
ventricles are separated only posteriorly, where a rudimentary 
horn is present. The rarer lobar variant is characterized 
by completely separated lateral ventricles except in 
Chapter 2 
Central and peripheral nervous 
system anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE BRAIN: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
11 

the foremost portion, where there is fusion of the anterior 
horns. In corpus callosum agenesis, colpocephaly may be 
present; in addition, there is an increased distance between 
the ‘parallel’ bodies of the lateral ventricle, and the third 
ventricle is enlarged and upwardly displaced in 50–60% of 
cases. Some destructive brain lesions are detected on this 
axial scan, too: hydranencephaly, which is characterized 
by a large endocranial cyst, and porencephaly, which is 
characterized by a parenchymal cyst that commonly communicates 
with the ventricular system. Anomalies associated 
with absence of the CSP are reported below. 
Axial transthalamic view and related malformations. The 
axial transthalamic view is the classic plane in which the 
biparietal diameter (BPD) and the fetal head circumference 
(HC) are measured. On this view, the CSP, the thalami 
and the symmetry of the cerebral hemispheres can be 
assessed (Figure 2.3a). Hence, the various midline malformations 
associated with absence of the CSP can be 
detected on this view (and on the transventricular view). 
These include holoprosencephaly and complete agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, both featuring absence of the CSP 
and abnormal lateral ventricles. Severe hydrocephaly and 
septo-optic dysplasia are also associated with absence of 
the CSP. In addition, some neuronal proliferation and 
migration disorders can be detected on the transthalamic 
view. These include microcephaly, which is characterized 
by a marked reduction of the fetal head circumference, 
and hemimegalencephaly, in which the two cerebral 
hemispheres are of different size, although a certain 
degree of asymmetry can also be present in some intracranial 
neoplasms (Figure 2.3b). In the same plane, some 
skull deformities, due to craniosynostoses or to 
other anomalies of the CNS, can also be recognized 
(Figure 2.4). 
Axial transcerebellar view and related malformations. 
This view is used to assess the posterior cranial fossa 
and the related structures, namely the cerebellum, the 
cisterna magna and the fourth ventricle (Figure 2.5a). 
The nomograms for the transverse cerebellar diameter 
are given in the Appendix. As for the cisterna magna, the 
distance between the posterior margin of the cerebellar 
vermis and the internal occipital bone surface should be 
measured. The normal range is 3–10 mm. It should also 
be taken into consideration that the cerebellar vermis has 
12 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.1 Transventricular scans of the fetal brain showing (a) the distal lateral ventricle and the echogenic choroid plexus within it; 
the arrows indicate the glomus of the choroid plexus. (b) Mild dilatation of the distal lateral ventricle with separation of the choroid plexus 
from the medial wall of the ventricle; (c) a single ventricular cavity (arrow); (d) a mild dilatation of the posterior part of the lateral ventricle 
(colpocephaly) (arrows) while the anterior part is normal (arrowhead). 
a b 
c d 

not completed its macroscopic development in the early 
second trimester; as a result, a premature scan can mislead 
the operator and cause misinterpretation of a normal 
pattern: an ample fourth ventricle and the still incomplete 
cerebellar vermis closure, which is normal in the early 
second trimester, can be misinterpreted as a vermian 
defect.8–9 Therefore, the screening examination for the 
detection of posterior fossa abnormalities should not be 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 13 
Normal 
Biventricular 
hydrocephalus 
Triventricular 
hydrocephalus 
Intraventricular 
hemorrhage 
Agenesis of corpus 
callosum 
Aneurysm of vein of 
Galen 
Figure 2.2 Ventricular anomalies evident 
on axial transventricular scans. 
Figure 2.3 Transthalamic scans of the fetal 
brain showing (a) the thalami (large 
arrows), the cavum of the septum pellucidum 
(small arrow), and the symmetry of 
the hemispheres; (b) the asymmetry of the 
hemispheres due to an intracranial hyperechoic 
tumor. 
a b 

Figure 2.4 Anomalies evident on 
the axial transthalamic scan. 
14 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Anomalies of the skull 
(Transthalamic view) 
Normal 
Macrocrania1 
Microcephaly 
Scaphocephaly2 
Acro(turri)cephaly3 
Hypomineralization
1: due to hydrocephaly/tumors 
2: due to fronto-parietal synostosis 
3: due to coronal suture synostosis, 
in Apert syndrome 
performed before 19–21 weeks’ gestation. On the axial 
transcerebellar plane, the cisterna magna, the cerebellum, 
and the fourth ventricle are displayed, and it is therefore 
possible on this view to demonstrate the anomalies of 
these structures, such as abnormal width of the posterior 
cranial fossa (Chiari II malformation, Dandy–Walker 
continuum) and/or the presence of a ‘cyst’ in the 
posterior fossa, (Dandy–Walker continuum, arachnoid 
cyst) (Figures 2.5b and 2.6). In the classic Dandy–Walker 
malformation, there is complete or partial agenesis of the 
cerebellar vermis, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle, 
and an abnormally wide posterior fossa. In the case of an 
arachnoid cyst, the cerebellar vermis is present, but is usually 
compressed and displaced, as are the cerebellar hemispheres. 
The study of the vermis should be performed 
with particular attention being paid to its inferior portion: 
if the cerebellum is insonated with an excessive downward 
angle, the plane will cut through the fourth ventricle 
rather than the vermis itself, erroneously suggesting an 
enlarged cisterna magna or even partial agenesis of the 

Figure 2.5 (a) Axial transcerebellar scan 
of the fetal head showing the cerebellar 
hemispheres, the vermis (arrow), and the 
cisterna magna (CM). (b) In this image, the 
cerebellum is V-shaped because of a large 
defect in the inferior vermis connecting the 
cystic fourth ventricle to the area of the cisterna 
magna (arrow). 
Normal 
Dandy–Walker 
malformation 
Dandy–Walker 
variant 
Megacisterna magna 
Spina bifida 
(Arnold–Chiari II) 
Incorrect alignment 
(angled too much toward 
the fourth ventricle) 
Figure 2.6 Anomalies evident on the axial 
transcerebellar scan. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 15 
a 
a b 

16 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
cerebellar vermis. (Figure 2.7). A likely explanation of 
this artefact may be the following: the fluid-filled vallecula 
cerebelli tends to expand slightly in the anterior 
aspect and has a very thin membranous roof that is 
impossible to visualize with the resolution currently available 
with ultrasound equipment. The juxtaposition of the 
vallecula with the adjacent cerebellar hemispheres creates 
the false impression of a continuum between the cisterna 
magna and the fourth ventricle, mimicking a 
Dandy–Walker variant9. In doubtful cases, and in those 
in which a posterior fossa cyst is detected, a midsagittal 
view will resolve the issue (see below) (Figure 2.8). The 
most important structure that needs to be carefully evaluated 
is the cerebellar vermis and its anatomy, since this 
is involved in a significant number of posterior fossa 
anomalies. Unfortunately, it is difficult to make a correct 
evaluation of vermian integrity when a cyst is present, 
particularly if its mass effect is significant. 
Three-dimensional ultrasound navigation of the fetal 
brain. Axial views are extremely useful in the context of 
screening, but have significant diagnostic limitations. 
While examining the fetal brain, one of the most important 
views is probably the midsagittal section of the fetal head: 
this view provides unique information on important 
midline intracranial structures such as the corpus callosum 
and the cerebellar vermis (Figure 2.8). Several authors have 
advocated the use of this scanning plane in the evaluation 
of fetal brain anatomy.6,7,9,10 Unfortunately, scanning in this 
plane is particularly difficult with two-dimensional ultrasound. 
Several approaches have been described, but they all 
require considerable manual skills, time, and, frequently, a 
transvaginal examination. Three-dimensional ultrasonography 
is now widely available, and one of its advantages is 
the possibility to obtain a volume and ‘slice’ it along different 
directions from those used to acquire it. With this technique, 
obtaining midsagittal and other informative sagittal 
and coronal views has become much easier. Once the volume 
has been acquired, multiplanar imaging allows navigation 
at will within the volume, enabling reconstruction 
of virtually all scanning planes (Figure 2.9a). It should be 
noted that the structures displayed best will be those perpendicular 
to the insonating beam when the volume is 
acquired. Finally, a new image modality allowing 2D slices 
to be displayed from any given volume similar to CT or 
MRI scans is represented by tomographic ultrasound 
imaging (TUI) (Figure 2.9b). 
Midsagittal view of the fetal head and related malformations. 
The midsagittal view allows visualization of 
Correct 
Incorrect 
Figure 2.7 (a) This transcerebellar 
scan is too oblique downward. A 
direct connection (the arrow indicates 
the vallecula) seems to appear between 
the cisterna magna and fourth ventricle, 
producing a false-positive image of 
partial absence of cerebellar vermis. 
(b) Schematic diagram showing correct 
and incorrect axial views through the 
posterior fossa. 
Figure 2.8 Midsagittal view of the fetal head showing (a) the corpus callosum (CC), the third ventricle (3v), the cerebellar vermis (V), and 
the cisterna magna (arrows); (b) the fastigium, the primary fissure of the cerebellum (arrow), the brainstem (BS), the tentorium (T), and the 
corpus callosum (arrows). (c) The Primary fissure (PF), always visible at 21 weeks’ gestational, delineates the posterior part from the anterior 
part of the vermis. The posterior vermis shows characteristic fissures (SF: secondary fissure) and its volume is greater than the volume of the 
anterior vermis. The fastigium (F)and primary fissure represents two main anatomical landmarks of the vermis (BS: brain stem) 
a b 
a b 
P 
S 
c 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 17 
the corpus callosum with the cavum septi pellucidi, 
the third ventricle, the brain stem, the cerebellar vermis, 
the fourth ventricle and the cisterna magna 
(Figure 2.8a,b). It therefore allows detection and 
characterization of agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
and vermian abnormalities. Knowledge of vermian 
morphology is essential when assessing for vermian 
anomalies. At 21–22 weeks the primary fissure is usually 
present. The primary fissure delineates the anterior 
from posterior lobes of the vermis; the volume of 
the posterior lobe is greater than the volume of the 
anterior lobe (Fig. 2.8b,c). 
Figure 2.9 (a) Multiplanar 
analysis of an ultrasound volume 
of the fetal brain 
obtained from the sagittal 
plane (a); the two orthogonal 
planes, coronal and axial are 
simultaneously displayed. 
From this position it is possible 
to navigate into the volume 
to demonstrate the 
different anatomical details. 
(b) Tomographic ultrasound 
imaging (TUI) of the fetal 
brain; the TUI panel allows 
demonstration of the extension 
of a cerebral tumor. 
a 
b 

18 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Right and left parasagittal views. Proximal parasagittal 
views allow study of the lateral ventricles with the choroid 
plexuses. Outermost parasagittal views allow visualization 
of the insula and the parietal and temporal operculum. 
Coronal views. The midcoronal views allow visualization 
of the anterior horns, the corpus callosum, the cavum septi 
pellucidi (Figure 2.10a), the thalami, the caudate nuclei, the 
lateral ventricular bodies, and the atria with the choroid 
plexuses. Posterior coronal views allow visualization of the 
occipital horns, and the posterior fossa (cerebellar hemispheres, 
cisterna magna, and tentorium) (Figure 2.10b). 
Anterior coronal views show the anterior horns of the lateral 
ventricles and the interhemispheric fissure. 
Figure 2.10 (a) Midcoronal 
view of the fetal head. The 
frontal horns (FH), genu and 
cavum septi pellucidi (arrow), 
are shown. (b) Posterior coronal 
view of the fetal brain 
showing the occipital horns 
(OH) and the cerebellum 
(arrow). 
CEREBRAL VENTRICULOMEGALY 
Incidence. High: 0.3–1.5 per 1000 births; probably higher in utero. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Axial transventricular view. Uni- or biventricular dilatation = 10 mm. It can be isolated or 
associated with other congenital (DWM, corpus callosum agenesis) or acquired (hemorrhage, infections) CNS 
anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Moderate to high: 1.5–12% for isolated ventriculomegaly; 9–36% if 
ventriculomegaly is associated with other malformations; almost absent if ventriculomegaly is associated with 
acquired lesions. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Variable, and depending on the etiology and associated lesions; poor if associated with syndromes or 
other CNS anomalies. 
Definition. Ventriculomegaly may be the consequence of 
a variety of conditions that can result in a dilatation 
of the cerebral ventricular system. The incidence of congenital 
enlargement of the cerebral ventricles ranges 
between 0.3 and 1.5 per 1000 live births in different series.9 
However, this may be an underestimate, as most available 
surveys are based upon clinical data, and enlarged ventricles 
are presumably asymptomatic at birth in many cases. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Ventriculomegaly may be secondary 
to brain destruction (congenital infection or 
a vascular mechanism), malformations, hydrocephalus, 
or a combination of two processes (i.e. hydrocephalus 
and malformation). It may also be related to a brain 
neoplasm or to a genetic abnormality not associated with 
a brain malformation. The well-known classic criteria for 
the diagnosis of hydrocephalus in the postnatal period 
cannot be completely extended to the fetus. Indeed, 
in utero, hydrocephalus may be present even with a 
normal head circumference, and the underlying cause of 
an altered flow of the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cannot be 
identified in all cases. However, fetal progressive, severe 
ventricular enlargement can be presumed to be indicative 
of hydrocephalus. The mean ventricular size measurement 
is not reliable as a means of distinguishing between 
the different causes of ventriculomegaly. However, even 
if there is no statistically significant difference, the mean 
value is lower for fetuses with underlying genetic causes 
(excluding cerebral malformations) than for those in 
which hydrocephalus is due to destructive causes; indeed, 
a discrete number of fetuses with borderline ventriculomegaly 
have a chromosomal anomaly. 
a b 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 19 
The presence of uni- or bilateral ventriculomegaly 
seems to be of some discriminatory value. Ventriculomegaly 
tends to be unilateral in cases of destruction 
and bilateral in cases of malformation, and this difference 
is statistically significant.11 In apparently isolated 
ventriculomegaly, we must distinguish between borderline 
and moderate to severe ventriculomegaly. The term 
borderline ventriculomegaly is commonly used to indicate 
cases characterized by an atrial width of 
10–15 mm. Some authors have reported a different rate 
of abnormal neurologic outcome in fetuses with atria 
> 12 mm compared with those with atria measuring 
10–12 mm (a mild form of borderline ventriculomegaly). 
In fact, an isolated borderline ventriculomegaly 
of 10–12 mm might be considered as a 
variant of the norm.12 The higher incidence of this 
anomaly in male fetuses is related to the fact that their 
mean atrial size is slightly greater than that of females. 
Borderline ventriculomegaly may resolve even before 
birth, and has no consequence in a vast majority of 
cases. However, it has been suggested that in a distinct 
minority of cases, this finding can be the earliest manifestation 
of brain lesion from heterogeneous causes, 
including primary cerebral maldevelopment (i.e. 
lissencephaly). Severe ventriculomegaly is usually 
referred to as hydrocephalus and is defined on the basis 
of an atrial width of more than 20 mm. When the atrial 
width is between 15 and 20 mm the ventriculomegaly is 
defined moderate. Aqueductal stenosis, regardless of its 
cause, is responsible for the progression of ventricular 
dilatation. Although it is generally a multifactorial disease, 
there can be an X-linked transmission characterized 
by mental retardation, spastic paraplegia, and 
adducted thumbs. Aqueductal stenosis can also be 
acquired, following intrauterine infection or intraventricular 
hemorrhage. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. We report the most common 
sonographic patterns of ventriculomegaly. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with CNS malformations. 
As stated above, ventriculomegaly is associated 
with typical malformation patterns of the CNS. In the 
Chiari II malformation (Figure 2.11a), ventriculomegaly 
is associated with a small posterior fossa, a small dysmorphic 
cerebellum, an effaced cisterna magna, and a spinal 
defect with myelomeningocele; for a conclusive diagnosis, 
the latter defect must be detected. The association of ventriculomegaly 
with the presence of a dilatation of the 
fourth ventricle and complete or partial agenesis of the 
cerebellar vermis are the typical sonographic signs of the 
Dandy–Walker continuum (Figure 2.11b). The ‘teardrop’ 
appearance of the lateral ventricles (colpocephaly) 
(Figure 2.11c) with ‘parallel bodies’ which are shifted laterally, 
and upward displacement of the third ventricle 
suggest agenesis of the corpus callosum, the presence of 
which must be confirmed on coronal and sagittal views. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with cerebral destruction. 
Ventriculomegaly associated with destructive lesions can 
be unilateral or bilateral. The most common causes are 
hypoxia, infection, or vascular lesions. When ventriculomegaly 
is associated with hyperechogenic foci located in 
the brain and periventricular cysts, a fetal infection should 
be suspected. If multiple nodular subependymal calcifications, 
which sometimes group together to form periventricular 
hyperechogenic bands (Figure 2.12a), are 
present, cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection should be suspected. 
In addition, free-floating particles, consisting of 
exudate and shedded ependymal cells, may be detected 
within the cerebral ventricles (Figure 2.12b), which 
are often dilated, as this particulate matter frequently 
obstructs ventricular foramina, leading to secondary 
obstructive hydrocephalus. In such cases, a differential 
diagnosis with intraventricular hemorrhage should be 
made: maternal serology for CMV and other infectious 
agents and the findings at earlier ultrasound examinations 
often resolve the differential diagnostic issue. In the case 
of hypoxia-induced hemorrhage, ventricular dilatation 
Figure 2.11 (a) Chiari II malformation: dilatation of the lateral cerebral ventricles, small posterior fossa (arrows) and obliteration of the cisterna 
magna (arrows). (b) Dandy–Walker malformation with ventriculomegaly, cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle (arrow), and enlarged 
posterior fossa. (c) Axial scan showing the teardrop configuration of the lateral ventricle due to mild enlargement of its posterior part 
(colpocephaly). 
a b c 

20 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
occurs in severe forms only, and is generally associated 
with intraventricular fibrin strands and/or blood clots 
(grade 3). If this is the case, then a hyperechoic hemorrhagic 
lesion (grade 4) is often found in the parenchyma; 
this will successively become hypoechoic, due to the 
liquification of the blood clot, and eventually disappears, 
leaving a poroencephalic cyst filled with CSF and in 
communication with the ventricular system. 
Isolated ventriculomegaly. The diagnosis of isolated 
ventriculomegaly is made when no other associated 
sonographically detectable anomaly of the CNS can 
be found. An atrial width of 10–15 mm is defined as 
borderline ventriculomegaly (Figure 2.13a). As mentioned 
above, some authors distinguish a mild form of borderline 
ventriculomegaly, with atria of 10–12 mm, from borderline 
ventriculomegaly, with atria of 13–15 mm. An abnormal 
neurologic outcome is significantly less frequent in the former 
group. Isolated borderline ventriculomegaly may also 
be unilateral. It should be noted that ventricular asymmetry, 
defined as a difference in atrial size greater than 2mm, 
without dilatation may be observed in normal fetuses. 
Severe ventriculomegaly. This is usually referred to 
as hydrocephalus, and is defined by an atrial width 
of more than 20 mm (Figure 2.13b,c). In the fetus, 
ventriculomegaly is more frequently the result of a 
non-communicating hydrocephalus (where the obstruction 
is located inside the ventricular system, as in aqueductal 
stenosis), whereas a communicating hydrocephalus 
(where the obstruction is located outside the ventricular 
system) is significantly less frequent (Table 2.1). 
The reverse is the case in postnatal life. The typical sonographic 
pattern of aqueductal stenosis is triventricular 
Figure 2.12 (a) Cytomegalovirus 
infection: a periventricular hyperechogenic 
band (arrow). (b) Axial scan 
of the fetal brain, showing hyperechoic 
clots within the frontal horn of the 
proximal lateral ventricle (arrow) and 
in the third ventricle (arrow). 
Figure 2.13 (a) Axial scan of the 
lateral ventricles showing mild ventriculomegaly: 
the arrow indicates the atrium 
of the distal lateral ventricle. (b) Severe 
ventriculomegaly: overall enlargement 
of both lateral ventricles with dangling 
choroid plexus (arrow). (c) Severe tetraventricular 
hydrocephaly (LV, lateral 
ventricle; 3°, third ventricle; 4°, fourth 
ventricle). (d) Triventricular hydrocephalus: 
coronal scan of the fetal brain 
showing dilatation of the third ventricle 
and lateral ventricles with a typical 
‘Mickey Mouse’ configuration. 
a
a b 
c 
b 
d 

hydrocephalus with enlargement of the third and the lateral 
ventricles (Figure 2.13d). It has been suggested that (at least 
in some cases) aqueductal stenosis could result from 
an excessive pressure exerted on the midbrain by a voluminous 
communicating hydrocephalus. Alternatively, 
hydrocephalus may also result from an imbalance in the 
production and resorption of CSF (Table 2.1). Excessive 
production of CSF (i.e. in papilloma of the choroid plexus) 
is rare; in most cases, CSF resorption disorders are responsible 
for ventricular dilatation (Table 2.1). 
• Differential diagnosis. Borderline ventriculomegaly 
must be differentiated from colpocephaly, caused by 
agenesis of the corpus callosum. The sonographic findings 
useful for a correct differential diagnosis are 
described above. 
• Association with other malformations. The rate of 
association with other cerebral anomalies (holoprosencephaly, 
corpus callosum agenesis, and Dandy– 
Walker malformation) and extracerebral anomalies 
(myelomeningocele) ranges from 45% to 80%. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is moderate to 
high. In particular, the rate of association with aneuploidy 
is 1.5–12% in the case of isolated ventriculomegaly, 
but is higher (9–36%) if ventriculomegaly is 
associated with other malformations. Only in the case of 
ventriculomegaly associated with destructive lesions, is 
the risk of associated chromosomal anomalies low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes are:13 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ lissencephaly, microcephaly, cardiac 
anomalies, facial anomalies, and polydactyly 
• Goldenhar syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
facial asymmetry, preauricular tag, vertebral anomalies, 
and cleft lip and palate 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic 
kidneys, and other CNS anomalies 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ lymphedema of the limbs, lissencephaly, microcephaly, 
proptosis, intrauterine growth retardation, 
arthrogryposis, and other CNS anomalies 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia, cataract), 
CNS anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, 
cerebellar anomalies, microcephaly, and cephalocele) 
• Crouzon syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
craniofacial dysostosis and hypoplastic jaw bone 
• Gorlin syndrome: look for .ventriculomegaly + facial 
anomalies, macrocephaly, and multiple neoplasms 
• Kartagener syndrome: look for . ventriculomegaly + 
situs inversus 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 21 
Table 2.1 Classification of hydrocephalus 
A. Mechanical obstruction 
1. At the foramen of Monro 
(i) Neoplasia 
(ii) Ventriculitis 
(iii) Ventricular hemorrhage 
(iv) Primary aplasia of foramen 
2. At the third ventricle 
(i) Stenosis 
(ii) Neoplasia – either by direct invasion or by 
compression 
(iii) Obstruction by congenital cysts 
(a) Choroid plexus 
(b) Neuroepithelial 
3. At the aqueduct (most common site of 
obstruction) 
(i) ‘Congenital’ stenosis/atresia, including 
membranous 
(ii) ‘Acquired’ stenosis/atresia (postnecrosis, 
hemorrhage) 
(iii) Direct occlusion by vascular malformation 
(iv) External compression 
(a) Arteriovenous malformation – vein of 
Galen 
(b) Cysts in cisterna ambiens 
4. At the cerebellar foramen 
(i) Without caudal displacement 
of the cerebellum 
(a) Neoplasia 
(b) Dandy–Walker malformation 
(c) Retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 
(ii) With caudal displacement of the cerebellum 
(a) Acute cerebellar tonsillar herniation 
(b) Arnold–Chiari malformation 
5. At the level of the subarachnoid space 
(i) Non-canalization as a primary anomaly 
(ii) Acquired fibrotic obstruction 
(a) Organized subarachnoid hemorrhage 
(b) Organized necrotic debris or protein 
exudates 
(iii) Abnormalities of arachnoid granulations/villi 
(a) Congenital absence of granulations 
(b) Acute hemorrhagic block 
B. Hypersecretion 
Choroid plexus papillomas 
C. Hydrocephalus associated with bony dysplasia 
D. Functionally impaired CSF resorption 
(i) Altered CSF colloid osmotic pressure 
(ii) Increased venous pressure 
(iii) Large arteriovenous shunts 

22 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Obstetric management. When ventricular dilatation is 
detected in utero, it is important to assess the extent of 
ventriculomegaly (biventricular, triventricular, etc.), its 
degree (borderline, moderate, or severe), and whether 
it is associated with any cerebral or/and extracerebral 
anomaly. Except for cases associated with infectious 
lesions, fetal karyotyping should be offered to the parents. 
The contribution of fetal magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) to the etiologic diagnosis of ventriculomegaly has 
not been the subject of many studies, and it is difficult to 
establish its role on the basis of the small and heterogeneous 
series investigated. In the case of isolated borderline 
fetal ventriculomegaly, the appropriate management 
remains controversial.9 Although it is unclear whether or 
not this finding represents an independent risk factor for 
chromosomal anomalies, it seems sensible to offer karyotyping. 
A congenital infections screen is also commonly 
recommended, although to date no significant association 
has been demonstrated. Moreover, it should also be kept 
in mind that isolated borderline ventriculomegaly may be 
the harbinger of severe cerebral lesions that can be predicted 
only in later pregnancy, such as migration disorder; 
this is why fetal brain MRI has recently been suggested 
after 22–24 weeks’ gestation to diagnose subtle cerebral 
maldevelopment in these fetuses. 
Postnatal treatment. Aqueductal stenosis may be treated 
with a ventriculoperitoneal or ventriculoatrial shunt 
placed for decompression of hydrocephalus after delivery; 
unfortunately, shunt obstruction is common and a new 
operation may be needed. An endoscopic procedure represents 
a valid alternative, which has yielded good results. 
Prognosis. Isolated fetal ventricular dilatations may 
undergo spontaneous resolution in about 25–30% of 
cases; in 50–60% of cases the dilatation remains stable, 
whereas in the remaining 14–20% it progressively 
increases.14 It is difficult to establish a prognosis for these 
forms of ventriculomegaly, as published studies have 
often been based on small case series and very heterogeneous 
patient cohorts. Despite these limitations, some 
prognostic factors can be outlined. The outcome of prenatally 
detected ventriculomegaly is worse than that of 
ventriculomegaly detected in the neonatal period.15 There 
is a high rate of spontaneous abortion, in utero fetal 
demise, stillbirth, and neonatal death (up to 60–70%), 
especially if ventriculomegaly is associated with other 
brain anomalies.16 The mortality rate is much lower if the 
lesion is isolated, with a reported survival rate of about 
80%, with 60% of these having normal neurologic development. 
Early detection and progressive increase of the 
ventriculomegaly are the two factors indicating a poor 
prognosis.15 In these cases, only30–40%of survivorsshow 
normal neurologic development. An important factor 
influencing prognosis is the cause of the ventriculomegaly – 
for example, X-linked hydrocephalus is known to have 
an unfavorable prognosis. Considering only borderline 
ventriculomegaly, the mortality and morbidity rates are 
much lower.9 Isolated borderline ventriculomegaly has an 
abnormal outcome in 20% of cases, with perinatal death 
occurring in 4% and chromosomal aberrations complicating 
another 4% of cases. The association with malformations 
undetected at a 2nd trimester sonogram is 9% 
(about 50% are CNS anomalies). The risk of an abnormal 
neurologic outcome is very low or absent in cases of 
mild forms of borderline ventriculomegaly (atrial width 
of 10–12 mm). In isolated cases of mostly mild unilateral 
ventricular dilatation, the prognosis is generally good 
(86–90% of cases), except for the cases in which other 
malformations are associated or when the dilatation progresses 
rapidly.17 Prognosis is commonly excellent for 
fetuses with ventricular asymmetry without dilatation. 
HOLOPROSENCEPHALY (HPE) 
Incidence. 1 in 6000–16 000 births, but much higher in aborted fetuses (1 in 250). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal, axial, and coronal views. Alobar and semilobar HPE: completely or partially 
fused thalami, single or partially fused ventricles, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi, corpus callosum dysgenesis, 
midline facial abnormalities. Lobar HPE: fusion of the frontal horns, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi, corpus 
callosum dysgenesis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomy 13 is associated in up to 40% of cases, especially if other 
anomalies are associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: 15–20%. 
Outcome. Very poor in alobar and semilobar forms, better in lobar form. 
Definition. The term ‘holoprosencephaly’ refers to a 
group of complex abnormalities of the forebrain deriving 
from a failed cleavage of the prosencephalon that yields 
an incomplete division of the cerebral hemispheres and of 
the telencephalon from the diencephalon. The most 
widely accepted classification of holoprosencephaly 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 23 
recognizes three major varieties: the alobar, semilobar, 
and lobar types, according to the severity of the malformation 
(Figure 2.14). However, there are no precise 
boundaries between the three variants, and intermediate 
cases may be identified. Recently, another variant of HPE 
has been described: the middle interhemispheric variant 
(syntelencephaly), characterized by failure of cleavage of 
the posterior frontal and parietal regions of the brain. 
Whereas more anterior and occipital areas of the brain 
are fully cleaved; the interhemispheric fissure may be 
present both anteriorly and posteriorly (Figure 2.15).18 
Holoprosencephaly is almost invariably associated with 
facial abnormalities.13,19,20 The incidence of holoprosencephaly 
is 1 in 6000–16 000 births, and is higher in 
aborted fetuses (1 in 250).13 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Holoprosencephaly is 
the result of a ventral induction disorder, and is characterized 
by a defect in the development of the midline 
embryonic forebrain. The etiology is heterogeneous. 
In most cases, chromosomal, genetic, and teratogenic 
(retinoic acid) causes are found. Several cases showing 
mendelian inheritance patterns have been detected. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The alobar variety (Figure 2.16a) 
is characterized by (i) a single primitive cerebral ventricle 
(the holosphere) surrounded by a varying amount of 
residual holospheric mantle that can give rise to three 
morphologically different varieties (pancake (remnants 
only against the frontal basicranium), cup (with a peel of 
frontal cerebrum), and ball (complete parenchymal lining 
of holosphere without dorsal pouch) types); (ii) the 
absence of midline structures, including the falx cerebri, 
the interhemispheric fissure, the septum pellucidum, the 
corpus callosum and the third ventricle; and (iii) fusion of 
the thalami on the midline. The semilobar variety (Figure 
2.16b) is characterized by (i) the presence of rudimentary 
lateral ventricles with sketchy posterior horns, and a more 
developed cortex; (ii) partial development of the interhemispheric 
fissure and of the falx cerebri, which is present only 
posteriorly; (iii) partial fusion of the thalami; and (iv) 
hypoagenesis of the septum pellucidum and corpus callosum. 
The lobar variety (Figure 2.16c) is characterized by (i) 
partial fusion of the frontal horns, which show ample communication 
with the third ventricle and (ii) hypoagenesis of 
the septum pellucidum and corpus callosum. 
All of the above anomalies involve midline anatomic 
structures and, as such, can be diagnosed on the midsagittal 
view of the fetal head. However, some of these 
anomalies can also be recognized on the axial and coronal 
views. In particular, on the transthalamic view, 
absence of the cavum septi pellucidi and midline anomalies 
(fusion of the thalami, absence of falx cerebri, etc.) 
are detected. The transventricular view, in which the 
lateral ventricles are displayed, shows mild to overt ventriculomegaly. 
In the alobar form, the roof of the ventricular 
cavity (the tela chorioidea) may bulge between the 
cerebral convexity and the skull to form a cyst referred to 
as the dorsal sac, which communicates with the rudimentary 
ventricle (Figure 2.17). This can be displayed on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal head. In the lobar type, separation 
of the hemispheres is almost complete, except for 
the most anterior part. As a consequence, sonographic 
diagnosis of lobar HPE is more difficult than that of the 
other types and is based on the recognition of the partially 
Normal 
Third 
ventricle 
Alobar Semilobar Lobar 
Figure 2.14 Graphical representation of the three variants of holoprosencephaly, showing the different forms of the cerebral hemispheres 
with respect to the normal brain. 
Figure 2.15 Middle interhemispheric type of holoprosencephaly 
(syntelencephaly). (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing the 
abnormal morphology of the ventricular system (big arrows), with 
rudimentary frontal horns (small arrows) and interhemispheric 
separation of the anterior frontal and occipital lobes (IF, interhemispheric 
fissure). (b) Postnatal sagittal T1-weighted MRI scan 
showing the splenium and genu normally formed (arrows), while 
the callosal body is absent. 
a b 

24 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
fused frontal horns and on associated absence of the septum 
pellucidum. This diagnosis requires a midcoronal 
plane to demonstrate the absence of the cavum septi pellucidi 
and the central fusion of the frontal horns, which 
communicate with the third ventricle. MRI is useful in the 
lobar form, because it can better demonstrate the fusion of 
the fornices as a linear structure running down inside the 
third ventricle. Recently, another ultrasonographic sign 
has been used to differentiate between lobar HPE and 
septo-optic dysplasia: in lobar HPE, the anterior cerebral 
artery is pushed anteriorly alongside the frontal bone by 
an abnormal bridge of cortical tissue between the two 
frontal gyri. This sign of a ‘snake under the skull’ on the 
sagittal view of the brain can be found in all three types of 
holoprosencephaly (Figure 2.18).21 
In the case of HPE, sonographic assessment of 
the fetal face is recommended, considering that HPE 
is almost invariably associated with midfacial abnormalities. 
The spectrum of facial anomalies, caused by 
an abnormal development of the midline structures, 
ranges from cyclopia to mild dysmorphisms. The more 
severe the facial anomalies, the more pronounced the 
brain lesion (‘the face predicts the brain’ approximately 
80% of the time), but the reverse is not always true: 
about 15–20% of alobar HPE cases are associated with 
only minor dysmorphisms. The most frequent facial 
anomalies are usually classified in the following main 
types: cyclopia, with a single midline orbit or absent eyes; 
arhinia, with or without a proboscis; ethmocephaly, with 
evident ocular hypotelorism and a proboscis located 
between the eyes; cebocephaly, with less pronounced ocular 
hypotelorism and a nose with a single nostril (Figure 
2.19a,b); a median cleft lip and palate (Figure 2.19c), with 
premaxillary agenesis; isolated premaxillary agenesis; and 
slight anomalies that cannot be detected by ultrasound 
(e.g. a single central incisor). 
• Differential diagnosis. Alobar HPE should be distinguished 
from hydranencephaly: the presence of a dorsal 
sac, the fused thalami and the evidence of a thin 
cerebral cortex and of facial anomalies may orient the 
diagnosis towards HPE. It is also important to differentiate 
HPE from some forms of severe hydrocephalus 
in which an acquired communication between the 
lateral ventricles has occurred due to a disruption of 
the falx. The presence of the contralateral choroid 
Figure 2.16 (a) Alobar holoprosencephaly: axial scan at the level of the thalami showing the single ventricle, absence of midline 
structures, and fused thalamus (T); the arrowheads indicate the rim of the cortex. (b) Semilobar holoprosencephaly: ultrasound image 
showing the two cerebral hemispheres partially separated posteriorly; the rudimentary lateral ventricles with sketchy posterior horns 
(arrowheads) and a more developed cortex are present. (c) Lobar holoprosencephaly: axial scan showing the brain almost completely 
divided into two distinct hemispheres, with the only exception being at the level of the frontal horns of the lateral ventricles (arrows); the 
interhemispheric fissure is evident (arrowhead). 
Figure 2.17 Alobar holoprosencephaly. 
(a) Sagittal scan of the fetal 
brain demonstrating the communication 
between the ventricular cavity (V) 
and the dorsal sac (S). The cortex 
(arrowheads) covers the anterior and 
inferior part of the ventricular cavity 
(‘cup type’). (b) Postnatal magnetic resonance 
image showing the disposition 
of the cortex. 
a b c 
a b 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 25 
plexus dangling across the ruptured falx, normally 
separated thalami, and the lack of midline facial 
anomalies are suggestive of hydrocephaly. The most 
difficult differential diagnosis regards lobar HPE and 
septo-optic dysplasia. This differentiation is difficult 
because both malformations share the absence of the 
cavum septi pellucidi and the same appearance of the 
frontal horn. Hints that may suggest the presence of 
lobar HPE are the abnormal course of the anterior 
cerebral artery (‘the snake under the skull’) and the 
presence of fused fornices better demonstrable on 
MRI. 
• Associated anomalies. The most frequently associated 
anomalies involve the CNS (microcephaly, 
macrocephaly, and Dandy–Walker malformations) 
the heart, the skeleton, and the gastrointestinal tract 
(omphalocele). When these associated anomalies 
are detected, the risk of chromosomal and genetic 
anomalies is very high. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (especially 
trisomy 13): up to 40% if other malformations are 
associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 15–20% of cases. The most common syndromes 
are:13 
• Grote syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly + 
octodactly, absent tibiae, cardiac anomalies 
• Steinfield syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly + 
median cleft lip, renal anomalies, short forearms, absent 
thumbs, cardiac anomalies, and absent gallbladder 
• Holoprosencephaly-fetal akinesia syndrome: look for 
. holoprosencephaly + microcephaly, micrognathia, 
multiple contractures, and talipes equinovarus 
• Velocardiofacial syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly 
+ median cleft lip, cleft palate and cardiac 
defects 
Figure 2.18 (a) Sagittal scan of the fetal brain showing the abnormal pathway of the anterior cerebral artery crawling under the skull 
(arrow). (b) The normal course of the anterior cerebral artery and pericallosal artery. 
Figure 2.19 (a) Cebocephaly: three-dimensional surface rendering of the fetal face showing marked hypotelorism (arrowheads) 
and a single-nostril nose (arrow). (b) Postmortem photograph confirming the marked hypotelorism and the single-nostril nose. 
(c) Three-dimensional surface rendering of the fetal face showing the median cleft/lip palate often associated with holoprosencephaly. 
a b 
a b c 

26 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Meckel-Gruber syndrome: look for . holoprosencephaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic 
kidneys, and other CNS anomalies 
The empiric recurrence risk is 5–6%. If HPE occurs in 
the context of a syndrome, the recurrence risk is that 
of the syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Should HPE be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping should always be performed. 
In addition, the high risk of syndromic holoprosencephaly 
strongly supports the need for accurate familial 
analysis and a careful search for additional structural 
anomalies. The disclosure of a specific syndrome is 
important not only to formulate an appropriate prognosis 
but also to calculate the recurrence risk. After 
24 weeks’ gestation, conservative management must 
be adopted for the alobar or semilobar types, due to the 
extremely high neonatal mortality rate. 
Postnatal therapy. No therapy is possible for neonates 
affected with the severest forms of HPE, considering the 
invariably poor prognosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In the severest 
forms (alobar and semilobar), the neurologic deficit 
is already evident in the neonatal period, in the form 
of generalized hypotonia, seizures, feeding problems 
and mental retardation. In the few survivors, 
severe neurologic anomalies are often responsible 
for death during the first year of life. In the lobar type, 
the prognosis is less well defined, but mental retardation, 
olfactory and visual anomalies are often 
present. 
AGENESIS OF THE CORPUS CALLOSUM 
Incidence. From 0.3–0.7% in the general population to 2–3% in the developmentally disabled population. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal view. Complete or partial absence of the corpus callosum. Axial views: 
colpocephaly, absence of the cavum septi pellucidi (in complete agenesis). Coronal views: lateral convexity and 
increased distance between the frontal horns. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. From good to poor. However, 15–28% rate of significant neurodevelopmental delay also in isolated forms. 
Definition. Developmental abnormalities of the corpus 
callosum (CC) include hypoplasia, hyperplasia, agenesis, 
and dysgenesis. Agenesis of the corpus callosum (ACC) 
can be complete (CACC) or partial (PACC); the latter is 
also referred to as hypogenesis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The corpus callosum represents 
the major commissure between the two cerebral 
hemispheres; it extends from the frontal lobe anteriorly to 
above the collicular plate posteriorly. In the fetus, the 
leaves of the septum pellucidum enclose the space of the 
cavum of the septum pellucidum, which is located under 
the anterior portion of the corpus callosum. The other 
telencephalic commissures include the hippocampal commissure 
and the anterior commissure. The prevalence of 
corpus callosum anomalies varies significantly in the different 
studies, depending on the population and the diagnostic 
criteria: it ranges from 0.3–0.7% in the general 
population22 to 2–3% in the developmentally disabled 
population. Formation of the corpus callosum begins 
with the development of the genu during the 11th week 
of gestation; the body, isthmus, and splenium develop at 
a later stage. If the normal developmental process is disrupted, 
the corpus callosum may be completely or partially 
(hypogenesis) absent. Since the development 
process starts from the anterior part and progresses from 
front to rear, when the corpus callosum is hypogenetic, it 
is usually the posterior portion (i.e. the posterior body 
and the splenium) that is affected. The exception to this 
sequence is the late formation of the small frontal part 
(i.e. the rostrum), which is the last part to develop, at 
18–20 weeks’ gestation. Knowledge of the organogenetic 
sequence helps to differentiate developmental damage 
(hypogenesis) from acquired damage (destruction). The 
latter mechanism usually occurs in association with 
hypoxic ischemic injury and infectious causes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Since the corpus callosum shares 
with the septum pellucidum a common anatomic and 
embryogenetic formation, absence of the corpus callosum 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 27 
is commonly associated with a hypoplastic or absent 
cavum septi pellucidi. Hence, at the midtrimester anomaly 
scan, ACC may be suspected when the cavum of the 
septum pellucidum is not visualized on the axial 
transthalamic view. The suspicion of ACC is further supported 
by the recognition of other indirect signs (Figure 
2.20).22,23 These include colpocephaly (dilatation of the 
atria and occipital horns), due to the absence of the splenium 
and hypoplasia of the cingulus which is often associated; 
increased separation of the hemispheres with a 
prominent interhemispheric fissure resulting from 
absence of the main cerebral commissure; parallel bodies 
of the LV which are shifted laterally and an abnormal 
third ventricle, which extends upward between the LV 
into the interhemispheric fissure (in 50–60% of cases). A 
definitive diagnosis relies on recognition of the direct 
signs, which consist of the demonstration of the absence 
of the corpus callosum on midsagittal and coronal views 
of the fetal brain. In particular, the midsagittal plane will 
demonstrate complete or partial absence of the corpus 
callosum (Figure 2.21a,b) and, in advanced gestation or 
postnatally, an atypical radiating appearance of the 
medial hemispheric sulci into the third ventricle (Figure 
2.21d). On this view, the absence of the pericallosal 
artery can be demonstrated on color Doppler (Figure 
2.21c,d). A mid-coronal section of the fetal brain will 
show an increased distance between the frontal horns and 
their abnormal aspect characterized by a lateral convexity 
(Figure 2.22b), which is due to the medial compression 
exerted by the white fibers that fail to cross the hemispheres 
(Probst bundles). Callosal defects are due to a 
developmental anomaly of these fibers. In particular, 
white fibers can form or axons may not develop properly; 
if axons are indeed formed, but unable to cross the midline 
because of the alteration of a recognition protein, 
large aberrant longitudinal fiber bundles will run along 
the medial walls of the hemispheres. These fiber bundles 
– the Probst bundles – running parallel to the medial 
walls of the lateral ventricles, invaginate their medial borders, 
producing a crescent shaped frontal horns (Figure 
2.22b) on coronal images. Since the development of the 
corpus callosum occurs simultaneously with the formation 
of the cerebral cortex, when the commissural axons 
fail to form in the cerebral cortex it is not surprising that 
this anomaly is observed in patients with malformations 
of cortical development, such as lissencephaly, heterotopia, 
polymicrogyria, and schizencephaly. The absence 
of Probst bundles in patients with cortical dysgenesis and 
microcephaly supports the hypothesis that insufficient 
axon formation could be a possible cause of ACC in 
patients with cortical dysgenesis and microcephaly. 
Interhemispheric cysts (Figure 2.23a) associated with 
ACC are often considered as mere extensions of the ventricular 
system. These cysts have a variable appearance 
and can be divided into two main categories: one in which 
the ‘cysts’ are herniations of the ventricular system, representing 
the dorsal expansion of the roof of the third ventricle 
and the other in which they are clearly separated 
from the ventricles. Another median anomaly that may be 
associated with ACC is an intracranial lipoma, visible 
only in the 3rd trimester as a hyperechogenic image 
under the inferior part of the interhemispheric scissure 
(Figure 2.23b). As already mentioned, ACC may be partial 
(Figure 2.24a)24 or complete. In the former case, the 
sonographic findings are more subtle than those 
associated with the complete form. When the corpus 
callosum is hypogenetic, it is usually the posterior portion 
that is affected (the posterior body and the splenium) 
(Figure 2.24a); in this situation, the cavum septi pellucidi 
is present, and often the only indirect sonographic sign is a 
Figure 2.20 Agenesis of the corpus callosum: indirect signs. (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing the teardrop aspect of the lateral 
ventricle due to the prevalent dilatation of the atria and occipital horns. (b) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing that the midline echo has 
become a three-line complex due to increased separation of the hemispheres with a prominent interhemispheric fissure. (c) Ultrasound 
image showing the colpocephaly (large arrows) and the upward displacement of the third ventricle (small arrow). 
a b c 

28 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
mild colpocephaly.24 Sometimes, the indirect signs of 
PACC may also be completely absent. A sagittal view is 
the only way to reach the diagnosis, visualizing a small 
corpus callosum that is lacking the posterior part and only 
partially surrounds the third ventricle (Figure 2.24a). 
Fetal MRI (Figure 2.25), is particularly useful in 
demonstrating possible additional cerebral anomalies 
such as late sulcation, migration anomalies, and heterotopia.
24 However, in most cases, the presence of these 
anomalies can be recognized only from the late 2nd 
trimester onwards, with late development of the sulci 
and gyri. 
• Differential diagnosis. Colpocephaly caused by ACC 
must be distinguished from borderline ventriculomegaly. 
However, the presence of other indirect signs 
and the direct evidence of ACC on the midsagittal view 
of the fetal brain is diagnostic. 
• Association with other malformations. ACC is often 
associated with other cerebral and/or extracerebral 
malformations, including a number of syndromes 
and metabolic diseases.22,24,25 The risk of associated 
brain anomalies is extremely high (up to 80%) including 
Dandy–Walker complex (Figure 2.24b), gyral 
anomalies, and neuronal heterotopia. The risk of 
associated extra-CNS abnormalities is high (up-to 
60%), including congenital heart disease and skeletal 
and genitourinary defects. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively 
high (20% of cases): trisomy 13 and 18, deletions 
Figure 2.21 Agenesis of the corpus callosum: direct signs. (a) Sagittal scan of a normal fetal brain showing the entire corpus callosum 
(CC). (b) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: sagittal scan of the fetal brain demonstrating absence of the corpus callosum (arrow). (c) Color 
Doppler scan showing the normal course of the pericallosal artery. (d) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: the semicircular loop of the 
pericallosal artery is absent; the same image reveals sulci and gyri radiating superiorly from the region of the third ventricle. 
a b 
c d 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 29 
Figure 2.22 (a) Coronal scan of a normal fetal brain showing the frontal horns (FH) and a normal genu (CC). The arrow 
indicates the cavum septi pellucidi. (b) Agenesis of the corpus callosum: coronal scan of the fetal brain demonstrating absence of the corpus 
callosum (genu), an increased distance between the frontal horns (arrows), and their abnormal aspect characterized by an external convexity 
due to the medial compression exerted by the Probst bundles. 
Figure 2.23 Coronal scans of the fetal brain demonstrating (a) absence of the corpus callosum and the presence of an interhemispheric 
cyst (arrows) communicating with the third ventricle and (b) the presence of a midline lipoma (arrow). 
Figure 2.24 (a) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum: three-dimensional ultrasound image (midsagittal plane) of the fetal brain 
showing partial formation of the corpus callosum – genu and anterior part of the body are present (CC), whereas the posterior part of the body 
and the splenium are absent. The larger arrow indicates the cavum septi pellucidi. 3v, third ventricle;?, absence of the posterior part of the corpus 
callosum; CV, cerebellar vermis. (b) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum associated with Dandy–Walker malformation: the arrow indicates 
cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle and enlarged posterior fossa; CS, small cavum septi pellucidi; 3, upward displacement of the 3rd 
ventricle; LV, mild dilatation of the posterior part of the distal lateral ventricle. 
a
a 
b 
b 
a b 

30 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
[del(4)(p16), del(l6)(q23), del(X)(p22)], and duplications 
[dup(8)(p21–23), dup(11)(q23–qter)]. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes involving ACC are shown in 
Table 2.2. 
Obstetric management. Should ACC be diagnosed in a 
fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, because of the high risk 
of a chromosomal anomalies. In addition, the high rate 
of association with mendelian inherited syndromes 
dictates an accurate familial analysis and a careful search 
for additional structural anomalies (hematologic diseases, 
asplenia, anophthalmia, cleft lip/palate, albinism, 
bone lesions, congenital megacolon and camptodactyly). 
A tissue sample should usually be preserved for a possible 
molecular diagnosis. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. It is not unusual 
for individuals with ACC to have no neurologic problems, 
despite the absence of callosal fibers, although 
a case series of children with postnatally diagnosed 
ACC reported that most of them suffered from developmental 
delay and often from seizures.26 However, in this 
study, there was a referral bias, since children without 
developmental anomalies were not studied. Several postnatal 
case series suggest a direct relationship between the 
occurrence of associated brain abnormalities and poor 
neurodevelopmental outcome.22,25,26 With isolated ACC, 
caution must be adopted when assessing the fetal/neonatal 
prognosis. In fact, considering the small number of fetal 
cases series reported in the literature, no general conclusions 
can be drawn, although some interesting points can 
be made. The first issue is that other CNS malformations 
(especially gyral anomalies, which are difficult if not 
impossible to visualize on ultrasound) or extra-CNS malformations 
can be present even when ACC is apparently 
isolated on ultrasound/MRI.24 The second point is that, 
regardless of the associated anomalies, significant neurodevelopmental 
delay develops in a consistent proportion 
of cases (15–28%), even if ACC is confirmed 
postnatally to be isolated.22,24–26 The same also applies to 
Table 2.2 Syndromes associated with agenesis of the 
corpus callosum 
Syndrome Transmissiona Gene 
Acrocallosal AR GLI 3 
Aicardi XLD 
Apert AD FGFR2 
ATRX XLR ATRX 
Basal cell nevus AD PTCH2 
CRASH XLR L1CAM 
Fukuyama AR FCMD 
Kallmann XLR/AD/AR KAL1 
Leopard AD PTPN11 
Leprechaunism AR INSR 
Neu–Laxova AR 
Neurofibromatosis AD NF1 
Rubinstein–Taybi AD CREBBP 
Tuberous sclerosis AD TSC1,TSC2 
Walker–Warburg AR POMT/FKRP 
a AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; XLD, 
X-linked dominant; XLR, X-linked recessive. 
Figure 2.25 (a) Magnetic resonance image (MRI) sagittal view of the normal fetal brain (T2-weighted HASTE image). The corpus callosum 
is completely formed; it is evident as an intermediate signal due to the incomplete myelination. The black arrow indicates the cavum 
septi pellucidi. (R, rostrum; G, genu; B, body; S, splenium). (b) Complete agenesis of the corpus callosum: MRI (sagittal view, T2- 
weighted HASTE image) of the fetal brain showing complete absence of the corpus callosum and the third ventricle communicating with 
the interhemispheric fissure. (c) Partial agenesis of the corpus callosum: MRI (sagittal view, T2-weighted HASTE image) of the fetal 
brain showing the presence of the genu and the anterior part of the body; the posterior part of the body and the splenium are absent and 
cisternal enlargement is evident (black arrow). B, anterior part of the body; G, genu; ?, absence of the posterior part of the corpus callosum. 
Modified from reference 24. 
a b c 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 31 
The classification of cerebellar malformations is 
controversial – no widely accepted agreement has been 
reached, despite many attempts by neuroradiologists, 
geneticists, and neuropathologists. In particular, as far 
as the conditions associated with a defective vermis are 
concerned, the use of the term ‘Dandy–Walker variant’ 
(DWv), its significance, and the relationship of the 
Dandy– Walker malformation (DWm) to other posterior 
fossa cystic malformations represent the most controversial 
topic.27–34 DWM, DWv, and Megacisterna 
magna (MCM) are believed to represent steps on a continuum 
of developmental anomalies of rhombencephalic 
roof and therefore all are classically contained 
within the general context of the DW complex. 
Recently, Tortori-Donati et al. added Blake’s pouch cyst 
(BPC) as separate entity within the DW complex.30 
In addition, other cerebellar hemispheric and vermian 
malformations have been described but are poorly understood, 
with little discussion in the literature other than 
occasional case reports. Thus, the prognosis of patients 
with most cerebellar malformations is uncertain. Finally, 
it is often difficult to clearly distinguish, in an infant with 
signs and symptoms relating to the posterior fossa, 
between cerebellar or vermian atrophy, hypoplasia, or 
malformation. In the fetus, the situation is understandably 
even more confused, due to the difficulties in the prenatal 
assessment of the CNS, both by ultrasound and by 
MRI. However, based on a morphologic ultrasound 
approach, it is at least possible to differentiate posterior 
fossa anomalies into two broad categories: (i) cystic malformations, 
characterized by the presence of an evident 
CSF collection in the posterior fossa resulting from active 
expansion of CSF spaces, and (ii) non-cystic malformations, 
in which either there is no increase of CSF or the 
widening of the spaces is passive, i.e. resulting from defective 
cerebellar development. In most cases, anatomic 
landmarks such as the position of the tentorium and the 
presence of a normal brainstem can be visualized; in addition 
evaluation of vermian biometry, position and morphology, 
including the fastigial point and vermian 
fissures can be performed, using prenatal ultrasound, 
especially in the sagittal plane. 
isolated partial ACC. A final point that should be made is 
that even when the outcome is good, subtle neuropsychologic, 
perceptual, and motor defects can emerge later 
in life, since all individuals with CACC/PACC have some 
neuropsychological symptoms. Considering the presence 
of neurosensorial information transfer defects, no differences 
seem to exist between PACC and CACC in terms 
of the performance accuracy of the somatosensory functions. 
However, the clinical relevance of such deficits 
should not be exaggerated, because the functions of the 
corpus callosum are not completely understood and it 
is difficult to correctly assess the neuropsycologic status 
of individuals with CACC/PACC and normal-range IQs, 
and the role of possible compensatory mechanisms.24 
Nevertheless, a protracted follow-up (until around 
6 years of age) is important to update the neurodevelopmental 
status of these patients, especially with regard 
to social interactions and school performance, in order 
to be able to provide better prognostic information to 
families. 
POSTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA MALFORMATIONS 
CYSTIC POSTERIOR FOSSA 
In the fetus, cystic anomalies are easily recognizable in 
the axial transcerebellar plane, as mentioned at the 
beginning of this chapter. However, their differential 
diagnosis can be particularly difficult because the 
recognition of the subtle anatomic features that differentiate 
them may be challenging or sometimes impossible. 
This is why a midsagittal section of the fetal brain 
is required for accurate anatomic assessment of the 
posterior fossa in normal and abnormal conditions; 
and this plane is of fundamental importance for the 
characterization of vermian anatomy.9,27–34 Some cysts 
are related to massive dilatation of the fourth ventricle, 
others to persistence of embryonic structures, such as 
Blake’s pouch, others to malformative dilatation of 
subarachnoid spaces, and others to true arachnoid 
loculations. 
The mainstay of the diagnosis is represented by the 
assessment of a number of direct and indirect signs (Table 
2.3),28 including the following: the relationship of the cyst 
with the fourth ventricle and subarachnoid spaces; the 
morphology, position and biometry of the vermis and the 
cerebellar hemispheres, association with hydrocephalus; 
the size of the posterior fossa and the position of the tentorium. 
Although the use of the term ‘Dandy–Walker 
variant’ is currently discouraged by several authors, this 
term does refer to a cluster of ultrasound signs in the fetus 
and it is therefore useful to consider these, regardless of 
the underlying etiology: prenatally detectable ultrasound 
signs of Dandy–Walker variant are a normal insertion of 
the tentorium, moderate anticlockwise rotation of the vermis, 
and moderate underdevelopment of the postero-inferior 
part of the vermis.29,31 

32 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The term Dandy–Walker malformation 
(DWM) was suggested to describe a malformation consisting 
of a cystic enlargement of the fourth ventricle 
associated with partial or complete agenesis of the vermis. 
The four characteristic signs identifying classic 
DWM are: (i) complete or partial agenesis of the vermis; 
(ii) cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle; (iii) 
enlarged posterior fossa with upward displacement of 
the tentorium; and (iv) anticlockwise rotation of the 
hypoplastic vermis. Ventriculomegaly develops in up to 
80% of cases, especially in postnatal age.19 The cystic 
dilatation of the fourth ventricle fills the posterior fossa 
and extends into cisterna magna, which is compressed 
between the dilated fourth ventricle and the dura 
mater. 
Subsequent observations of cases characterized by 
hypoplasia/partial agenesis of the postero-inferior 
part of the vermis, rotation of the vermis, and 
enlargement of the fourth ventricle without substantial 
enlargement of the posterior fossa led to the introduction 
of the term Dandy–Walker variant (DWv). 
Unification of DWM and DWv into a spectrum of 
DANDY–WALKER MALFORMATION (DWM) 
Incidence. 1 in 25 000–30 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the midsagittal view of the fetal brain, it is characterized by expansion of the 
posterior fossa, CSF collection (cystic dilatation of the 4th ventricle) determining an upward displacement of the 
tentorium, anticlockwise rotation of the vermis; partial or complete agenesis of the vermis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: up to 35% of cases. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Poor when associated with other malformations and syndromes; less severe if isolated. 
Table 2.3. Anatomical features of cystic anomalies of the posterior fossa characterized at ultrasound examination 
by an appreciably increased CSF collection in the posterior fossa (modified from references28). 
DWM DWv BPC MCM AC 
Cerebellar Hypoplastic Hypoplastic Normal/ Normal Usually 
hemispheres compressed compressed 
Cerebellar vermis Total or partial Mild hypoplasia Normal and Normal Usually 
(inferior) agenesis (inferior) usually compressed 
(commonly (often elevated 
rotated-elevated) rotated-elevated) 
4th ventricle Cystic dilatation Dilatated Dilated Dilated cisterna Usually 
communicating magna compressed 
with the pouch 
Posterior fossa Widened Normal Usually normal Usually normal Usually 
normal 
Tentorium Elevated, high Normally Normally Normally Normally 
(and torcular lying inserted inserted inserted inserted 
herophili 
Ventriculomegaly 80% of cases Infrequent Usually absent Usually absent Often present 
(mainly in in prenatal age 
postnatal age) 
Note: It must be kept in mind that some non cystic malformations of the posterior fossa can give the US impression of a mildly 
increased amount of CSF, due to the passive widening of the spaces, i.e. resulting from defective cerebellar development. AC, 
arachnoid cyst 

variably expressed anomalies of the rhombencephalic 
roof development (the DW continuum) was proposed 
by Barkovich et al.31 However, more recently, the 
same group, following further investigations, has 
questioned whether DWv is indeed a mild form of 
DWM or rather represents a generalized form of cerebellar 
hypoplasia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. These malformations result 
from a defective development of the structures originating 
from the rhomboencephalic roof.30,32,34 Failure 
to incorporate the anterior membranous area (AMA) 
into the choroid plexus leads to persistence of the AMA 
between the caudal edge of the developing vermis and 
the cranial edge of the developing choroid plexus. 
Ballooning of the AMA into a cyst displaces the hypoplastic 
vermis superiorly; counter-clockwise rotation of 
a (regardless of how much) hypoplastic vermis is the 
key feature indicating a developmental arrest of the 
AMA. The posterior membranous area (PMA) can persist 
unopened (in Blake’s pouch cyst) or become patent, 
accounting for the reportedly variable patency of the 
foramen of Magendie.30,32 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The first steps in reaching a 
correct diagnosis of DWM are differentiation 
between a dilated fourth ventricle and extraventricular 
cysts and distinguishing among a variety of cerebellar 
vermian dysgenesis syndromes. DWM is 
characterized by an expansion of the posterior cranial 
fossa, an upward displacement of the tentorium, a 
cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle, and partial or 
complete vermian agenesis. In addition, when present, 
the cerebellar vermis is also rotated counterclockwise 
(Figure 2.26b); as a result of this rotation, the vermis 
is positioned behind the quadrigeminal plate. As far 
as the maldevelopment of the cerebellar vermis is concerned, 
some cases of DWM show a partial agenesis/
hypoplasia, whereas others feature vermian 
dysplasia. It has been reported that in the case of a 
partially agenetic vermis, the presence of a normal or 
almost normal lobulation improves the prognosis.33 
However, the ultrasound evaluation of vermian fissures 
and lobulation remains extremely difficult when 
a ‘cyst’ is present and its mass effect is significant such 
as in case of DWM.34 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of cystic 
malformations of the posterior fossa is difficult, and 
a midsagittal view of the vermis is mandatory for an 
accurate assessment of vermis features and the characteristics 
of the fluid components of the posterior fossa 
(fourth ventricle and cisterna magna). The parameters 
that may allow a differential diagnosis are showed in 
Table 2.3. 
• Association with other malformations. Numerous 
malformations have been reported to be associated 
with DWM. The most commonly associated 
anomalies are other CNS anomalies (in 50–60% of 
cases), including midline anomalies (partial or 
total agenesis of the corpus callosum, holoprosencephaly, 
etc.). An association with facial clefts and 
other extra-CNS anomalies (especially congenital 
heart disease and urinary anomalies) has been 
described, often in the context of chromosomal and 
genetic syndromes. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, with up to 
35% of cases being associated with aneuploidy, mainly 
trisomies 18 and 13. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 33 
4th 
V 
Figure 2.26 Dandy–Walker malformation. (a) Axial scan of the posterior fossa showing a cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle 
(arrows) and a V-shaped cerebellum due to a vermian defect. (b) Sagittal scan of the posterior fossa showing an upward displacement of 
the tentorium (TN), a cystic dilatation of the fourth ventricle (thin arrow), and a rotation (curved arrow) of a partially agenetic vermis; the 
big arrow indicates the corpus callosum. (c) Schematic diagram of the same finding. V, cerebellar vermis; 4th, fourth ventricle. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
most common syndromes that can be associated with 
DWM are:13 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for . DWM + eye 
anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract), other CNS 
anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, microcephaly, 
and cephalocele) 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . DWM + 
encephalocele, polydactyly, and polycystic kidneys 
• Aicardi syndrome: look for . DWM + agenesis of the 
corpus callosum and vertebral defects 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . DWM + 
lissencephaly, microcephaly, proptosis, diffuse joint 
contractures, subcutaneous tissue edema, and 
intrauterine growth retardation 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is mandatory, 
because of the high risk of chromosomal 
anomalies. In addition, a thorough anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert because of the high 
risk of association with other CNS and extra-CNS 
malformations. Serial ultrasound monitoring is warranted 
to verify the possible onset of severe hydrocephalus. 
Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center, for definitive diagnosis and adequate 
neonatal management. 
Postnatal treatment. There is obviously no treatment 
of the primary vermian lesion. The virtually ubiquitous 
secondary obstructive hydrocephalus may be treated 
with a cystoperitoneal shunt. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. DWM is associated 
with late-onset hydrocephalus in about 80% of 
cases. If hydrocephalus develops, whether in utero or in 
the neonatal period, there is a mortality rate of over 
60%, with most survivors having a low IQ. In most 
DWM series, approximately 40% of the children were 
intellectually normal, 40% were severely retarded, and 
20% had borderline mental retardation. However, a 
review of DWM outcome has shown that isolated 
forms have a better intellectual prognosis and lower 
mortality.33 
34 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
OTHER CYSTIC MALFORMATIONS OF THE POSTERIOR CRANIAL FOSSA 
BLAKE’S POUCH CYST (BPC) 
Definition and anatomy. BPC, or Blake’s pouch cyst, 
consists of a marked caudal protrusion of the fourth ventricle 
resulting from a fingerlike expansion of the PMA 
that does not perforate. The BP is a normal, transient 
embryological structure that initially does not communicate 
with the surrounding sub-arachnoid spaces.30 
Subsequent spontaneous perforation of the pouch forms 
the foramen of Magendie. If the BP fails to perforate, 
CSF accumulates and determines the fingerlike expansion 
of the PMA within the posterior fossa. This, in turn, 
leads to displacement of a normally developed cerebellar 
vermis and frequently in post-natal age to ventriculomegaly/
tetraventricular obstructive hydrocephalus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographically, BPC is characterized 
by a normal but displaced cerebellar vermis, 
a CSF collection in the posterior fossa (Figure 2.27), consisting 
of the expanded and imperforated Blake’s pouch 
widely communicating with the 4th ventricle. Ventriculomegaly/
hydrocephalus is often associated in post-natal 
age30 whereas it is absent in the few cases detected in the 
fetus.27 The tentorium and torcular are usually in normal 
position but in unfrequent cases may be elevated. A normal 
appearance of the cerebellar vermis rules out the diagnosis 
of DWM, in which the vermis is agnetic/hypoplastic and 
rotated counterclockwise. (Table 2.3). 
Prognosis. The prognosis of BPC is generally good. 
This is due to the fact that the cerebellar anatomy is 
unremarkable in this condition, with the vermis simply 
being displaced and cerebellar hemispheres compressed 
by the enlarged BPC. The secondary hydrocephalus, 
when present in post-natal age, requires simple ventriculoperitoneal 
shunting. 
V 
BPC 
B 
Figure 2.27 Small Blake’s pouch cyst. (a) Sagittal view of the 
posterior fossa showing a normal but elevated vermis; note the 
gap between the vermis and the brain stem (BS). T, tentorium, V, 
fastigium. (b) Schematic diagram of persistent Blake’s pouch cyst 
(BPC). V, cerebellar vermis. 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 35 
Definition and anatomy. MCM is defined as a cystic 
posterior fossa malformation characterized by an intact 
vermis, an enlarged cisterna magna, freely communicating 
with the perimedullary subarachnoid spaces, 
absence of hydrocephalus, and a normal size of the 
fourth ventricle (Figure 2.28, Table 2.3). The tentorium 
cerebelli is superiorly displaced in almost 10% of 
cases. MCM can be asymmetrical. Similarly to BPC, it 
results from a defect of the PMA. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. MCM is a cystic posterior fossa 
malformation characterized by an intact vermis, an 
enlarged cisterna magna, absence of hydrocephalus, 
and a normal size of the fourth ventricle (Figure 2.28). 
As such, the appearance is similar to that previously 
described for the BPC, except for the presence of a late 
fenestration, the free communication between the 
MCM, 4th ventricle and subarachnoid space, and consistent 
absence of hydrocephalus in pre/post-natal age 
(Table 2.3). Similarly to BPC, the extent of the CSF collection 
is variable; it may remain purely infravermian 
or it may extend far beyond the normal borders of the 
cisterna magna laterally, posteriorly, and superiorly, 
reaching in some cases the quadrigeminal plate cistern. 
The torcular and the tentorium are usually in normal 
position but in infrequent cases may be elevated. 
Prognosis. This is commonly favorable if MCM is 
isolated. In syndromic conditions, the final prognosis is 
that of the underlying syndrome. 
V 
M 
Figure 2.28 Megacisterna magna at 25 weeks’ gestation. (a) Axial 
scan of the posterior fossa showing enlargement of the cisterna 
magna; the cerebellar vermis appears intact. (b) Sagittal scan of the 
posterior fossa demonstrating increased size of the cisterna magna 
(arrow). The vermian size and morphology are normal for gestational 
age, with a normal fastigial point and primary fissure. The vermis is 
not elevated. (c) Schematic diagram of the same finding. V, cerebellar 
vermis; M, megacisterna magna. 
DANDY–WALKER VARIANT (DWv) 
Definition and anatomy. DWv shares with DWM the 
counterclockwise rotation and hypoplasia of the vermis, 
with the former indicating that also in DWv there 
is an abnormality of the AMA.30 However, the vermis 
is less severely agenetic/hypoplastic than in DWM and, 
in addition, the agenesis/hypoplasia affects mainly the 
postero-inferior aspect of the vermis. Another difference 
from DWM is that in DWv the fourth ventricle 
a b 
c 
MEGACISTERNA MAGNA (MCM) 

is only mildly enlarged, and consequently the upward 
displacement of the tentorium, characteristic of 
DWM, is absent in DWv. As above mentioned unification 
of DW and DWv into a spectrum of variability of 
rhombencephalic roof development was proposed by 
Barkovich et al.;31 subsequently the same authors 
questioned whether DWv is a mild form of DWM or 
rather represents a generalized form of cerebellar 
hypoplasia; they suggest that the term DWv should be 
discarded since it may create confusion. On the other 
hand, in the view of other authors, the term may be 
still useful, in order to grade the severity of the anomalies 
of the posterior fossa in everyday practice, and, in 
addition, retaining this term does not lead to significant 
diagnostic confusion if embryologic concepts are 
correctly applied. These authors believe that the counterclockwise 
rotation of the vermis that is almost 
always associated is the key feature that allows differentiation 
of DWv from other forms of cerebellar 
hypoplasia.30,32 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The above anatomic features 
can be detected with ultrasound. The amount of CSF 
in the posterior fossa is only slightly increased. As 
already mentioned, neither the upward displacement 
of the tentorium nor enlargment of the posterior fossa 
are present in DWv. In addition, there is partialvermian 
agenesis/hypoplasia, mainly involving the 
postero-inferior part of the vermis, and a moderate 
counterclockwise rotation (Figure 2.29). The differential 
diagnosis with other cystic anomalies of the 
posterior fossa is given in Table 2.3. 
Prognosis. As already mentioned, it has been proposed 
that the term DWv be abandonent because it apparently 
represents a cluster of anomalies of the posterior fossa 
shared by completely different genetic and embryologic 
conditions, which have completely different prognoses 
and outcomes. Therefore, the overall prognosis of a vermian 
lesion sonographically consistent with the above definition 
of DWv will not and indeed cannot be described. 
36 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
V 
4V 
Figure 2.29 Dandy–Walker variant. (a) Axial view of 
the posterior fossa showing communication between the 
fourth ventricle and the area of the cisterna magna 
because of a defect/rotation of the vermis; the amount 
of CSF in the posterior fossa is only mildly increased. 
(b) Sagittal view of the posterior fossa showing an 
enlarged fourth ventricle (4V); there is partial agenesis of 
the postero-inferior part of the vermis and it is rotated 
counterclockwise (curved arrow). (c) Schematic diagram 
of the same finding. V, cerebellar vermis 
a b 
c 

A large number of heterogeneous syndromes, some of 
which have a genetic background, fall into this category. 
Pathologically, these conditions are mainly characterized 
by vermian dysgenesis (Joubert syndrome, rhombencephalosynapsis, 
etc.) or by a small posterior cranial 
fossa. Some but not all of the former conditions may 
be detected on ultrasound, while most of those in the 
second group are evident on the axial transcerebellar 
view, due to a very small posterior fossa, as in the Chiari 
II syndrome. However, it should be kept in mind that 
when global decreased cerebellar biometry is present, 
this requires that attention be focused on the brainstem 
anatomy in order to differentiate cerebellar hypoplasia 
from pontocerebellar hypoplasia. Cerebellar hypoplasia 
can be primitive or secondary to a chromosomal anomaly, 
infection, or a polymalformative syndrome. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 37 
RETROCEREBELLAR ARACHNOID CYST 
Definition and anatomy. A retrocerebellar arachnoid 
cyst is a CSF collection that does not communicate 
with the surrounding subarachnoid spaces nor with the 
ventricular system (Table 2.3). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographically, a retrocerebellar 
arachnoid cyst appears as a sonolucent cystic mass. 
Depending on its size, the cyst may compress and displace 
the cerebellum, causing a false impression of a DWM 
(Figure 2.30). In addition, large arachnoid cysts may 
obstruct the circulation of CSF, leading to secondary 
obstructive hydrocephalus. 
Prognosis. The overall prognosis is good, and the 
condition does not need treatment if compression on 
the cerebellum is absent or asymptomatic. In contrast, 
if the cyst is large and symptomatic, it may require 
surgery. 
Figure 2.30 Retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst. (a) Axial view of the posterior fossa showing a sonolucent cystic mass. (b) Sagittal view of the 
posterior fossa showing a large arachnoid cyst. 
NON-CYSTIC POSTERIOR FOSSA MALFORMATIONS 
JOUBERT SYNDROME 
Definition and anatomy. This entity, which is inherited 
with an autosomal recessive pattern, features a developmental 
defect of the cerebellar vermis and abnormal 
pontomesencephalic junction, which result in the wellknown 
‘molar tooth’ sign on axial MRI scans. It is of 
note that Joubert syndrome represents an integrated clinical–
radiologic diagnosis; in fact, the ‘molar tooth’ sign 
is not exclusive to Joubert syndrome but can be found 
also in other syndromes.13,20,31 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is extremely difficult and 
has been reported in a very limited number of cases. On 
the transcerebellar view, the vermis usually appears 
hypoplastic: its superior part is present but the inferior 
one is absent; the absence of the inferior part produces 
a midline cleft that connects the fourth ventricle to the 
cisterna magna, resulting in an umbrella-shaped fourth 
ventricle in axial and coronal planes. The fourth ventricle 
can be slight dilated without the formation of a posterior 
a b 

fossa cyst or hydrocephalus. However, the diagnosis of 
this anomaly is based on the pathognomonic ‘molar 
tooth’ sign on axial MRI scans (Figure 2.31); this results 
from a combination of mesencephalon, vermis, and superior 
cerebellar peduncle abnormalities. 
Prognosis. The poor prognosis is characterized by episodic 
hyperpneic–apneic spells, abnormal eye movements, 
hypotonia, ataxia, developmental delay, and mental 
retardation. 
38 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.31 Joubert syndrome. The ‘molar tooth’ sign (arrow) is 
visualized on axial brain MRI and results from the combination of 
a hypoplastic cerebellar vermis, elongated and thickened superior 
cerebellar peduncles, and a deep interpeduncular fossa. 
RHOMBENCEPHALOSYNAPSIS 
Definition and anatomy. This rare malformation is 
characterized by vermian agenesis associated with fusion 
of the cerebellar hemispheres and peduncles.13,31 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the axial transcerebellar view¸ 
the vermis is absent and the hypoplastic cerebellar hemispheres 
are fused on the midline. The posterior fossa is 
small (Figure 2.32), and associated supratentorial abnormalities 
(absence of the septum pellucidum, abnormal 
gyration, and hydrocephalus) may be present. The diagnosis 
is confirmed by MRI. 
Prognosis. This is commonly poor, with most affected 
patients dying in childhood. 
Figure 2.32 Rhombencephalosynapsis. Axial view of the posterior 
fossa showing an abnormal cerebellum formed of a single 
block with no individualization of vermian structure. 

Definition and anatomy. This malformation is characterized 
by a small posterior fossa with downward displacement 
of the vermis, the brainstem, and the fourth ventricle 
into the foramen magnum or even into the cervical spinal 
canal. An open spinal dysraphism is constantly associated. 
Pathogenesis. Embryologically, during the fourth week, 
closure of the neural tube (day 25, posterior neuropore) 
results in an accumulation of ependymal fluid and dilatation 
of the three cerebral vesicles. If the closure of the 
neuropore fails (myelomeningocele), the physiologic 
dilatation of the rhombencephalic vesicle is impaired, 
and this in turn determines a small posterior fossa. 
Eventually, the brainstem and the cerebellum, which 
have normal growth, are no longer contained in the small 
posterior fossa and herniate through the cervical canal 
behind the upper cervical cord; the cerebellum surrounds 
the brainstem and compresses the collicular plate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the second trimester, the 
ultrasound findings indicating the presence of the 
Chiari II malformation are frontal bossing, which is 
responsible for the lemon sign (Figure 2.33a), and 
obliteration of the cisterna magna, with abnormal curvature 
of the cerebellar hemispheres (the banana sign) 
(Figure 2.33b,c). In addition, moderate to severe ventriculomegaly 
develops in most cases (70%) during the 
2nd trimester, and worsens in the 3rd trimester. 
(Figure 2.33a). In the 3rd trimester, ultrasound examination 
of the fetal posterior fossa is limited by 
increased calvarial mineralization; with this limitation, 
the cerebellum is often not visible, while the classic 
lemon sign is less reliable, being present only in up to 
50% of cases. In these cases, the measurement of the 
clivus–supraoccipital angle may be useful to evaluate 
the shape and size of the posterior fossa.35 These findings 
may be used to assist detection of open dysraphism 
such as myelomeningocele by means of both transverse 
and coronal scans of the vertebral arches. 
Prognosis. See the section below on spina bifida. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 39 
CHIARI II MALFORMATION 
Figure 2.33 Chiari II malformation. (a) Axial view of the fetal head showing moderate ventriculomegaly and frontal bone concavity 
(lemon sign) (arrows). (b) The cerebellum is banana-shaped (arrow) as it wraps around the midbrain. (c) Image showing the inferior 
displacement of the fetal cerebellum; the arrow indicates a fetal clavicle. 
ANOMALIES OF NEURONAL PROLIFERATION AND 
MIGRATION AND OF CORTICAL ORGANIZATION 
Any event that is able to alter neuronal proliferation, 
migration, or cortical organization can cause a cerebral 
cortex malformation. Neuroblast proliferation starts in 
the 7th week of gestation in the subependymal region 
around the walls of the lateral ventricle. This proliferation 
is particularly active between 13 and 26 weeks’ gestation. 
After 26 weeks, the volume of the germinal zone rapidly 
decreases. Neuronal migration to the cerebral cortex starts 
around the 8th week and is completed by 20–24 week’s 
gestation; glial cell migration continues following its completion 
until after birth.4,36 During this period, the neurons 
migrate from the germinal matrix within the periventricular 
zone, on radial glial guides, towards the pial surface. 
Waves of migrating neuroblasts lead to the formation of a 
superficial cortical plate separated from the deep germinal 
layer by an intermediate zone containing concentric 
migrating cells.19,36 The migration waves form an ‘insideout’, 
six-layered cortex in which the first wave of migrating 
neuroblasts forms the deepest cortical layer, while the 
later waves constitute the most superficial layer. At the 
same time, the intermediate zone increases in width and 
forms the white matter. Recently it has been shown that 
not all cerebral cortical neurons are generated in the germinal 
zones of the dorsal telencephalon and migrate radially 
to the developing cortex; in fact a discrete number of 
cortical interneurons are generated in the lateral, medial 
and caudal ganglionic eminences and migrate tangentially 
into the cerebral cortex. In addition, recent reports have 
made it clear that radial glia are much more active participants 
in cortical development. Indeed, radial glia are 
a b c 

40 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Microcephaly is defined as a small head 
circumference, that is more than 3 standard deviations 
below the mean for postnatal or gestational age.13,19 It is 
commonly characterized by a small size of the brain, 
mainly due to hypoplasia of the frontal lobes (microencephaly). 
Microcephaly may be considered as a sign of 
many underlying causes. A new classification of microcephaly 
has been recently proposed; three categories can 
be identified: (a) primary microcephaly, or microcephalia 
vera with normal to thin cortex; (b) Microlissencephaly 
(extreme microcephaly with thick cortex) and (c) microcephaly 
associated with extensive polymicrogyria.36 Its 
incidence varies between 1 in 6250 and 1 in 8500 births, 
and it increases during the first year of life. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Microcephaly is believed 
to result from decreased neuronal and glial proliferation/ 
increased apoptosis. The etiology is heterogeneous. 
Primitive microcephaly should be differentiated from 
microcephaly secondary to environmental insults. Primary 
microcephaly may be inherited with an autosomal recessive, 
or dominant or an X-linked pattern. One hundred 
distinct familial syndromes characterized by microcephaly 
have been documented, with 20–30% of these 
being estimated to be genetic. In addition, microcephaly 
is a common feature in chromosomal disorders. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The main issue regarding the 
prenatal diagnosis of microcephaly is its difficulty, due 
to the fact that microcephaly is of late onset in most 
cases, with the impairment in head growth becoming 
clearly evident in the 3rd trimester or even only after 
birth. At present, the sonographic diagnosis is mainly 
based on biometric parameters. The most important 
diagnostic criterion is a head circumference below 
3 standard deviations from the mean. Other biometric 
parameters, such as head circumference/abdominal 
circumference (HC/AC) ratio and head circumference/ 
femurlengh (HC/FL) ratio, may be useful in doubtful 
cases (Figure 2.34a). Some time ago, a nomogram of 
the normal dimensions of the frontal lobes was proposed 
as a potential tool for the prenatal diagnosis of 
microcephaly, in view of the fact that the anterior lobes 
seem to be primarily involved in this malformation.37 
Microcephaly also leads to a disproportion between 
the skull and the face, which is also due to the fact that 
the frontal lobes are severely hypoplastic; this causes a 
typical sloping forehead, which is present in most cases 
of this defect, especially from the late 2nd trimester 
onwards (Figure 2.34). Among the various signs 
described in some but not all cases of microcephaly are 
large subarachnoid spaces and an absent or reduced 
flow of the anterior cerebral arteries.9 The gyral pattern 
is normal in primary microcephaly and abnormal in the 
other 2 forms of microcephaly. However, the degrees 
of cerebral gyration and sulcation are difficult to assess 
with prenatal ultrasound. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the craniosynostoses, 
in which an indentation of the cranial 
outline is present. 
• Associated anomalies. Microcephaly is often associated 
with abnormal gyration, agenesis of the corpus 
callosum, and holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes most commonly associated with microcephaly 
are:13 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . microcephaly 
+ encephalocele, polydactyly, polycystic kidney, and 
other CNS anomalies 
neuronal and glial precursors as well as guides and may, 
as well, have a role in orchestrating the entire migration 
process.36 Myelination, in contrast, starts only after birth. 
Gyration and sulcation occur during neuronal migration 
and continue following its completion until after birth. In 
this section, we describe the main malformations due to 
abnormal neuronal/glial proliferation or apoptosis, abnormal 
migration, and cortical organization. 
Incidence. 1 in 6250–8500 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A head circumference below 3 standard deviations from the mean of the gestational age is 
considered a reliable indicator of microcephaly. Sloping forehead. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Depends on the etiology and on the association with other anomalies. In the isolated form, the severity 
of mental delay increases with the degree of impairment of head circumference. 
MICROCEPHALY 

CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 41 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .microcephaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia, and cataract), CNS 
anomalies (lissencephaly, midline anomalies, and 
cephalocele) 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . microcephaly + 
lissencephaly, congenital heart disease, facial anomalies, 
and polydactyly 
• Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome: look for . microcephaly 
+ genitourinary defects 
• Seckel syndrome: look for . microcephaly + 
intrauterine growth retardation and facial anomalies 
The empiric recurrence risk of microcephaly is 10%. 
In syndromic cases, the recurrence risk is that of the 
underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. When microcephaly is suspected 
or diagnosed, it is necessary to carefully assess the brain 
structures in order to rule out associated brain anomalies. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, because of the strong association 
with extra-CNS anomalies. Karyotyping should also 
be performed, because of the relatively high risk of 
chromosomal anomalies. Finally, the high association 
rate with genetic forms (with an autosomal recessive 
mode of inheritance) strictly supports the need for an 
accurate familial analysis. 
Postnatal treatment. Treatment is only possible for 
microcephaly if it is due to craniosynostosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
of microcephaly depends on the etiology, the associated 
anomalies, and the size of the head. When 
microcephaly is isolated the mental delay increases 
with the severity of the impairment of head circumference. 
However, clinically, patients with microcephalia 
vera are less severely affected than those with the other 
2 forms. The former has a developmental delay and 
mild corticospinal tract signs in infancy; the latter are 
severely hypotonic at birth and rapidly develop 
myotonic seizures. 
Figure 2.34 Microcephaly. (a) The sonographic diagnosis of microcephaly is based mainly on biometric parameters such as an HC/AC 
ratio below the 1st centile. (b) Side view of a 30-week fetus showing a typical sloping forehead. (c) Corresponding photograph after birth. 
a 
b c 

Definition. HME is characterized by an overgrowth of 
one cerebral hemisphere, with gyral disorders and white 
matter gliosis.19 The brainstem and cerebellum may also 
be affected. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. HME can be caused 
by abnormal neuronal and glial proliferation/ 
apoptosis.36 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The sonographic diagnosis is 
based on asymmetry of the cerebral hemispheres, with 
overgrowth of one cerebral hemisphere, dilatation of 
the ipsilateral ventricle and a consequent shift of the 
midline (Figure 2.35). Gyral anomalies are commonly 
associated, but are difficult to identify on ultrasound. A 
detailed anatomic scan must be performed in order to 
detect associated corporeal hemihypertrophy and 
hamartomatous lesions, which may indicate the presence 
of on associated syndrome (see below). It should 
be underlined that HME can be detected only late in 
gestation or after birth. 
• Differential diagnosis. The hemisphere asymmetry 
can be also caused by a brain neoplasm and its mass 
effect. However, in this case, the tumor mass is easily 
detected on ultrasound. 
• Associated anomalies. Lissencephaly is frequently 
associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes most commonly associated with 
HME are:13 
• Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome: look for . 
hemimegalencephaly + hemangiomatosis of one or 
more limbs, soft tissue hypertrophy, cardiac anomalies, 
kidney agenesis, and laryngeal atresia 
• Proteus syndrome: look for . hemimegalencephaly 
+ partial gigantism of hands and feet, hemihypertrophy, 
subcutaneous hamartomatous tumors, and 
macrocephaly 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be 
discussed with the parents, considering the low risk and 
the very poor prognosis of HME itself. In the case of continuation 
of pregnancy, the perinatal management should 
also be discussed with the parents, for the same reasons. 
Postnatal treatment. The only possible treatment 
consists of a hemispherectomy of the affected hemisphere. 
Often, this is the only way to control seizures. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
poor, with epilepsy unresponsive to treatment, severe 
mental retardation, and hemiplegia. 
42 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
HEMIMEGALENCEPHALY (HME) 
Incidence. Unknown, but very low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Based on asymmetry of the cerebral hemispheres with dilatation of the lateral ventricle on 
the affected side and a shift of the midline. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Very poor: severe mental retardation, seizures, and hemiplegia. 
Figure 2.35 Hemimegalencephaly. 
(a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing 
a shift in the midline echo, with overgrowth 
of one hemisphere and ipsilateral 
ventriculomegaly (arrow) already 
present at 22 weeks’ gestational age. 
In this case, the unilateral ventriculomegaly 
was the first sign of hemimegalencephaly. 
(b) Coronal scan of the fetal 
brain showing unilateral mild enlargement 
of the right occipital horn (arrow). 
a b 

Definition. In a recent classification system,36 malformations 
due to abnormal neuronal migration are categorized 
in three main groups: (a) Group A – Lissencephaly/subcortical 
band heterotopia spectrum (includes type I or classic 
lissencephaly); (b) Group B – Cobblestone Complex (formerly 
known as type II lissencephaly); (c) Group C – 
Heterotopias 1) subependymal, 2) subcortical (other than 
band heterotopia), 3) marginal glioneuronal. The term 
‘lissencephaly’ refers to a smooth brain surface with total 
absence of cortical convolutions. It is a synonym of 
agyria. Pachygyria refers to a simplified convolutional 
pattern with a low number of broadened gyri and shallow 
sulci (incomplete lissencephaly). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Within the group of neuronal 
migration anomalies, there is extreme variability in the 
phenotypic expression of lissencephalies, accounting for 
the denomination ‘agyria–pachigyria’ that is widely used in 
everyday practice. Group A includes subcortical band heterotopia 
(characterized by a poorly organized band of 
arrested neurons residing beneath a relatively normal cortex) 
and Type I (classic) lissencephaly (characterized by 
agyria with or without pachygyria; in addition, there is a 
four-layered cortex instead of the classic six-layered one). 
LIS1 and DCX gene mutations are those mainly responsible 
for these pathologic entities. Miller–Dieker syndrome 
with deletions of LIS1 and telomeric genes is included in 
this group. Group B includes the cobblestone complex 
(lissencephaly type II) characterized by an irregularly 
bumpy and knobbed surface of the brain. It is characterized 
by a disorganized unilayered cortex on histopathologic 
examination. Congenital muscular dystrophy 
syndromes such as Fukuyama and Walker–Warburg 
syndromes are included in this group. These syndromes 
result from a deficiency of a protein group that plays a 
fundamental role in muscular contraction and in CNS 
development. POMT, FKRP and FCMD gene mutations 
are the main determinants of this group of pathology. 
Heterotopia (group c) refers to arrested migration of normal 
neurons along the radial glial path between the 
ependyma of the lateral ventricle and the cortex. According 
to the location, it can be classified into subependymal, subcortical 
and marginal glioneuronal heterotopia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Prenatal detection of lissencephaly 
remains a challenge even for the expert, and can be 
achieved only if the ultrasound examination is done from 
the late 2nd trimester onwards. In fact, due to the timing of 
normal neuronal development, lissencephaly cannot be 
reliably suspected before the 22–24th week of gestation, 
when some normal gyri and sulci become well defined.38 
Familiarity with the normal ultrasound pattern of development 
of the fetal sulci (Figure 2.36), and especially of the 
parieto-occipital fissure and the Sylvian fissure/insula 
(Figure 2.37 and 2.38), is of the utmost importance to 
allow suspicion of lissencephaly as early as the late 2nd 
trimester. In fact, the absence or abnormal appearance of 
a particular sulcus at the appropriate fetal age should raise 
suspicion about the possibility of abnormal or delayed 
cortical development. A sulcus or fissure is first seen as a 
small dot on the surface of the brain; later, a V-shaped 
identation forms and finally it deepens and is visible as an 
echogenic line that extends into the brain in a Y-shaped 
configuration. Since mild ventriculomegaly (Figure 2.39) 
can be the first sign of abnormal/delayed brain maturation, 
it has been suggested that a follow-up ultrasound examination 
be performed at 24–26 weeks for the assessment 
of cerebral sulci in fetuses with apparently ‘isolated’ mild 
ventriculomegaly detected at the midtrimester scan (18–21 
weeks). However, currently, if no associated anomalies are 
present, the diagnosis is made prenatally in very few cases. 
Moreover, although there have been recent reports describing 
sonographic criteria for the diagnosis of lissencephaly,39 
it must be stressed that cerebral involvement may vary significantly 
in severity and extension in lissencephaly, and 
only the most severe forms can be suspected on ultrasound; 
milder degrees of cerebral involvement such as subcortical 
band heterotopia are very difficult, if not impossible, to 
diagnose. As reported by several authors, gyral anomalies 
and neuronal heterotopia are the anomalies most commonly 
missed on prenatal ultrasound due to technical limitations 
and/or to the fact that routine ultrasound is not 
usually performed late in gestation, when gyration and sulcation 
mainly occur. MRI represents a valuable diagnostic 
tool, being more accurate than ultrasound in the detection 
of gyral disorders. The optimal time for its use appears to 
be after 22–24 weeks’ gestation. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 43 
LISSENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Unknown in the fetus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In suspected cases, absence of normally present sulci, lack of opercularization of the Sylvian 
fissure, or early abnormal sulcation can be seen. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Poor/very poor in most cases. 

44 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.36 Fetal cerebral sulci. (a,b) Sagittal views of the fetal brain: images of a 30-week fetus showing ultrasound appearance of (a) 
cingulate sulcus (arrows), above the corpus callosum (CSP, cavum septum pellucidum), and (b) convex sulci (arrows). (c,d) Coronal views 
of the fetal brain: images of a 30-week fetus showing the appearance of (c) the calcarine fissure (arrow); (PF: posterior fossa) and (d) the 
cingulate sulcus (arrow) (FH, frontal horns). 
Figure 2.37 Axial views of the 
fetal brain: images showing ultrasound 
appearance of the parieto-occipital fissure 
at (a) 21 weeks’ and (b) 23 weeks’ 
gestational age. 
a b 
c d 
a b 

• Differential diagnosis. Care should be taken in 
diagnosing lissencephaly prior to 24 weeks38 gestation, 
as a smooth cerebral surface is a normal finding 
until 20–22 weeks. 
• Association with other malformations. Lissencephaly 
can be associated with agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
Dandy–Walker malformation, micrognathia, 
omphalocele, polydactyly, congential heart disease, 
and urinary defects, and, frequently polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes most commonly associated with 
lissencephaly are:13 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .lissencephaly 
+ eye anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract) and 
CNS anomalies (ventriculomegaly, midline anomalies, 
cerebellar anomalies and cephalocele) 
• Miller–Dieker syndrome: look for . lissencephaly + 
microcephaly, congenital heart disease, facial anomalies, 
and polydactyly 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome: look for . lissencephaly + 
microcephaly, Dandy–Walker malformation, proptosis, 
diffuse joint contractures, subcutaneous tissue 
edema, and intrauterine growth retardation. 
Obstetric management. If abnormal sulcal development 
is suspected, further investigations should include 
MRI and genetic evaluation (fluorescence in situ hybriditation 
(FISH) for 17p13.3 deletion (Miller–Dicker 
region)). 
Postnatal treatment. No treatment is available. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
usually poor, and is characterized by severe mental 
retardation, hypotonia, convulsions, and death during 
the first 5 years of life. The prognosis is less severe in 
the case of heterotopia. However, in these cases, postnatal 
outcome cannot be extrapolated from postnatal 
series, which usually include only symptomatic individuals 
who are referred to the specialist and ignore those 
patients who remain asymptomatic. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 45 
Figure 2.38 Axial views of the fetal brain. (a) Ultrasound appearance of a 19-week fetus showing a smooth Sylvian fossa without any 
angularity (arrow). (b) Ultrasound image of a 23-week fetus showing a plateau-like Sylvian fossa with obtuse posterior angulation (arrows) 
at the site of the developing circular sulcus. (c) Ultrasound image of a 26-week fetus showing further development of the Sylvian fissure. 
The temporal operculum is overgrowing the insula, and forms an acute angle posteriorly (arrows). 
Figure 2.39 Lissencephaly: (a) Ultrasound image showing a smooth brain surface (arrows) in a 32-week fetus with lissencephaly; 
arrhinia was also present. On this midsagittal view of the fetal face, the absence of the nose determines the extremely flat profile (arrowhead). 
(b) Ultrasound image of a 29-week fetus with lissencephaly. Borderline ventriculomegaly is present; in addition, the parietooccipital 
fissure is not identified in the expected location (arrow) and a shallow, flat Sylvian fissure/insula (arrow) with absence of 
angularity at the insular margins can be seen. 
a b c 
a b 

Definition. Schizencephaly is characterized by the 
presence of abnormal clefts (70% of cases) in the part 
of the cerebral mantle that separates the lateral ventricles 
from the subarachnoid spaces. Clefts are lined 
by polymicrogyric gray matter, so that a loss of substance 
due to acquired causes, such as encephaloclastic 
porencephaly, can be ruled out.19 It can be uni- or bilateral, 
symmetric or asymmetric. Of the two types of 
schizencephaly, closed lips schizencephaly shows very 
thin clefts (fused clefts), while open lips schizencephaly 
has clefts filled with CSF and is often associated with 
ventriculomegaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. At present, schizencephaly is 
considered a malformation due to abnormal cortical 
organization (including later neuronal migration). It was 
recently classified together with polymicrogyria as they 
are often observed together in patients.36 Its etiology is 
uncertain, but it may represent an early destructive event 
before completion of neuronal migration at 16–20 
weeks’ gestation or a primary neuronal migrational disorder, 
sometimes associated with a mutation of the 
EMX2 homeobox gene, which is needed for the regular 
formation of the cerebral cortex. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Only open lips schizencephaly 
has been diagnosed in utero. It is characterized by 
the presence of a CSF-filled cleft of one or both cerebral 
hemispheres that extends from the subarachnoid spaces 
to the lateral ventricles (Figure 2.40). The lateral ventricles 
are often dilated and clearly visible on the transventricular 
view. The most common site of the cleft is the 
Sylvian scissure, and it is often associated with septooptic 
dysplasia. 
• Differential diagnosis. Differential diagnosis with a 
large Sylvian porencephalic cyst is extremely difficult. 
However, type I porencephaly differs from schizencephaly 
not only in the smaller size of the lesion but 
also in both the unilaterality and the shape. In fact, 
schizencephaly is commonly wedge-shaped rather 
than round or irregular like the porencephalic cyst. 
Moreover, in schizencephaly, the cortical clefts are 
lined with gray matter. Due to the relatively frequent 
association with septo-optic dysplasia, a differential 
diagnosis with lobar holoprosencephaly and isolated 
septo-optic dysplasia should be made, since both 
share the fusion of the anterior horns and the absence 
of the cavum septi pellucidi: the presence of the cleft is 
typical of schizencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetrical management. In cases of open bilateral 
shizencephaly, termination of pregnancy can be offered 
prior to viability, due to the extremely poor prognosis of 
schizencephaly. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. Unilateral closed 
schizencephaly is occasionally found incidentally in 
adults undergoing MRI for other reasons; in these 
cases, the affected individuals are asymptomatic or 
have minor symptoms. In contrast, open bilateral 
schizencephaly is generally associated with seizures and 
46 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SCHIZENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Characterized by the presence of CSF-filled clefts of cerebral hemispheres that extend from 
subarachnoid spaces to the lateral ventricle. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Variable in closed forms; poor in most cases of open schizencephaly. 
Figure 2.40 Open lips 
schizencephaly. Coronal 
scan of the fetal brain 
showing full-thickness 
cleft of the cortex (small 
arrows), connecting the lateral 
ventricles with the subarachnoid 
space. The big 
arrow indicates the choroid 
plexus. 

severe mental retardation. In fact, the presence of 
bilateral clefts and the association with other cerebral 
anomalies are poor prognostic indicators. The severity 
of the disease varies with the extension of the cortical 
lesion. Bilaterality of the anomaly is correlated with 
more serious psychomotor retardation. When it is associated 
with septo-optic dysplasia, blindness is also present. 
Epilepsy is frequent. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 47 
DESTRUCTIVE LESIONS 
Independently of the cause, the outcome of a cerebral 
insult depends mainly on the age at which it occurs and on 
the severity of the insult itself. The main destructive anomalies 
are hydranencephaly, porencephaly, and multicystic 
encephalomalacia. To understand the meaning and the 
ultrasound pictures of these entities, it is necessary to consider 
that the reaction of the fetal brain to an insult changes 
according to the gestational age at which it occurs: until the 
2nd trimester, the lesion is characterized by a scarce glial 
reaction; therefore, the necrotic tissue is completely reabsorbed 
and the final result is a smooth-walled cyst (porencephaly). 
In the 3rd trimester, the glial reaction becomes 
more intense; consequently, the cyst will have irregular 
walls and small septa (multicystic encephalomalacia). 
Definition. Hydranencephaly is characterized by 
a complete or almost complete absence of the cerebral 
cortex, with the normal brain tissue being replaced by a 
large fluid collection covered by leptomeninges and 
dura.19 The presence of the falx and of the cranial nerves 
demonstrates that the hemispheres have developed but 
have subsequently been destroyed. The incidence at birth 
is 1–2.5 in 10 000. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The most accepted hypothesis 
to explain this particular lesion is interruption of 
the blood supply in early pregnancy. In fact, in animal 
models, this type of lesion can be induced by occluding 
the carotid arteries. Moreover, congenital infections 
such as toxoplasma and cytomegalovirus can have a 
similar effect by causing necrotizing vasculitis with 
consequent destruction of the cerebral tissue. It should 
come in mind that a number of situations can lead to 
an impairment of fetal brain perfusion. These include 
placental, maternal (hypoxia, abdominal trauma, etc.), 
and fetal (infection and coagulation factor deficits) 
causes. Finally, the twin–twin transfusion syndrome 
(TTTS), if severe, may also be responsible for 
hydranencephaly. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydranencephaly is characterized 
by a huge fluid collection filling the whole cranial cavity, 
with no recognizable cerebral cortex (Figure 2.41a). 
The falx is usually present (Figure 2.41b); the meninges, 
thalami, basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum may 
be normal. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes alobar holoprosencephaly 
and severe hydrocephalus. In the former, 
the thalami are fused and residual cortex is visible. 
In severe hydrocephalus, a layer of cortex can usually 
be seen and the falx is always present, even if it may 
have ruptured. Color Doppler can contribute to a correct 
diagnosis by showing absent flow in the anterior 
and middle cerebral artery in hydranencephaly. 
HYDRANENCEPHALY 
Incidence. 1–2.5 in 10 000 newborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A huge fluid collection filling the whole cranial cavity, with no recognizable cerebral cortex. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Very poor. 

• Associated anomalies. In most cases, hydranencephaly 
is an isolated anomaly, although an association with 
renal dysplasia and cardiac defects has been reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
The most common syndrome possibly associated with 
hydranencephaly is Fowler syndrome: hydrocephalus/ 
hydranencephaly + arthrogryposis. 
Obstetric management. Due to the poor prognosis, 
termination of pregnancy should be offered prior to 
viability. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis is uniformly 
poor. Hydranencephaly is associated with severe 
psychomotor delay, nystagmus, optic atrophy, epilepsy, 
and hypothermia. Death usually occurs within the first 
2 years of life. 
48 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.41 Hydranencephaly. (a) 
The image shows the typical features of 
hydranencephaly, with a large cystic 
mass filling the entire cranial cavity. 
(b) A midline falx is present. 
PORENCEPHALY 
Incidence. 1 in 9000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Cystic usually unilateral lesion communicating with the ipsilateral ventricle and/or 
the subarachnoid space. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on the extension of the lesion. There can be psychomotor retardation, hemiparesis, 
and epilepsy. 
Definition. The term ‘porencephaly’ includes every type 
of lesion with cavitary character, i.e. a fluid-filled area 
within the brain that commonly communicates with 
the ventricles, subarachnoid spaces, or both. It involves 
the destruction of previously developed brain tissue, 
with subsequent cavity formation. It may be isolated or 
associated with ventriculomegaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Some authors19 consider 
two types of porencephaly: type I is due to parenchymal 
damage followed by liquification/reabsorption 
(encephaloclastic porencephaly), resulting from an 
insult (ischemia, hemorrhage, etc.) during the 3rd 
trimester. It is more frequent and usually unilateral. It 
has a round or irregular shape. Type II (schizencephalic 
porencephaly), which is usually bilateral, is due 
to an anomaly in the process of neural migration/ 
cortical organization and is completely cystic with 
a smooth wall. It is best considered separately as a 
primary developmental abnormality. Serious hemodynamic 
alterations can be responsible for the formation 
of porencephalic cysts, as in TTTS (usually in the 
recipient twin). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Porencephaly appears as a 
unilateral cystic lesion, usually communicating with the 
ipsilateral ventricle (Figure 2.42a) and/or the subarachnoid 
space. It does not cause any mass effect, being due 
to distruction of brain tissue. The cystic walls and the 
content of the cyst may vary according to the gestational 
a b 

age at which the insult occurs. If it is secondary to 
hemorrhage, it is possible to visualize a hyperechoic 
focus evolving into an anechoic CSF-filled cyst. 
• Differential diagnosis. Type I differs from schizencephaly 
not only in the smaller size of the lesion but 
also in both its unilaterality and shape. In fact, 
schizencephaly is commonly wedge-shaped rather 
than round or irregular. Moreover, cortical clefts are 
lined with gray matter. Porencephaly must also be 
differentiated from multicystic encephalomalacia, 
which results from a diffuse insult to the brain late 
in gestation, with a large portion of cortical tissue 
replaced by multiple and bilateral cystic lesions 
(Figure 2.42c). Unlike porencephaly, these cysts 
have shaggy walls and are separated by hyperechoic 
strands of glial tissue. The difference with arachnoid 
cysts and tumors lies in the mass effect, which is 
present in the latter and absent in porencephaly. 
Moreover, arachnoid cysts do not communicate 
with the lateral ventricles. 
• Associated anomalies. The most frequently associated 
anomaly is ventriculomegaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. Type 
II porencephaly may be associated with orofaciodigital 
syndrome type I:13 porencephaly + facial anomalies 
(including cleft lip and micrognathia), tongue hamartoma, 
and other CNS anomalies. 
Obstetric management. In the bilateral form, it is necessary 
to look for other anomalies, whereas the unilateral 
form is usually isolated, being due either to ischemia or 
to hemorrhage. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. These depend 
on the extent of the lesion; there can be psychomotor 
retardation, hemiparesis, and epilepsy. In type II, due to 
the bilaterality of the lesion and the tendency to be part 
of a syndrome, the prognosis is worse. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 49 
Figure 2.42 Porencephaly. (a) Axial scan of the fetal brain showing a cystic cavity in the brain that communicates with the ipsilateral lateral 
ventricle, which appears mildly dilated (arrow). (b) At 35 weeks, a large porencephalic cyst fills the entire distal cerebral 
hemisphere. (c) Twin–twin transfusion syndrome: coronal view of the donor’s twin, showing multiple encephaloclastic cysts. 
INTRACRANIAL HEMORRHAGE 
Incidence. Rare: 1 in 10 000 pregnancies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Grade 1: not usually detectable. Grades 2 and 3: presence of hyperechoic clots, which can 
fill the entire ventricle or be scattered within it. Grade 4: extension of the hemorrhage to the parenchyma as a 
hyperechogenic area. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Good for grades 1 and 2; worse for grades 3 and 4 (neurologic sequelae can be present in >50% of cases). 
a b c 

Definition. Based on the anatomic location, several types 
of hemorrhage can be distinguished: subdural, subarachnoid, 
intraparenchymal, subependymal, and intraventricular. 
Although rare (1 in 10 000 pregnancies), the 
most frequent form in the fetus is the subependymal/ 
intraventricular hemorrhage; it is also frequent in the 
premature neonate. In fact, in premature infants less 
than 32 weeks and below 1500 g weight, its incidence 
reaches 30–40%. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The initial lesion is a bleeding 
episode in the germinative matrix, which has its 
maximal extension at about the 26th week, regressing 
thereafter. This is a highly vascularized region with thinwalled 
vessels, and because of this anatomic characteristic, 
very rarely can the hemorrhage be stopped or 
restrained. In a premature baby, with an immature 
autoregulatory system for vascular tone and consequently 
for cerebral blood flow, hypoxia and hypercapnia 
can cause an increase in blood flow, thereby 
distending the fragile vascular bed of the matrix. In the 
fetus, a number of conditions can lead to impairment of 
fetal brain perfusion. These can be of placental, maternal, 
or fetal origin. Among maternal causes, the following 
should be considered: history of recent abdominal 
trauma, anticoagulant therapy (e.g. warfarin), coagulation 
disorders, and hyperpyrexia (> 38°C). Fetal predisposing 
conditions include congenital coagulation factor 
deficiency (mainly factors V and X), cerebral arteriovenous 
malformations, and severe TTTS. However, the 
most important determinant of fetal intracranial hemorrhage 
is represented by an autoimmune disease, fetomaternal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FMAIT). FMAIT 
is due to the maternal production of antibodies against 
paternal antigens present on fetal platelets that are not 
recognized by the maternal immune system. Maternal 
exposure to these antigens during pregnancy can lead 
to the production of various classes of immunoglobulins: 
the IgG antibodies are small enough to cross the placental 
barrier and enter the fetal circulation, causing severe 
thrombocytopenia. Unlike hemolytic disease of the newborn, 
FMAIT can also occur in the first pregnancy if 
there is parental incompatibility. Depending on the time 
of onset, the disease is referred to as FMAIT (fetomaternal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia) or NAITP (neonatal 
alloimmune thrombocytopenia). The former often leads 
to severe hemorrhage and even intrauterine death during 
midtrimester, while the latter is the most common cause 
of severe thrombocytopenia in neonates. Among the various 
platelet antigens involved in FMAIT, immunization 
against human platelet antigen (HPA)-1a (P1A1) is 
by far the most common, accounting for 80–85% 
of cases. The importance of recognizing this cause of 
fetal cerebral hemorrhage is that it can be effectively 
treated, if disclosed prior to the hemorrhagic episode, 
with intravenous immunoglobulins and intrauterine 
transfusion of compatible platelets. In some cases, the 
cause of the hemorrhage remains unknown. 
A simple classification divides intracranial hemorrhage 
into four grades based on severity: 
• Grade 1: the hemorrhage is limited to the germinative 
matrix 
• Grade 2: the hemorrhage diffuses from the matrix 
into the ventricle, which fills up with blood without 
distension 
• Grade 3: the hemorrhage distends the ventricles 
• Grade 4: there is extension of the hemorrhage to the 
parenchyma 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound appearance varies 
with the size, location and age of the hemorrhage. Grade 
1 hemorrhage is rarely detectable; it can sometimes form 
a subependymal cyst, which represents an occasional 
finding. Grades 2 and 3 hemorrhage can be recognized 
by the presence of hyperechoic clots, which may fill the 
entire ventricle or be scattered within it (Figure 2.43a). It 
can be limited to one ventricle, but is often bilateral; the 
third ventricle may also be involved (Figure 2.43b). The 
ependymal walls appear hyperechoic and irregular due 
to chemical ventriculitis caused by the blood. The presence 
of ventriculomegaly can persist even after 
the disappearance of the clots due to obstruction of the 
ventricular outlets by the clot debris. Grade 4, which 
is the most severe form, is characterized by a clot in the 
parenchyma, which appears as a hyperechoic, usually 
oval area; this often evolves with time into a porencephalic 
cyst. 
Differential diagnosis. The detection of clots inside 
the enlarged ventricles contributes to the identification 
of the hemorrhage as the cause of the ventriculomegaly. 
However, the most important condition 
that needs to be distinguished from hemorrhage is represented 
by cerebral lesions associated with infections 
– also because, in some cases (cytomegalovirus) the 
infection itself may be responsible for intracranial 
hemorrhagic events. The differential diagnosis should 
rely on an accurate maternal obstetric history and 
on the results of blood tests, which will show recent 
seroconversion. 
Obstetric management. The first issue is to reveal the 
cause of the hemorrhage. It is therefore useful to obtain a 
careful clinical history to rule out recent trauma. 
Maternal testing for coagulation disorders/platelet antibodies 
has to be done in order to detect possible FMAIT 
or congenital coagulation disorders. In the case of 
FMAIT, fetal platelets or whole blood transfusion may 
be needed together with, in the former case, intravenous 
immunoglobulin (IVIG), with or without steroids. There 
has been much discussion regarding the best way to 
50 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

deliver a baby with an intracranial hemorrhage, because 
there are no clear data about the advantages of cesarean 
section compared with vaginal delivery in fetuses with 
mild to moderate FMAIT. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is high 
and with a low percentage of neurologic sequelae for 
the first two degrees of hemorrhage, especially grade 1 
(there is a good outcome in 95–100% of cases in grade 1 
and 65–70% in grade 2). In grade 3, significant neurologic 
sequelae may be present in over 50% of cases, reaching 
70–90% in grade 4. Grade 4 hemorrhage is also associated 
with a mortality rate between 30% and 70%. 
Posthemorrhagic hydrocephalus is a common complication 
of large hemorrhages. 
Recurrence. It should be underlined that a couple having 
a first child/fetus affected with FMAIT have a high risk 
(> 80%) of a recurrence in the following pregnancy. 
To avoid recurrence, early monitoring and treatment 
with IVIG may succeed in reducing the severity of the 
recurrence. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 51 
SPACE-OCCUPYING LESIONS 
Figure 2.43 Intraventricular hemorrage. 
(a) Coronal scan of the fetal brain 
showing hyperechoic clot (arrows) in the 
frontal horns of the lateral ventricle; the 
lateral ventricles are dilated, with 
echogenic borders. (b) Axial view 
of the fetal brain showing triventricular 
hydrocephalus due to aqueductal 
obstruction by the debris of the clot. 
The term ‘space-occupying lesion’ refers to different 
kinds of disorders with a mass effect, compressing and/or 
altering normal intracranial anatomy. The best known 
entities are arachnoid cysts (CSF collections enclosed 
within layers of arachnoid), cerebral tumors (teratomas, 
neuroblastoma, craniopharyngioma, etc.), and vascular 
lesions (aneurysms of the vein of Galen). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound aspect varies, 
depending on the type of lesion. 
Arachnoid cysts. These are represented by extra-axial 
sonolucent cysts of variable dimensions, with regular 
walls, with or without septa (Figure 2.44a), and which 
do not communicate with the ventricular system. The 
location may be supra- or, more rarely, subtentorial. 
Compression of the adjacent cerebral structures is evident 
in larger cysts. Secondary hydrocephalus develops 
when the foramen of Monro or the acqueduct are 
blocked by the cyst. Virtually all arachnoid cysts have 
been identified in the 3rd trimester. 
Aneurysm of the vein of Galen. This consists of an 
enlarged midline vascular structure, extending from the 
quadrigeminal plate cistern posteriorly towards the 
occiput, showing typical turbulence on color Doppler 
(Figure 2.44b). It may be associated with secondary hydrocephalus 
due to compression of the aqueduct and with 
high-output heart failure due to the arteriovenous fistula. 
Cerebral tumors. The tumor has a predominantly solid 
or mixed echostructure, with irregular contours. The 
localization is more frequently supratentorial. Tumor 
growth is rapid, often leading to macrocrania, which 
may be associated with signs of disruption of the normal 
intracranial anatomy and possible secondary hydrocephalus 
(Figure 2.45). Polyhydramnios may also be 
associated. According to the site of the tumor, a preliminary 
distinction between choroid plexus papilloma/ 
papillocarcinoma (intraventricular), craniopharyngioma, 
and the other varieties (including teratoma, astrocytoma, 
and others) can be made. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. These depend on 
the type of lesion. In particular, arachnoid cysts may be 
left in place, if asymptomatic, or be surgically removed 
or shunted if there are seizures on epilepsy. With regard 
to the relationship between location and prognosis, 
temporal cysts have the best prognosis, while subtentorial 
cysts in the posterior fossa are associated with the 
worst outcome. Aneurysms of the vein of Galen are 
associated with significant neonatal mortality, especially 
if cardiac failure is already evident in utero. An 
endovascular approach with embolizing agent and 
repeated procedures may provide a good outcome, 
especially if the anatomy of the lesion is favorable and 
if cardiac failure has not yet developed. The prognosis 
of cerebral tumors is generally poor, and depends on 
their histology and size. 
a b 

This term includes different anomalies deriving from 
failed closure of the neural tube between the 3rd and 
the 4th week of development, the best known being 
anencephaly, cefalocele, and spina bifida. 
52 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 2.44 (a) Arachnoid cyst: axial 
view of the fetal brain showing a large 
fluid collection in the temporal 
fossa; note the smooth contour of the 
cyst and its mass effect. (b) Aneurysm of 
the vein of Galen: color Doppler. 
Ventruculomegaly (V) Secondary to 
obstruction to also evident. 
Figure 2.45 Craniopharyngioma: a rare case of craniopharyngioma detected at 22 weeks of gestation. (a) Coronal view of the fetal head 
demonstrating a huge hyperechoic tumor occupying most of the intracranial cavity and causing macrocrania. (b) The fetus, after termination 
of pregnancy. Note the severe and early macrocrania. (c) At autopsy, after removal of the brain and most of the tumor, the sellar 
origin of the neoplasm is confirmed (AF, anterior fossa; PF, posterior fossa; Sph, sphenoid bone; T, tumor). 
ACRANIA/EXENCEPHALY/ANENCEPHALY 
Incidence. Formerly 1 in 1000, but decreasing due to prenatal diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Absence of the cranial vault. Exencephaly: cerebral hemispheres visible in the amniotic 
fluid. Anencephaly: no cerebral cortex remaining. Frog appearance of the orbits in the 2nd trimester (brain 
destroyed), ‘Mickey mouse’ appearance in the 1st trimester (brain hemispheres still present). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Uniformly fatal. 
a b c 
NEURAL TUBE DEFECTS 
a b 

Definition. These conditions are characterized by 
absence of the cranial vault and the cerebral hemispheres. 
In particular, acrania is absence of the cranial 
vault13 and includes two subtypes: exencephaly and 
anencephaly. The former shows relative normal amounts 
of abnormally developed cerebral tissue whereas the latter 
is characterized by total absence (due to intrauterine 
destruction) of the cerebral hemispheres. Its incidence is 
1 in 1000 births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is due to a closing defect 
of the neural tube in the rostral region. The most widely 
accepted theory is that in most cases, because of a failure 
of development of the cranial vault bones (acrania), the 
encephalic structures, covered only by the meninges 
(exencephaly), are in time subject to extensive destruction, 
with consequent transformation of the encephalon 
into a mass of soft tissue adhering to the base of the cranium 
(cerebral–vascular area) typical of anencephaly 
(Figure 2.46a). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Until a few decades ago, diagnosis 
was made only in the 2nd trimester, with a transthalamic 
scan used to measure the biparietal diameter, and was 
based on absence of the cranial vault with very little cerebral 
tissue being left. The typical appearance of anencephaly 
was the ‘frog’s face’ sign, because of the absence of cerebral 
tissue visible cephalad to the orbits. Currently, the diagnosis 
is often made at the end of the 1st trimester in the form of 
acrania (Figure 2.46b). In fact, in the 1st trimester, the cerebral 
hemispheres have not yet been destroyed by contact 
with the amniotic fluid and traumatic rubbing against the 
uterine walls. In coronal section, the cerebral lobes are seen 
as two semicircular structures above the orbits floating 
in amniotic fluid – an appearance best described as the 
‘Mickey Mouse’ sign (Figure 2.46c). 
• Differential diagnosis. It can sometimes be difficult to 
differentiate a large cephalocele from exencephaly 
when the cranial vault is completely absent. 
• Associated anomalies. In 25–50% of cases, other 
anomalies are present: spina bifida (craniorachischisis), 
cleft lip/palate, omphalocele, coronary heart disease, 
and limb anomalies. 
Obstetric management. Termination of pregnancy 
should be offered prior to viability. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. This anomaly is 
incompatible with life. Few cases survive more than 
a week. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 53 
Figure 2.46 (a) Pathologic finding of a term fetus with anencephaly. Acrania/anencephaly. (b) The calvarium is absent, but the relatively 
intact brain is covered with meninges. (c) Exencephaly. Coronal view, one week later, of the same fetus; the cerebral lobes are seen as two 
semicircular structures above the orbits floating in amniotic fluid – the appearance best described as the ‘Mickey Mouse’ sign. 
a b c 

Definition. Cephalocele is characterized by protrusion 
of intracranial structures through a cranial bone defect. 
The herniated anatomic structures can consist of meninges 
only (meningocele) or meninges plus cerebral tissue 
(encephalomeningocele).13 The most common location is 
occipital in Europe and the USA, although frontal 
cephaloceles are more frequent in South-East Asia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. According to the most widely 
accepted theory, cephalocele is caused by a lack of fusion 
of the neural tube in its specific closing sites, although 
some authors claim that postneurulation events with 
anomalies of the mesenchymal induction phases of the 
nervous tissue are responsible for the lesion. Cephaloceles 
are defined anatomically according to their location 
(frontal, parietal, occipital, frontoethmoidal, etc.). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based on the recognition 
of a cystic (meningocele) or complex (meningoencephalocele) 
formation of variable size protruding through 
a skull defect, often localized in the occipital region 
(Figure 2.47). This anomaly is usually revealed on 
a transthalamic view. However, the other planes are 
useful for a correct evaluation of the encephalic structures. 
In particular, the midsagittal view of the fetal 
head, if obtainable with a posterior approach, may 
clearly demonstrate both the bony defect and the 
myelomeningocele (Figure 2.48). The use of threedimensional 
ultrasound has further increased the potential 
for prenatal characterization of these defects. In 
particular, the multiplanar approach may be used to 
study the bony defect, whereas the surface and maximum-
mode renderings may provide an overall idea of 
the defect itself (Figure 2.48). If recognition of cerebral 
tissue inside the cephalocele still poses difficulties, as in 
small cephaloceles, it may be advisable to perform an 
MRI scan. Ultrasound diagnosis can also be difficult 
in frontal cephaloceles. An asymmetric localization of a 
cephalocele can be found in amniotic band syndrome, 
which is usually associated with other severe lesions, 
including omphalocele and limb amputations. 
• Differential diagnosis. The most important lesions 
to differentiate from occipital meningoceles are cystic 
hygroma, teratoma, and hemangioma. In all of these 
anomalies there is usually no skull defect (Figure 
2.47c), although a bony defect has been found in a 
minority of hemangiomas. 
• Associated anomalies. In up to 70–80% of cases, there 
can be other malformations of the CNS: agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, ventriculomegaly, holoprosencephaly, 
and spina bifida; in the more voluminous 
54 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CEPHALOCELE 
Incidence. From 1 in 5000 to 1 in 100 000 at birth, but decreasing due to prenatal diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Cystic structure of variable dimensions protruding through a calvarial bone defect, most 
often in the occipital region. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: 14–18%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Postnatal morality varies from 30% to 50% for encephalocele and from 10% to 25% for meningocele. 
Figure 2.47 Cephalocele. Complex (a) and cystic (b) formations protrude through a skull defect, localized in the occipital region. (c) 
Small cystic hygroma; no calvarium defects are present. 
a b c 

forms, there is associated microcephaly. Among 
extracerebral anomalies, the most frequently associated 
are cardiac anomalies and skeletal dysplasias. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(14–18%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. The syndromes possibly associated with cephalocele 
are:13 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome: look for . cephalocele + 
polydactyly, polycystic kidneys, and other CNS 
anomalies 
• Amniotic band syndrome: Look for .cephalocele + 
amputation of digits or limbs, facial disruptions, 
and cleft lip/palate 
• Frontonasal dysplasia: look for . cephalocele + 
hypertelorism + anterior cranium bifidum occultum, 
and widely set nostrils 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome: look for .cephalocele + 
eye anomalies (microphthalmia and cataract) and CNS 
anomalies (ventriculomegaly, midline anomalies, and 
lissencephaly) 
Obstetric management. Should a cephalocele be detected 
in a fetus, a thorough search for possibly associated 
structural anomalies has to be carried out. In addition, 
karyotyping is indicated, especially if other anomalies 
are present. Delivery by cesarean section is advisable to 
avoid trauma and infection (through the birth canal) of 
the exposed brain tissue. 
Postnatal treatment. Very large lesions have an 
unfavorable prognosis – hence there is no benefit 
from treatment. Small cephaloceles can be corrected 
surgically. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. These depend on the 
dimensions and the location of the lesion, on the presence 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 55 
Figure 2.48 Meningoencephalocele. In this case (20 weeks’ gestation), there is a huge meningocele with a very small occipital defect 
through which only the hypoplastic cerebellum has herniated. (a) Three-dimensional volume contrast imaging (VCI) rendering of the 
midsagittal view of the fetal head showing the meningocele (arrowheads) and the herniated hypoplastic cerebellum (arrow). (b) Three-dimensional 
surface rendering showing the herniated cerebellum. (c) Maximum-mode rendering showing the small occipital bony defect (arrow). (d) 
Multiplanar imaging, demonstrating the small bony defect on the three orthogonal planes (arrow). (e) The fetus after termination of pregnancy: 
note the huge meningocele and the initial microcephaly with moderately slanting forehead (arrow). 
a b c 
e d 

Definition. The term ‘spina bifida’ is still commonly 
used as a synonym for spinal dysraphism, although it 
properly refers to defective fusion of posterior spinal 
bony elements. The terms ‘spina bifida aperta’ or ‘cystica’ 
and ‘spina bifida occulta’ were once used to refer 
to open spinal dysraphism (OSD) and closed spinal dysraphism 
(CSD), respectively but have been progressively 
discarded. 
Myelomeningoceles and myeloceles are characterized 
by exposure of the placode through a midline defect in 
the back. In myelomeningoceles, expansion of the underlying 
subarachnoid space results in elevation of the placode 
above the cutaneous surface (open spina bifida with 
a dorsal cyst), whereas in myeloceles, the placode is flush 
with the cutaneous surface. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Both myelomeningoceles 
and myeloceles originate from defective closure of the 
primary neural tube, with persistence of a segment of 
non-neurulated placode. Most are located at the lumbosacral 
level, and the placode is terminal. Since neurulation 
does not occur, the cutaneous ectoderm does not 
detach from the neural ectoderm and remains in a lateral 
position. This results in a midline skin defect. 
Therefore, the external surface of the placode is directly 
visible on inspection. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis 
of spina bifida associated with a myelomeningocele or 
meningocele is based on the recognition of direct and 
indirect sonographic signs. In fact, the detection rate of 
this anomaly has greatly increased in recent decades 
56 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SPINA BIFIDA 
Incidence. 1 in 1000 at birth. Higher prevalence in Whites than African-Americans or Asians, and in Hispanics. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most cases are detected thanks to the indirect signs, including lemon sign, banana sign, and 
effacement of the cisterna magna. Ventriculomegaly can be associated. Direct signs best detectable on axial planes, 
are ‘C’ or ‘U’ shape of the affected vertebra, which is due to absence of the dorsal arches; an interruption of the 
cutaneous contour with/without a meningocele is commonly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: 8–16%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The 5-year mortality rate is about 35%, with 20% dying during the first 12 months of life. As far as the 
motor function of the lower limbs is concerned, cases are evenly spread between complete paralysis, partial 
paralysis, need for robust rehabilitation, and almost normal limb function. 
SPINAL DISRAPHISM 
Spinal cord malformations are collectively named 
spinal dysraphisms. They arise from defects occurring 
in the early embryologic stages of gastrulation (weeks 
2–3), primary neurulation (weeks 3–4), and secondary 
neurulation (weeks 5–6). Spinal dysraphisms are categorized 
into open spinal dysraphisms (OSDs), in 
which there is exposure of abnormal nervous tissues 
through a skin defect, and closed spinal dysraphisms 
(CSDs), in which there is complete skin coverage of the 
underlying malformation. OSDs basically include 
myelomeningocele and other rare abnormalities such 
as myelocele and hemimyelo(meningo)cele.40 CSDs are 
further categorized based on the association with low 
spinal subcutaneous masses. CSDs with mass are represented 
by lipomyelocele, lipomyelomeningocele, 
meningocele, and myelocystocele.40 Closed CSDs without 
mass comprise simple dysraphic states and complex 
dysraphic states. The latter category further 
comprises defects of midline notochordal integration 
(basically represented by diastematomyelia) and 
defects of segmental notochordal formation (represented 
by caudal agenesis and spinal segmental dysgenesis). 
With OSD, there is a leakage of cerebrospinal 
fluid within the amniotic cavity and the ensuing 
hypotension of subarachoid spaces triggers a cascade 
of events which eventually results in Chiari II malformation. 
In CSD there is no loss of cerebrospinal fluid 
and the cranial anatomy is normal. 
of cerebral tissue in the herniated sack, and on any association 
with hydrocephaly or microcephaly or other extracranial 
pathologies. The postnatal mortality rate varies from 
30% to 50%, depending on the above-mentioned parameters. 
Meningocele and an anterior (frontal) location are 
associated with lower mortality rates (10–25%). 

thanks to the discovery that indirect signs are present 
in most cases of spina bifida.41 
Indirect signs. There is a constant association between 
OSDs and the Chiari II malformation, a congenital hindbrain 
anomaly characterized by a small posterior fossa 
with caudal displacement of the vermis, brainstem, 
and fourth ventricle. Indirect signs, which have been 
described for the Chiari II malformation earlier in this 
chapter, are the lemon sign (typical deformation of the 
frontal bone), the banana sign (abnormal anterior curvature 
of the cerebellar hemispheres), obliteration of the 
cisterna magna, and a hypoplastic posterior cranial 
fossa. Obliteration of the cisterna magna is the most 
sensitive sign, with the percentage of false positives being 
close to zero. In addition, a degree of ventriculomegaly is 
present in most cases of spina bifida: it is usually mild to 
moderate in the 2nd trimester and worsens in the 3rd 
trimester, when 80–90% of fetuses with spina bifida will 
show moderate to severe ventriculomegaly. 
Direct signs. Sonographic assessment of the fetal spine 
is rather difficult even today, being strongly dependent 
upon the position of the fetus in utero. Direct sonographic 
recognition of the spinal defect requires systematic 
examination, in the axial and midsagittal 
planes, of each neural arch, from the cervical to the 
sacral region. The sonographic signs of an open spina 
bifida include: interruption of the cutaneous contour 
at the level of the affected vertebrae, evident both on 
axial and midsagittal planes; on axial views, the 
affected vertebra has a ‘C’ or ‘U’ shape, which is due 
to absence of the dorsal arches (Figure 2.49a); in addition, 
on coronal views, the lateral processes appear 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 57 
Figure 2.49 Spina bifida. (a) Photograph of a fetus with spina bifida. (b) Maximum-mode rendering of the spine demonstrates lateral splaying 
of the lateral vertebral processes, with widening of the spinal canal (arrows). (c) Axial scan of the lumbosacral spine demonstrating the 
open vertebra (arrows) and membranous coverage of the meningocele. (d) Longitudinal view of the lumbar spine showing the bulging membranes 
of the myelomeningocele (arrows). 
a b 
c d 

58 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
SACROCOCCYGEAL TERATOMA 
Incidence. 1 in 40 000 at birth. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Large mass arising from the sacrococcygeal area. It can be completely cystic, solid or have 
mixed echostructure. The tumor may have also an intrapelvic component. Signs of heart failure are frequently 
associated: hydrops, cardiomegaly, polyhydramnios, subcutaneous edema. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The perinatal mortality rate is 30–40%. Poorer prognosis is associated with solid, malignant, and large 
tumors. 
widely separated (Figure 2.49b). Diagnosis is easier if 
a myelomeningocele (Figure 2.49a,c) is associated, 
while it may be difficult if the sac is absent. The midsagittal 
plane can be used for an adequate evaluation 
of the craniocaudal extension of the defect and to 
assess the dimensions of the myelomeningocele (Figure 
2.49c,d). Coronal views show the separation of the 
lateral processes. It should be underlined that sonographic 
recognition of the level and type of the lesion 
is useful in the assessment of the motor outcome of 
fetuses with OSD and helps counseling regarding the 
functional prognosis for this condition. 
The prenatal detection rate of CSD is decidedly lower, 
due to the absence of indirect signs. However, the prognosis 
of CSD is significantly better than that of OCD, 
with most cases of occult spina bifida being discovered 
incidentally after birth. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes sacrococcygeal 
teratoma, in which the indirect signs related to 
the posterior cranial fossa are absent and where the 
absence of a vertebral cleft can be demonstrated on a 
careful scan of the spine. 
• Associated anomalies. There is a constant association 
between OSDs and the Chiari II malformation which 
are part of the same malformative sequence. Clubfoot 
may develop in a significant percentage of cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is 8–16%. 
Obstetric management. The occurrence of associated 
anomalies should be excluded. Fetal karyotyping may 
be indicated in the presence of associated anomalies. 
Delivery by cesarean section is recommended to avoid 
any trauma to the myelomeningocele during transit 
through the birth canal, although this indication is still 
controversial. 
Postnatal treatment. Before surgery, care must be 
paid to covering the defect for ensuring complete asepsis. 
Ulceration of the placode and infection are responsible 
for a high mortality in untreated newborns. Therefore, 
these patients are operated on soon after birth. 
Hydrocephalus is a common occurrence after surgical 
correction, and requires placement of a ventriculoperitoneal 
shunt. The frequent urinary tract infections 
should be carefully treated with the antibiotics of choice. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In OSD, neurologic 
compromise is the consequence of hydrocephalus due to 
the Chiari II malformation, and of an abnormal differentiation 
and development of neural cord, resulting in varibale 
degrees of motor paralysis to the lower limbs and 
incontinence. The 5-year mortality rate is about 35%, 
with 20% dying during the first 12 months of life. As far 
as the motor function of the lower limbs is concerned, 
cases are evenly spread between complete paralysis, partial 
paralysis, a need for robust rehabilitation, and almost 
normal limb function. In general, the neurologic prognosis 
depends on the entity and the level of the lesion, the 
involvement of nervous tissue (myelomeningocele), and 
the severity of associated hydrocephalus. Lower spinal 
lesions and smaller ventricular sizes are associated with 
better ambulatory status compared with higher lesions 
and large ventricular sizes. A large study of outcome predictors 
showed that the pattern of neurological deficit 
appears to depend on the level of the lesion.42 Bowel and 
bladder incontinence, hindbrain dysfunction, and intellectual 
and psychological disturbances are also frequently 
associated. To improve this relatively rather poor outcome, 
intrauterine surgery was proposed for these lesions 
some years ago. However, the results are still controversial. 
In CSD, there is usually a much lesser involvement of 
the neurl cord, and the chiari II malformation does not 
develop; the outcome is good with neurologic symptoms 
of significant entity present only in a minority of cases. 

Definition. The sacrococcygeal teratoma is a neoplasm 
thought to arise from the pluripotent cells of Hensen’s 
node, which is located anterior to the coccyx. Since the 
cells of this node migrate into the embryo’s tail during 
the 1st postconceptual week, this theory may explain 
why teratomas arise more frequently in the lower spinal 
area than in other parts of the body. The most widely 
accepted classification43 recognizes the following four 
subtypes, according to the extension of the tumor: type 1 
are predominantly external, with minimal presacral 
component; type 2 are predominantly external, with significant 
presacral component; type 3 are predominantly 
internal, with abdominal extension; and type 4 are 
entirely internal, with no external component. The first 
two subtypes account for more than 80% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sacrococcygeal teratomas appear 
as large masses arising from the sacrococcygeal area. In 
general, the cases described in the fetus attain very large 
sizes and are mainly external. The echogenicity of the 
tumor may vary according to the component – from 
densely hyperechoic with sparse calcifications to completely 
cystic. Care should be taken in searching for an 
intrapelvic component, which may be difficult to identify 
due to bowel echogenicity (Figure 2.50). On color 
Doppler, high vascularization is usually detected in solid 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 59 
S-C 
TERAT 
IVC 
Figure 2.50 Sacrococcygeal teratoma. 
(a) Large solid teratoma (28 weeks’ gestation) 
causing high-output cardiac failure. 
Note the dilatation of the inferior 
vena cava (IVC, arrows) draining the 
large vascular bed of the tumor. 
(b) Specimen showing a very large 
tumor and the associated hydrops (subcutaneous 
edema). (c) Another case of 
prevalently cystic sacrococcygeal teratoma: 
fetus after termination of pregnancy 
at 22 weeks’ gestation. 
a
b c 

tumors. Signs of heart failure are frequently associated 
with solid and large tumors: hydrops, cardiomegaly, 
polyhydramnios, and subcutaneous edema. 
• Prognostic indicators. These include a prevalently 
solid tumor, because of its strong association with 
high-output heart failure and hydrops (Figure 2.50b) 
and its higher malignant potential; large size, for the 
same reason; and a rapid growth rate, which is associated 
with malignant tumors and cardiac failure. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should be made only for 
small tumors with other possible masses located in 
the sacral area, including lipomas and neural tube 
defects. In the latter, the spine is abnormal, whereas 
lipomas tend to be strictly associated with the lower 
spinal elements. 
• Association with other malformations. Up to 25% of 
cases described postnatally are reported to be associated 
with other malformations, without any particular 
organ system being preferentially involved. However, 
prenatally diagnosed cases do not appear to show the 
same relatively high risk of association, and the only 
frequent finding is hydrops from high-output cardiac 
failure. 
Obstetric management. Should a sacrococcygeal teratoma 
be diagnosed in a fetus, a thorough search for 
other possibly associated malformations should be 
performed by an expert. Fetal echocardiographic monitoring 
is indicated to assess the potential and stage of 
high-output cardiac failure, especially with solid tumors. 
Termination of pregnancy is an option, considering the 
poor prognosis of large and solid tumors and/or if cardiac 
failure (hydrops) is associated. Delivery should take 
place in a tertiary referral center in order to provide adequate 
neonatal management. A cesarean section is 
always indicated in the case of solid and large tumors 
due to the high risk of soft tissue dystocia. A few 
attempts at reducing the vascular bed prenatally, with 
radiofrequency or laser coagulation, have been reported, 
but there was a high toll in terms of fetal deaths, and 
therefore this approach is currently not considered a 
valid therapeutic option. 
Postnatal therapy. This consists of resection of the external 
and internal components of the tumor. 
Prognosis, survival and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
is guarded, with a 30–40% neonatal mortality 
rate, which is mainly due to hydrops from cardiac failure. 
There is also a consistent intrauterine mortality, for 
the same reasons. The only indicators of good outcome 
are represented by small mainly cystic tumors, which are 
also predominantly benign. 
60 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
REFERENCES 
1. Filly RA, Cardoza JD, Goldstein RB, Barkovich AJ. Detection of 
fetal central nervous system anomalies: a practical level of effort 
for a routine sonogram. Radiology 1989; 172: 403–8. 
2. Reece EA, Goldstein I. Three-level view of fetal brain imaging in 
the prenatal diagnosis of congenital anomalies. J Matern Fet Med 
1999; 8: 249–52. 
3. Nyberg DA. Reccomendations for obstetric sonography in the 
evaluation of the fetal cranium. Radiology 1989; 172: 309–11. 
4. Toi A, Lister WS, Fong KW. How early are fetal cerebral sulci 
visible at prenatal ultrasound and what is the normal pattern of 
early fetal sulcal development? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 706–15. 
5. Malinger G, Lerman-Sagie T, Watemberg N, et al. A normal 
second trimester ultrasound does not exclude brain pathology. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 51–6. 
6. Timor-Tritsch IE, Monteagudo A. Transvaginal fetal neurosonography: 
standardization of the planes and sections by 
anatomic landmarks. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 8: 
42–7. 
7. D’Addario V, Pinto V, Di Cagno L, et al. The midsagittal view 
of the fetal brain: a useful landmark in recognizing the cause 
of fetal cerebral ventriculomegaly. J Perinat Med 2005; 33: 423–7. 
8. Babcook C, Chong B, Salamat M, et al. Sonographic anatomy of 
the developing cerebellum: normal embryology can resemble 
pathology. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1996; 166: 427–33. 
9. Pilu G, Hobbins J. Sonography of fetal cerebrospinal anomalies. 
Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 321–30. 
10. Malinger G, Ginath S, Lerman-Sagie T, et al. The fetal cerebellar 
vermis: normal development as shown by transvaginal ultrasound. 
Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 687–92. 
11. Girard N, Gire C, Mancini J, et al. Ventriculomegaly. J Neuroradiol 
2002; 29: 1S8. 
12. Signorelli M, Tiberti A, Valseriati D. Width of the fetal lateral 
ventricular atrium between 10 and 12 mm: a simple variation of 
the norm? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 14–18. 
13. Stevenson RE, Hall JG, Goodman RM. In: Stevenson RE, 
Hall JG, Goodman RM eds. Human Malformations and 
Related Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1993: 
2975–3012. 
14. Kelly EN, Allen VM, Seaward G, et al. Mild ventriculomegaly 
in the fetus, natural history associated findings and outcome of 
isolated mild ventriculomegaly: a literature review. Prenat Diagn 
2001; 21: 697–700. 
15. Twining P, Jaspan T, Zuccollo J. The outcome of fetal ventriculomegaly. 
Br J Radiol 1994; 67: 26–31. 
16. Wilhelm C, Keck C, Hess S, et al. Ventriculomegaly diagnosed by 
prenatal ultrasound and mental development of the children. 
Fetal Diagn Ther 1998; 13: 163–6. 
17. Garel C. Ventricular dilatation. In: Garel C, ed. MRI of the Fetal 
Brain. Normal Development and Cerebral Pathologies. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. 2004: 201–16. 
18. Lewis AJ, Simon EM, Barkovich AJ, et al. Middle interhemispheric 
variant of holoprosencephaly: a distinct cliniconeuroradiologic 
subtype. Neurology 2002; 59: 1860–5. 

19. Barkovich AJ. Congenital malformations of the brain and skull. 
In: Pediatric Neuroimaging, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincot 
Williams & Wilkins. 2000: 251–381. 
20. Gentile M, Volpe G, Volpe P. Genetics of brain malformations. 
Ultrasound Rev Obstet Gynecol 2003; 3: 97–103. 
21. Bernard JP, Drummond CL, Zaarour P, et al. A new clue to the 
prenatal diagnosis of lobar holoprosencephaly: the abnormal 
pathway of the anterior cerebral artery crawling under the skull. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 19: 605–7. 
22. Pilu G, Sandri F, Perolo A, et al. Sonography of fetal agenesis of 
the corpus callosum: a survey of 35 cases. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1993; 3: 318–29. 
23. Maheut-Lourmiere J, Paillet C. Prenatal diagnosis of anomalies 
of the corpus callosum with ultrasound: the echographists’s point 
of view. Neurochirurgie 1998; 44(Suppl 1): 85–92. 
24. Volpe P, Paladini D, Resta M, et al. Characteristics, associations 
and outcome of partial agenesis of the corpus callosum in 
the fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 27: 509–16. 
25. Moutard ML, Kieffer V, Feingold J, et al. Agenesis of corpus 
callosum: prenatal diagnosis and prognosis. Childs Nerv Syst 
2003; 19: 471–6. 
26. Shevell MI. Clinical and diagnostic profile of agenesis of the 
corpus callosum. J Child Neurol 2002; 17: 896–900. 
27. Pilu G, Segata M, Ghi T, et al. Diagnosis of midline anomalies of 
the fetal brain with three-dimensional median view. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 522–9. 
28. Volpe P, Volpe G, Gentile M. Sonography of fetal posterior fossa 
abnormalities. Ultrasound Rev Obstet Gynecol 2003; 3: 97–103. 
29. Paladini D, Volpe P. Posterior fossa and vermian morphometry in 
the characterization of fetal cerebellar abnormalities: a prospective 
three-dimensional ultrasound study. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 482–9. 
30. Tortori-Donati P, Fondelli MP, Rossi A, et al. Cystic malformations 
of the posterior cranial fossa originating from a defect of the 
posterior membranous area. Mega cisterna magna and persisting 
Blake’s pouch: two separate entities. Childs Nerv Syst 1996; 12: 
303–8. 
31. Barkovich AJ, Kjos BO, Norman D, et al. Revised classification 
of posterior fossa cysts and cystlike malformations based on the 
results of multiplanar MR imaging. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1989; 
153: 1289–300. 
32. Tortori Donati P, Rossi A, Biancheri R. Brain malformations. In: 
Tortori-Donati ed. Pediatric Neuroradiology. Berlin: Springer- 
Verlag. 2005: 121–98. 
33. Klein O, Pierre-Kahn A, Boddaert N, Parisot D, Brunelle F. 
Dandy–Walker malformation: prenatal diagnosis and prognosis. 
Childs Nerv Syst 2003; 19: 484–9. 
34. Adamsbaum C, Moutard ML, Andre C, et al. MRI of the fetal 
posterior fossa. Pediatr Radiol 2005; 35: 124–140. 
35. D’Addario V, Pinto V, Del Bianco A, et al. The clivus–sovraocciput 
angle: a useful measurement to evaluate the shape and size of the 
fetal posterior fossa and to diagnose Chiari II malformation. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001; 18: 146–9. 
36. Barkovich AJ, Kuzniecky RI, Jackson GD, et al. A developmental 
and genetic classification for malformations of cortical development. 
Neurology. 2005; 65: 1873–87. 
37. Goldstein I, Reece EA, Pilu G, et al. Sonographic assessment of 
the fetal frontal lobe: A potential tool for prenatal diagnosis of 
microcephaly. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1988; 158: 1057–62. 
38. Toi A, Lister WS, Fong KW. How early are fetal cerebral sulci 
visible at prenatal ultrasound and what is the normal pattern of 
early fetal sulcal development? Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 706–15. 
39. Fong KW, Ghai S, Toi A, et al. Prenatal ultrasound findings of 
lissencephaly associated with Miller–Dieker syndrome and comparison 
with pre- and postnatal magnetic resonance imaging. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 716–23. 
40. Rossi A, Biancheri R, Cama A, et al. Imaging in spine and spinal 
cord malformations. Eur J Radiol 2004; 50: 177–200. 
41. Nicolaides KH, Campbell S, Gabbe SG. Ultrasound screening for 
spina bifida: cranial and cerebellar signs. Lancet 1986; ii: 72–4. 
42. Cochrane DD, Wilson RD, Steinbok P, et al. Prenatal spinal 
evaluation and functional outcome of patients born with 
myelomeningocele: information for improved prenatal counselling 
and outcome prediction. Fetal Diagn Ther 1996; 11: 159–68. 
43. Altman RP, Randolph JG, Lilley JR. Sacrococcygeal teratoma: 
American Academy of Pediatrics Surgical Section Survey. J Pediatr 
Surg 1974; 9: 389–98. 
CENTRAL AND PERIPHERAL NERVOUS SYSTEM ANOMALIES 61 

The fetal face represents one of the key anatomic regions 
from both a psychological and a clinical standpoint. 
Observing the fetal face on the screen of the scanner 
plays a central role in the development of materno-fetal 
bonding, especially with recent developments in threedimensional 
ultrasound. In addition, it has to be considered 
that a significant number of chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromes are associated with major 
and/or minor anomalies of the face. Finally, the high social 
and cosmetic impact of isolated anomalies of the face, such 
as microphthalmia or micrognathia, is extremely important. 
All of these factors, together with the difficulties posed by 
ultrasound examination of an irregularly shaped anatomic 
region such as the fetal face, contribute to make the fetal face 
one of the most difficult and delicate areas to explore. 
Timing of examination. The ultrasound appearance of the 
fetal face varies significantly throughout gestation, owing 
to the progressive accumulation of adipose tissue, especially 
at the level of the maxilla and the chin. This explains 
why the fetal face appears extremely thin and bony until 
23–24 weeks; thereafter, the facial features will progressively 
smooth to acquire individual features in the 3rd 
trimester (30–32 gestational weeks) (Figures 3.1 and 3.2). 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). As 
already mentioned, the fetal face represents an 
extremely irregular region to explore with ultrasound, 
if compared with regular geometric shapes such as the 
fetal cranium or limbs. This is why ultrasound examination 
of the fetal face has always posed significant 
problems in all attempts at a standardization of the 
ultrasound approach.1,2 To overcome the above-mentioned 
significant limitations, it is necessary to have in 
mind an extremely detailed mental replica of the spatial 
position of the fetal face in relation to the limbs 
and the uterine cavity. With these significant limitations, 
we report below the reference scanning planes, 
classified as axial, coronal, sagittal, and oblique, and 
the anatomic structures assessable in each of these 
Chapter 3 
Craniofacial and neck anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE FACE AND NECK: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 3.1 Fetal profile at different gestational ages – 2D imaging. The progressive increase in subcutaneous fat is responsible for the significant 
changes in the sharpness of the facial features: (a) 12 gestational weeks; (b) 20 gestational weeks; (c) 32 gestational weeks. 
63 
a b c 

views. Furthermore, it has to be underlined that the 
actual movements required for the hand holding the 
transducer to switch from one plane to the other are 
quite subtle and consist mainly of rotational and/or 
sweeping movements. With regard to the possible 
approaches, we should underscore the significant role 
played by ultrasound physics in obtaining a clear and 
artifact-free image: the better displayed structures are 
those at 90° to the insonating beam. Thus, for example, 
if the orbits are displayed with a ventral approach, 
the lens and the orbicular muscles will be better 
imaged; on the contrary, with a lateral approach, the 
bony orbits, and their lateral and medial aspects, with 
the ethmoid between, will be the structures displayed 
in the clearest way. Considering that the fetal face 
comprises the anterior part of the head, then the feasible 
approaches are reduced to lateral and ventral 
(anterior). As already mentioned, the ultrasound 
planes usually employed in the assessment of the fetal 
face are the axial, coronal, sagittal and oblique ones. 
The different views will be described separately afterwards. 
However, they are shown by scanning plane 
(axial, sagittal, coronal, oblique) in figures 3.3 and 
3.4. Since the anomaly scan is carried out in most 
countries between 18 and 22 weeks of gestation, all 
ultrasound planes described and illustrated below 
refer to fetuses examined in that gestational age range, 
unless otherwise specified. 
1. Axial views. The following ultrasound planes are 
shown in Figure 3.3: 
(i) orbits – lateral approach (Figure 3.5) 
(ii) orbits – ventral approach (Figure 3.6) 
(iii) base of the orbits/upper maxilla – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.7) 
(iv) lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.8) 
(v) tongue/pharynx – ventral approach (Figure 3.9) 
(vi) mandible/inferior alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach (Figure 3.10a) 
(vii) mandibular bone – ventral approach 
(Figure 3.10b) 
(viii) thyroid – ventral approach (Figure 3.11) 
2. Sagittal views. The two reference planes are: 
(i) facial profile – midline sagittal (Figure 3.13) 
(ii) ear – parasagittal (lateral) (Figure 3.14) 
3. Coronal views. The following ultrasound planes are 
shown in Figure 3.4: 
(i) face (Figure 3.15) 
(ii) palate (Figure 3.16) 
4. Oblique views. The following ultrasound planes are 
also shown in Figure 3.4: 
(i) lips (Figure 3.17) 
(ii) palate (Figure 3.18) 
64 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.2 Fetal profile at different 
gestational ages – three-dimensional 
imaging. The progressive increase in 
subcutaneous fat is responsible for the 
significant changes in the sharpness of 
the facial features: (a) 12 gestational 
weeks; (b) 20 gestational weeks; (c) 32 
gestational weeks. 
a 
b 
c 

CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 65 
Figure 3.3 Axial ultrasound views for the assessment of the splanchnocranium. This figure illustrates the level of the scanning plane and 
the corresponding two-dimensional ultrasound image. All views are illustrated in detail in Figures 3.5–3.11. 

66 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.4 Coronal and oblique ultrasound views for the assessment of the splanchnocranium. This figure illustrates the level of the 
scanning plane and the corresponding two-dimensional ultrasound image. All views are illustrated in detail in Figures 3.15–3.18. 

Orbits (lateral approach) and related malformations 
(Figure 3.5). This represents the classic view for the 
assessment of the bony orbits and the measurement of the 
binocular and interocular diameters. The corresponding 
nomograms are given in the Appendix.3 With reference to 
this view, and its corresponding drawing in Figure 3.3, it 
has to be underscored that, notwithstanding the fact that 
this view can also be achieved as a perfectly axial plane, it 
is common practice to obtain it with a minimal rotation 
of the transducer end that insonates the anterior aspect of 
the fetal head, starting from the axial transthalamic view; 
hence, in practice, the view used for the assessment of 
the orbits with a lateral approach represents a slightly 
oblique view of the fetal head (Figure 3.3). As is evident 
from Figure 3.5, in this plane, the lateral and median 
aspects of the orbits are clearly visible, which allows 
correct measurement of binocular and interocular diameters. 
It should be underlined that the above-mentioned 
biometry does not represent an integral part of the 
biometric assessment commonly carried out as part of the 
mid-trimester scan in all countries; in some, only the visualization 
of the orbits, but not their biometric assessment, 
is required. However, orbital biometry should be checked 
whenever there is a suspect of orbital malformations 
such as hypertelorism, hypotelorism, or microphthalmia. 
The orbital malformations that can be suspected and 
diagnosed on this view are as follows: 
• Microphthalmia/anophthalmia: complete absence or 
severe hypoplasia on one or both orbits 
• Hypertelorism/hypotelorism: increased/reduced interocular 
distance, with orbits of normal or abnormal 
dimensions 
• Macrophthalmia: increased orbital diameter, usually 
bilateral 
On the basis of what has been said about ultrasound 
physics and insonation, it is useful to stress that the eye 
bulbs, regardless of how normal or abnormal they may 
appear on this view, should be electively assessed on the 
ventral approach view (see below). On the contrary, the 
orbital anomalies reported above can also be detected on 
the ventral approach view. We have decided to describe 
the two views separately, in order to underscore the different 
accuracy with which the soft and hard tissues of 
the bony orbit and ocular bulb are displayed in each. 
Orbits (ventral approach) and related malformations 
(Figure 3.6). As has been said, this view should be sought 
to assess the intraocular soft tissues, the lenses, and the 
posterior walls of the orbits, constituted mainly by the 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 67 
FACIAL ANOMALIES BY SCANNING VIEW 
Figure 3.5 Axial view of the orbits – lateral approach. The lateral 
walls of the orbits and the midline structures (ethmoid) are clearly 
displayed. The lenses are not always visible on this view. 
Figure 3.6 Axial view of the orbits – 
ventral approach. Both lenses and the 
whole of the eye bulb are clearly 
depicted (arrows). Posteriorly, the 
back of the bony orbit, which is 
accounted for by the sphenoid, can be 
seen (arrowheads). (a) Two-dimensional 
imaging. (b) Three-dimensional 
surface rendering. 
a b 

anterior aspect of the sphenoidal wings. The lenses will 
appear as small echogenic circular structures within the 
eyes (Figure 3.6). Consequently, this represent the elective 
approach for the diagnosis of lens opacities and 
cataracts, microphthalmia, and arhinia. The orbital malformations 
that can be suspected and diagnosed on this 
view are as follows: 
• Cataract: partial/complete opacity of one or both 
lenses 
• Aphakia: congenital absence of the lens 
• Arhinia: absence of the nose (bones and soft tissues, 
nostrils included) 
• Microphthalmia/anophthalmia: complete absence or 
severe hypoplasia on one or both orbits 
• Hypertelorism/hypotelorism: increased/reduced interocular 
distance, with orbits of normal or abnormal 
dimensions 
• Macrophthalmia: increased orbital diameter, usually 
bilateral 
Base of the orbits/upper maxilla and related malformations. 
This view corresponds to an axial plane at the 
level of the lower rim of the orbits, which consists of the 
upper part of the maxillary bones (Figure 3.7). In fact, 
the malformations evident in this view only are very rare 
and consist of dacriocistocele (obstruction and enlargement 
of the lacrimal duct) and extremely rare cases of 
malar hypoplasia, which is one of the features of the 
EEC (ectrodactlyly–ectodermal dysplasia) syndrome. 
Lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge and related malformations. 
This plane cuts through the hard palate and the 
upper alveolar ridge, allowing the best possible view 
of the latter structure (Figure 3.8). Consequently, this 
view should be electively sought in order to assess 
the extent of the bony defect in case of cleft lip/palate. 
It is important to underline that isolated cleft lip 
(without associated cleft palate) can also be detected 
on this ultrasound plane, with the upper lip too being 
evident on this view. 
Tongue/pharynx and related malformations. If the transducer 
is moved caudally a few millimeters, the region of 
the mouth is displayed, with the tongue in the middle 
and the oropharynx posteriorly, in the prevertebral area 
(Figure 3.9). Therefore, in this view, the tongue diameters4 
can be measured in order to arrive at a diagnosis of 
macro- or microglossia. 
Mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone and 
related malformations. The axial view of the mandible 
allows, with minor angling movements of the transducer, 
display of the lower alveolar ridge (Figure 3.10a) and, 
68 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.7 Base of the orbits–upper maxilla – ventral approach. 
Both zygomatic bones, which continue posteriorly in the orbital 
bases, can be seen (arrows).
Figure 3.8 Lower maxilla/upper 
alveolar ridge – ventrial approach. The 
alveoli of the upper teeth are positioned 
symmetrically in relation to the midline 
and the maxillary sinuses. In front of 
the upper alveolar ridge, the upper lip, 
displayed cross-sectionally, is visible 
(arrowheads). (a) Two-dimensional 
imaging. (b) Three-dimensional surface 
rendering. 
a b 

below it, the bony mandible with the symphisis on the 
midline and the two mandibular branches laterally 
(Figure 3.10b). Therefore, this view allows confirmation 
of a suspicion of micrognathia, possibly raised while 
assessing the fetal facial profile. In particular, measurement 
of the Jaw Index helps support the diagnosis of 
moderate micrognathia in uncertain cases. The Jaw Index 
is given by the ratio of the anteroposterior mandibular 
diameter to the biparietal diameter: values less than 23 
are indicative of micrognathia.5 
Thyroid and related malformations. This plane, which 
consists of an axial view of the fetal neck at the level of 
this gland, is relatively difficult to obtain, due to the 
fact that the operator has to wait for the fetus to 
extend the head lightly and to remain in that position 
to give a reliable display of the thyroid. In fact, with 
the fetal head in its most common position, acoustic 
shadowing of the mandible makes visualization of 
the thyroid impossible. With a compliant fetus, the 
thyroid, which surrounds the trachea, is seen in the 
center on the neck between the two jugular veins and 
carotid arteries, with the cervical vertebra posteriorly 
(Figure 3.11). 
Facial profile and related malformations (Figures 3.12 
and 3.13). This view, which represents an extremely 
important one to obtain in order to get an overall idea of 
the anatomic proportions of the fetal face, represents a 
midsagittal plane, as already pointed out. Its importance 
is due to the fact that in the same plane, the three regions 
of the face (forehead, eyes and nose, and mouth and chin) 
are displayed together. The irregularity and the extreme 
phenotypic variability of the lines that make up the 
human face do not lend themselves easily to the creation 
of nomograms expressing the harmony and the correct 
mathematical or geometric relationships of the various 
elements composing the facial profile, at least in the 
fetus.1 Consequently, the diagnosis of generic profile 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 69 
Figure 3.9 Tongue/pharynx – ventral 
approach. Just caudal to the upper alveolar 
ridge, the tongue (T) can be seen in 
the mouth. The oropharynx (arrows) is 
visualized posteriorly, in the prevertebral 
area. Lateral to the tongue, the 
two mandibuar rami are seen in crosssection 
(arrowheads). Anteriorly, the 
upper lip is visible only if the plane 
is obtained with the mouth shut. (a) 
Two-dimensional imaging. (b) Threedimensional 
surface rendering. 
Figure 3.10 Mandible and inferior alveolar ridge – ventral 
approach. (a) In the plane just below the tongue, the lower horseshoe-
shaped alveolar ridge can be seen. (b) In contrast, the bony 
mandible has an acute angle. The symphysis can be seen on the 
midline (arrow). 
a
a 
b 
b 

abnormalities, such as a sloping forehead or a wide nasal 
root, is mainly based on a subjective assessment. In this 
ultrasound plane, the following aspects can be recognized 
(Figure 3.13): the echogenic curved shape of the frontal 
bone, with the overlying hypoechoic line represented by 
the soft tissues; the nasal area, with the nasal bone(s) in 
the upper part and the soft tissue of the tip of the nose; 
part of the hard palate; the lips, with the upper lip protruding 
slightly over the lower one; and the chin with the 
bony mandible. It is useful to underline that, if the scanning 
view is perfectly on the midline, the insonating beam 
passes through the still open metopic suture, allowing a 
nice view of the brain, with the corpus callosum, the third 
ventricle, and the cerebellar vermis (Figure 3.13; and see 
Chapter 2). The major abnormalities detectable on this 
view are as follows (Figure 3.12): 
• Forehead, sloping forehead: due to the severe hypoplasia 
of the frontal lobes in microcephaly 
• Forehead, turricephaly: increased vertical diameter of 
the forehead, due to early closure of the sutures 
• Nose, arhinia: Absence of the nose (bones and soft tissues, 
nostrils included); midline defect, associated 
with the holoprosencephaly sequence 
• Nose, proboscis: midline soft tissue appendix, 
protruding from the nasal root area; midline defect, 
associated with the holoprosencephaly sequence 
• Mouth, bilateral cleft: Additional tissue on the 
philtrum, common in bilateral clefts 
• Mouth, macroglossia: increased volume of the 
tongue, usually protruding between the lips 
• Chin, micrognathia: hypoplasia of variable degree 
of the bony mandible, both in the anteroposterior 
diameter (retrognathia) and in the laterolateral one 
Ear and related malformations. The most lateral 
sagittal plane of the fetal head is that passing for the 
external ear, which can be insonated with delicate 
movements of the transducer (Figure 3.14). It is difficult 
to confirm a diagnosis of low-set ears, frequently 
associated with chromosomal abnormalities and nonchromosomal 
syndromes, but it is possible to confidently 
detect pre-auricular tags, which are also 
associated with rare syndromic conditions. However, 
it should be underlined that this parasagittal twodimensional 
view has been replaced by the threedimensional 
surface-rendering image of the fetal face, 
which is much more easily obtained and, as far as ear 
abnormalities are concerned, provides greater diagnostic 
accuracy as well (see Figure 3.32). 
Face (coronal) and related malformations. In this 
coronal view, the face is displayed en face, allowing 
an overall evaluation of the various anatomic structures 
(Figure 3.15). At the same time, this allows recognition of 
abnormally protruding anatomic structures, such as the 
eyes in the case of proptosis, bilateral cleft lip (additional 
tissue on the philtrum), or the tongue (macroglossia). 
Palate (coronal) and related malformations. As already 
pointed out, in this case, the depth of the cut is increased, 
displaying the bony palate (Figure 3.16). As a result, this 
view can be used to demonstrate a unilateral or bilateral 
cleft palate. 
Lips (oblique) and related malformations. Oblique tangential 
views of the lips and palate are of fundamental 
importance for the detection of the facial clefts and the 
abnormalities of the nostrils associated with the holoprosencephaly 
sequence (arhinia or single nostril). An 
oblique view of the lips allows assessment of the 
philtrum in the middle of the upper lip, its relationship 
with the nostrils, the lower lip, and, inferiorly, the chin 
(Figure 3.17). Therefore, this view allows diagnosis of 
single nostril, and median, unilateral, and bilateral 
clefts. 
Palate (oblique) and related malformations. This view is 
parallel but deeper in comparison with the previous one. 
It allows assessment of the upper alveolar ridge and, 
therefore, detection of defects of the hard palate and 
their relationships with the nasal cavity (Figure 3.18). 
The most significant malformations detectable on this 
view are as follows: 
70 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.11 Thyroid – ventral approach. In this plane, the thyroid 
(Th and horizontal arrows) appears as a weakly hyperechoic midline 
structure surrounding the trachea (Tr and oblique arrow). This 
appears as a small round sonolucent area. The two jugular veins 
can be seen laterally, adjacent to the horizontal arrows as small 
round sonolucent areas. Posteriorly, the vertebral body is visible. 

CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 71 
Normal 
Slanting 
forehead 
Turricephaly Proboscis 
Cleft Arhinia 
Macroglossia Micrognathia 
Figure 3.12 Summary of the most important anomalies of the fetal facial profile. A sloping head is typical of microcephaly. Proboscis and 
arhinia are associated with holoprosencephaly. Turricephaly, due to early closure of the coronal suture, is typical of Apert syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly). 
In the case of a bilateral cleft lip/palate, there is commonly additional tissue on the philtrum, which becomes evident 
on the midsagittal view of the facial profile. Mild macroglossia can be found in trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), whereas severe macroglossia 
is typical of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. Micrognathia is associated with trisomy 18 and with a considerable number of nonchromosomal 
syndromes (fetal akinesia derformation sequence (FADS), skeletal dysplasia, etc.). 

• single nostril: midline defect, associated with the 
holoprosencephaly sequence 
• median cleft: midline defect, associated with the 
holoprosencephaly sequence 
• unilateral cleft lip/palate: unilateral defect of the lip, 
alveolar ridge, and hard palate 
• bilateral cleft lip/palate: bilateral defect of the lip, the 
alveolar ridge, and hard palate, commonly associated 
with additional tissue on the philtrum 
72 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.13 Midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile. On this 
view, the following structures can be recognized: the frontal area, 
the nasal root, the nose with the nasal bone (arrow), the lips with 
the hard palate (hp) in cross-section, and the chin, with the 
mandible (M) in cross-section. It should be noted that if the view is 
perfectly on the midline, as in this case, the orbits cannot be seen, 
this being a symmetric organ. In addition, due to the yet-unossified 
metopic suture, the ultrasound beam penetrates deep in the fetal 
head, allowing a good view of the corpus callosum (CC) and the 
cerebellar vermis (V). 
Figure 3.14 Parasagittal view at the level of the external ear. This 
view, which is often difficult to obtain with two-dimensional ultrasound, 
allows visualization of the external ear, which is abnormal or 
wrinkled in some syndromic conditions. The whole anatomy of the 
external ear is visible. This image was obtained in a 29-week-old 
fetus. 
Figure 3.15 Coronal view of the face. (a) Normal fetus. (b) 
Syndromic fetus (22 weeks) with evident proptosis (arrows). 
a b 
Figure 3.16 Coronal view of the palate. This plane is cut slightly 
deeper than that in Figure 3.15, allowing recognition of the bony 
palate. 

Artefacts 
Orbits. Since the orbits are symmetric organs, care 
should be taken in obtaining a perfectly axial view. 
If this does not happen, a false-positive diagnosis of 
microphthalmia can be made (Figure 3.19). In such a circumstance, 
it is necessary to re-obtain the plane, making 
delicate sweeping and tilting movements, in order to 
achieve a correct symmetric positioning of the transducer 
to remove the artefact. 
Lips. If the umbilical cord lies close to the upper 
lip, this can sometimes create the false impression 
of a clefting (Figure 3.20a). In this case, the lips 
should be rechecked after a few minutes to allow the 
fetus to move. Alternatively, power Doppler (or color 
Doppler with a relatively low pulse repetition 
frequency) may be used to discriminate between 
the cord lying on the lips and a real cleft lip/palate 
(Figure 3.20b). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 73 
Figure 3.17 Oblique view of the lips. This represents the classic 
plane for the assessment of the lips in normal and abnormal conditions; 
the lips, the nose with the nostrils, and the chin are displayed. 
Figure 3.18 Oblique view of the palate. This plane is cut slightly 
deeper than that in Figure 3.17, allowing a view of the upper 
alveolar ridge with the hard palate (arrows). 
Figure 3.19 Artefact. A false-positive diagnosis of microphthalmia 
can be made if the plane for the visualization of the orbits 
is not perfectly axial. (a) One of the orbits (usually that distal to the 
transducer) appears smaller than the other (arrows). (b) It is sufficient 
to re-obtain the axial plane with a correct angle to remove the 
artifact (arrowheads). 
Figure 3.20 Artefact. A false-positive diagnosis of cleft lip/palate 
can be made if a cord loop is positioned in front of the lips. (a) The 
cord, lying vertically on the lips, can be mistaken for a cleft 
(arrows). (b) It is sufficient to wait for the fetus to move or, better, 
to switch on color/power Doppler to identify the umbilical blood 
flow and remove the artifact. 
a
a b 
b 

Premises. The fetal face is one of the anatomic regions 
that benefits more from a three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound 
approach, be this with multiplanar imaging or 
with surface rendering. In particular, the employment of 
3D ultrasound represents the best possible approach to 
the detailed characterization of craniofacial malformations, 
since this technique is able to effectively display 
anomalies both of the soft tissues and of the bony structures. 
This is why we deem it important to dedicate this 
part of the chapter to the description of the multiplanar 
and surface rendering images of immediate clinical utility. 
It should be recalled here that a general introduction 
to the 3D technique is presented in Chapter 1, where 
the procedure of volume acquisition and rendering is 
explained – hereinafter, only the details regarding the use 
of 3D ultrasound for the assessment of craniofacial 
anomalies are described. 
Lips and palate 
Multiplanar imaging. The multiplanar mode represents 
the best approach for a detailed assessment of normal 
and abnormal facial anatomy. The volume acquisition is 
usually carried out having as a reference two-dimensional 
plane the midsagittal view of the facial profile, described 
elsewhere in this chapter. However, if the region of 
interest is the oromandibular one, as in the case of facial 
clefting or micrognathia, the acquisition can also be 
advantageously made from an axial, ventral view of the 
face, at the level of the maxilla. Once the volume has been 
obtained, its study in multiplanar imaging allows a 
detailed evaluation of the bones and the soft tissues. For 
example, an acquisition obtained from the axial view 
at the level of the maxilla is shown in Figure 3.21. As is 
evident, the possibility to scroll the volume on one plane, 
checking how the views change on the other two planes, 
allows reliable identification of anatomic detail in normal 
and abnormal conditions. The utility of the multiplanar 
approach is demonstrated in Figure 3.22, obtained simply 
by rotating the image of the a window of Figure 3.21, 
in order to display the facial profile in a vertical, more 
familiar position. In the case of complex cleftings, the use 
of multiplanar imaging allows a careful assessment of the 
extent and subtype of the defect, thanks to the correlation 
among the three orthogonal planes. The aspects in multiplanar 
imaging of a normal fetus, a fetus with unilateral 
cleft lip/palate and a third with bilateral cleft lip/palate 
are shown in Figure 3.23–3.25: the features of the defects 
and their extent are evident. 
Surface rendering. Having completed the anatomic 
assessment on multiplanar imaging, it is possible to 
switch to the surface rendering mode, if the aim is the 
assessment of soft tissues (Figure 3.26 and 3.27a). If, 
however, the operator elects to study the bony structures, 
then the ‘maximum’ mode should be employed: 
this filter adds transparency to the superficial less 
echogenic tissues, letting the underlying bony skeleton 
show up (Figure 3.27b). Surface-rendering images of 
unilateral cleft lip/palate, bilateral cleft lip/palate, and 
isolated cleft lip are shown in Figures 3.28–3.30. 
In Figure 3.31, the maximum mode is used to 
74 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
THE ROLE OF 3D ULTRASOUND IN 
THE ASSESSMENT OF FACIAL ABNORMALITIES 
Figure 3.21 Multiplanar assessment of the face at 32 weeks’ 
gestation. This image demonstrates the possibility of navigating 
the volume on the three orthogonal planes. Positioning the caliper 
at the level of the upper alveoli on the sagittal view, in window a, 
the axial view of the alveolar ridge will appear in window b and 
the coronal view of the face in window c. 
Figure 3.22 Multiplanar assessment of the face. This image shows 
the same volume as in Figure 3.21: on simply rotating the image in 
window a by 90°, the images in windows b and c change accordingly. 
a b 
c
a b 
c 

demonstrate the bony cleft of the palate. Both rendering 
modes (surface and maximum) and multiplanar 
imaging can be advantageously employed during 
prenatal counseling sessions with the parents and for 
consultation with plastic surgeons. 
Ear 
Surface rendering. The external ear can, with some 
expertise, be imaged with 2D ultrasound, and there are 
reports in the literature of pre-auricular tags detected 
with this technique. However, we believe that 3D 
ultrasound and, above all, its surface-rendering mode, 
makes the assessment of the normal and abnormal 
external ear much easier and immediate.6 In addition, 
this approach allows to diagnose, with a good degree 
of accuracy, the occurrence of low-set ears, which represents 
a key feature in a significant number of chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal anomalies. The 3D 
appearances of a normal ear and of different ear abnormalities 
are shown in Figure 3.32. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 75 
Figure 3.23 Multiplanar assessment of the face: normal fetus. To 
adequately study the lips and the whole area of the mouth, it is useful 
to display the axial plane in window a. Positioning the caliper 
at the level of the upper alveoli, the integrity of the hard palate can 
be assessed on the coronal plane (window c). 
Figure 3.24 Multiplanar assessment of the face: unilateral cleft 
lip/palate (27 weeks’ gestation). In this case, on positioning the 
caliper at the level of the bony defect (arrow) in the axial plane 
(top left window), the abnormal communication between mouth 
and nose becomes visible in the coronal plane (lower left window), 
with the caliper at the level of the palatal defect. 
Figure 3.25 Multiplanar assessment of the face: bilateral cleft 
lip/palate (22 weeks’ gestation). Also in this case, on positioning 
the caliper in the midline, behind the median remaining part of the 
alveolar ridge, on the axial view (top left window), the additional tissue 
on the philtrum, characteristic of bilateral clefts, becomes visible 
in the sagittal plane (top right window–arrow), while the bilateral 
ample palatal defect is visible in the coronal plane (lower left 
window). 
Figure 3.26 Surface rendering of the normal fetal face (same 
volume as in Figures 3.21 and 3.22, 32 weeks’ gestation) – rendering 
mode for soft tissues (surface mode). The ROI (region of interest) 
box is positioned around the fetal face (arrowheads), with an adequate 
acoustic window, and on (b) the side of the green visualization 
bar is checked (arrows). In (R), the reconstructed three-dimensional 
image is displayed: this is a normal fetus of Afro-American origin. 
a 
a
c 
b 
c 
b a b 
c 

Cranial sutures and related abnormalities. The cranial 
sutures can be assessed only by 3D ultrasound, with the 
transparent maximum mode. The procedure and the 
appearance of normal and abnormal sutures is described 
at the end of this chapter. 
The fetal face 
Surface rendering. Three-dimensional reconstruction of 
the fetal face has unfortunately represented for years 
the key marketing asset of 3D ultrasound both among 
professionals and in the media.7 The number of articles 
76 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.27 Renderings for soft 
tissues and bones. (a) Surface-mode 
rendering allows display of the facial 
features (large nasal root, typical 
of the Afro-American population). 
(b) Maximum-mode rendering is used 
to assess the bones: the metopic suture, 
between the frontal bones, the hard 
palate, and the mandible are all clearly 
displayed. 
Figure 3.28 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
unilateral cleft lip/palate. 
This is the same case as in Figure 3.24 
(27 weeks’ gestation). The appearance 
of the face, with the distortion of 
the alae nasi, is similar to the aspect at 
birth. 
Figure 3.29 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
bilateral cleft lip/palate. This 
is the same case as in Figure 3.25 (22 
weeks’ gestation). Also in this case, the 
three-dimensional reconstruction of the 
bilateral cleft is similar to the autopsy 
finding. 
a b 

appearing in women’s magazines is almost comparable to 
the number of scientific publications in medical journals. 
The concept of fetomaternal bonding has been misused 
and abused in order to justify the wide use of 3D 
ultrasound. We have demonstrated above the clinical utility 
of such an approach in the characterization of fetal 
facial malformations, and we firmly believe that the clinical 
assessment of the abnormal fetus should be and should 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 77 
Figure 3.30 Surface-rendering reconstruction: 
unilateral cleft lip. In this 
syndromic fetus, the three-dimensional 
surface reconstruction (volume acquired 
at 32 weeks) allows detection of the 
small cleft of the lip. The alveolar ridge 
was unaffected. On the right, the 
neonate at birth. 
Figure 3.31 Maximum-mode rendering 
for the bones. The same volumes 
used for the images in Figures 3.24, 
3.25, and 3.27–3.29 are now processed 
with the maximum mode, in order to 
show the bony defects associated with 
cleft/palate (arrows): (a) normal palate 
(see Figure 3.27). (b) unilateral cleft 
lip/palate (see Figures 3.24 and 3.28); 
(c) bilateral cleft lip/palate (see Figures 
3.25 and 3.29); (d) large midline defect 
in a fetus with holoprosencephaly (21 
weeks’ gestation). 
a
c d
b 

remain the key motivation for the use of 3D ultrasound. 
‘Scanning for pleasure’, as Larry Platt8 has said, or producing 
nice views of fetal facial expressions, should not be 
considered as misuse – however, in our opinion, it should 
not be financially exploited without letting women know 
that fetal portraiture is not a medical procedure. 
78 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.32 Surface-rendering reconstruction: external ear. (a) Magnification of a normal ear at 32 weeks’ gestation. (b) Syndromic fetus: 
low-set ears with preauricular tag. (c) Syndromic fetus: low-set ears. (d) Syndromic fetus: low-set ears and facial dysmorphism. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Definition. Hypoplasia of variable degree of the bony 
orbit and the eye bulb. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Microphthalmia can be 
unilateral or bilateral. In both cases, it is often associated 
with severe chromosomal and non-chromosomal 
syndromes, the most common of which are described 
below. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the axial view 
of the orbits, regardless of the approach (lateral or 
ventral), as already described. The orbit appears small 
and hypoplastic – sometimes to such an extent that it 
is hard to identify them (Figures 3.33–3.35). In the case 
of moderate microphthalmia, the use of published 
nomograms3 (see the Appendix) may be of help in 
establishing the diagnosis. 
Note. In the case of misalignment of the ultrasound 
beam on the axial plane, a false-positive impression of 
microphthalmia can be created (see Figure 3.19). 
• Prognostic indicators. If the anomaly is bilateral, it is 
often syndromic and, as such, has a poorer prognosis. 
Isolated unilateral microphthalmia has a very high 
aesthetic impact and may or may not be associated 
with sight loss, according to the presence and functional 
status of the hypoplastic eye bulb. Aphakia 
(complete absence of the lens) may indicate complete 
absence of the eye bulb. 
• Association with other malformations. Microphthalmia 
is relatively often associated with cataract 
or lens opacity. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Microphthalmia 
is one of the most common features of trisomy 
ANOPHTHALMIA/MICROPHTHALMIA 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Reduced orbital diameter on the axial view of the orbits. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, COFS, Meckel–Gruber, Walker–Warburg. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. Significant aesthetic impact also for isolated cases. 
a b c d 

13 (in >50% of cases), especially if holoprosencephaly is 
also present. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with microphthalmia are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome (oculo-auriculo-vertebral 
spectrum, OAVS):9,10 look for . microphthalmia, 
unilateral + cleft lip/palate and hemifacial microsomia 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome:11 
look for . microphthalmia, bilateral + arthrogryposis 
and micrognathia (see Chapter 10) 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 79 
Figure 3.33 Bilateral microphthalmia 
(19 weeks’ gestation). (a) Ultrasound: 
in this fetus with trisomy 13, both 
orbits are severely hypoplastic. (b) 
Autopsy: the enophthalmos and sealed 
eyelids are evident. The eye bulbs were 
severely hypoplastic. Bilateral cleft 
lip/palate, which is frequently encountered 
in trisomy 13, is also evident. 
Figure 3.34 Unilateral microphthalmia 
plus cataract. (a) The severe 
hypoplasia of the left orbit, which 
is associated with a corneal opacity 
(arrowhead), is evident. (b) The autopsy 
confirms both ultrasound findings, i.e. 
unilateral microphthalmia and cataract. 
Figure 3.35 Bilateral microphthalmia (33 weeks’ gestation). (a) Two-dimensional ultrasound: on this axial view of the orbits, the orbital cavities 
are replaced by whitish areas (arrows) and there is no sign of the eye bulbs either. (b) Three-dimensional surface-rendering reconstruction 
of the fetal face showing the apparently sealed eyelid and the enophtalmos . (c) At birth: both eyelids appear sealed and there is no sign of either 
orbits or eyebulbs. 
a
a
a b
b c 
b 

• Walker–Warburg syndrome:12 look for . microphthalmia, 
bilateral + cataract, hydrocephaly, and 
Dandy–Walker malformation 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . microphthalmia, bilateral 
+ laryngeal atresia, cleft lip/palate, external ear 
anomalies, bilateral renal agenesis, and congenital 
heart disease (see Chapter 10) 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:12 look for . microphthalmia, 
bilateral + cephalocele, polycystic kidney, 
and polydactyly (see Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. Should microphthalmia be 
detected in a fetus, fetal karyotyping is mandatory in order 
to exclude chromosome 13 anomalies (trisomy and longarm 
deletion, del(13q)). In addition, a thorough anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert, in order to detect 
major and/or minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis 
of one of the above-mentioned syndromes. Obstetric care 
and mode and timing of delivery are unaffected. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the lesion is 
part of a syndrome, then overall survival is extremely 
poor, due to the severity of the above-mentioned syndromic 
conditions. On the other hand, in the case of 
isolated microphthalmia, the main problem, which may 
sometimes require cosmetic surgery only because of psychologic 
reasons, is the significant aesthetic impact 
related to the facial dysmorphic features. The lifespan is 
unaltered, while the quality of life depends upon the 
degree of visual compromise of the affected eye. 
80 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CATARACT 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Lens opacity, unilateral or bilateral, detected on the axial view of the orbits. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: COFS, Walker–Warburg, Neu–Laxova, chondrodysplasia 
punctata. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. Good outcome after surgery in non-syndromic cases. 
Definition. Partial or total opacity of the eye lens. It can 
be unilateral or bilateral. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Cataract is an extremely rare 
lesion in the fetus. It can be the effect of 1st trimester 
maternal infections (rubela) or be due to the underlying 
presence of a syndrome. Isolated, unilateral, nonsyndromic 
cases have also been described. In this regard, 
a recent population case–control study14 has found a 
positive correlation between maternal influenza/common 
cold/minor respiratory infections during early pregnancy 
and the occurrence of cataract in the fetus, but 
only if these minor illnesses were not treated with 
antifever drugs.14 These findings led the authors of the 
study to two conclusions: 1) that congenital non-syndromic 
cataract may be the result of transient maternal 
hyperhermia during organogenesis, and 2) that influenza 
vaccination and antifever therapy in common cold/ 
minor respiratory infections in early pregnancy may 
reduce the incidence of congenital non-syndromic 
cataract.14 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the axial 
view of the orbits, preferably with a ventral approach: at 
the level of one or both orbits, a hyperechogenic usually 
round area is seen, as already described earlier in this 
chapter (Figures 3.34 and 3.36). Numerous authors have 
demonstrated that the recognition of a lens opacity is 
undeniably associated with cataract, while the reverse is 
not always true: the absence of any hyperechogenicity 
within the orbit in fetuses at risk of cataract does not 
allow one to exclude its presence. 
• Prognostic indicators. Bilateral cataracts are usually 
of syndromic origin, and, as such, have a poorer prognosis. 
Conversely, isolated, unilateral cases are more 
commonly due to intrauterine infections; in these 
cases, the final outcome depends on the spread and 
severity of the infection. If the cataract is associated 
with microphthalmia, this is more indicative of a syndrome. 
The isolated forms, which are not always 
detectable in utero as they are not constantly associated 
with lens hyperechogenicities, have a significantly 
better prognosis. 
• Association with other malformations. Microphthalmia 
is the most frequently associated anomaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, 
especially for bilateral forms. The in utero detectable syndromes 
that can be associated with cataract are as follows: 
• Cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome:11 
look for . cataract + microphthalmia, (bilateral), 
arthrogryposis, and micrognathia 
• Walker–Warburg syndrome:12 look for . cataract + 
microphthalmia, hydrocephaly, and Dandy–Walker 
malformation 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:12 look for . cataract + 
microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
severe cerebellar hypoplasia, hypertelorism, micrognathia, 
short limbs, syndactyly, joint contractures, 
early-onset fetal growth retardation, and polyhydramnios 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Chondrodysplasia punctata:12 look for . cataract + 
symmetric rhizomelic limb shortening and epiphyseal 
calcifications 
Obstetric management. Should cataracts be detected in 
a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and/or minor signs 
possibly leading to the diagnosis of one of the abovementioned 
syndromes. Obstetric and delivery management 
should be changed accordingly. 
Postnatal therapy. This entails lens aspiration and the 
use of contact lens, bifocal spectacles, and occlusion 
therapy (of the other eye, to stimulate the aphakic one), 
followed at a later stage by placement of a posterior 
chamber intraocular lens, with the latter procedure still 
being controversial.15,16 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If additional 
anomalies and syndromes are absent, survival is unaffected 
and the quality of life unremarkable, although in 
selected cases visual axis reopacification can occur. In 
these cases, the intraocular lens should be replaced.16 
In syndromic cases, which are usually associated with 
microphthalmia, the perinatal mortality risk is extremely 
high, owing to the severe abnormalities that characterize 
the above-mentioned syndromes. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 81 
Figure 3.36 Bilateral cataract. In 
this case, bilateral cataract, detected at 
20 weeks’ gestation (a), was the only 
sonographically recognizable sign of a 
recurrent Walker–Warburg syndrome. 
(b) At autopsy the occurrence of bilateral 
cataracts was confirmed. Note the 
opaque aspect of the eye. 
HYPERTELORISM 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Increased (> 95th centile) interocular distance, often, but not always, associated with an 
increased binocular distance. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: frontonasal dysplasia, Neu–Laxova, median facial cleft syndrome, 
Apert syndrome. 
Outcome. Depends on the general clinical context. 
a b 

Definition. Increased (> 95th centile) interocular distance, 
often, but not always associated with an increased binocular 
distance. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Hypertelorism is rarely found 
in the fetus. Since embryologically the ocular structures 
develop laterally and then start to migrate towards the 
midline, to end up in their normal position, hypertelorism 
may be seen as a partial arrest in this migration process (as 
in the median facial cleft syndrome). Alternatively, it can 
be the result of an anterior cephalocele, which mechanically 
limits the migration process. Or it can be determined 
by anomalies in the development and growth of the 
cranial bones, as in Apert syndrome (see Chapter 10). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the axial 
view of the orbits, with a lateral or ventral approach. In 
the rare cases of severe hypertelorism, the diagnosis is 
straightforward and does not need to be confirmed with 
the measurement of the binocular and inter-ocular diameters. 
However, in most instances, the degree of hypertelorism 
is moderate or moderately severe (Figure 3.37). 
In these cases, the diagnosis of hypertelorism should 
always rely on the biometric assessment (binocular and 
interocular diameters > 95th centile). 
• Prognostic indicators. The recognition of a midline 
cystic structure, consistent with a diagnosis of an 
anterior cephalocele, represents a poor prognostic 
sign, since this anomaly is often associated with a 
bifid nose and median clefting (median facial cleft 
syndrome). The association with other abnormalities 
of the face and/or the central nervous system increases 
the syndromic risk exponentially. 
• Association with other malformations. There are no 
significant malformative clusters reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. There have 
been a few cases of trisomy 13 and rare chromosomal 
arrangements. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
in utero detectable syndromes that can be associated 
with hypertelorism are as follows: 
• Neu–Laxova:12 look for . hypertelorism + microcephaly, 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, severe cerebellar 
hypoplasia, cataract, micrognathia, short limbs, 
syndactyly, joint contractures, early-onset fetal growth 
retardation, and polyhydramnios (see Chapter 10) 
• Median facial cleft syndrome:12 look for . hypertelorism 
+ midline facial clefting and anomalies of the nose 
• Apert syndrome (acrocephalosyndactyly):12 look for 
. hypertelorism + turricephaly, macroglossia, syndactyly, 
fusion of cervical vertebrae, renal anomalies, 
and congenital heart disease (see Chapter 10) 
• Fronto-nasal dysplasia:17 look for . hypertelorism + 
anterior cephalocele, median cleft lip, and bifid 
nose 
Obstetric management. Should hypertelorism be 
detected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to detect major and/or 
minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis of one of 
the above-mentioned syndromes. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends on the general clinical context, and on the type 
of any underlying syndromic condition of which the 
hypertelorism is an expression. 
82 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.37 Hypertelorism. This image shows the moderate 
increase in interocular distance in a fetus with multiple anomalies. 
HYPOTELORISM 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Reduced interocular and binocular distances. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, and related to the almost constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: trisomy 13. 
Outcome. Extremely poor, if associated with holoprosencephaly. 

Definition. Reduced interocular and binocular distances 
(< 5th centile). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The most common cause 
of hypotelorism is the migration defect underlying 
the frequently associated holoprosencephaly (see 
Chapter 2). The phenotypic expression of this midline 
migration defect ranges from severe hypotelorism to 
cyclopia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the axial 
view of the orbits, with a ventral or lateral approach. 
It should be underlined that the overwhelming majority 
of cases of hypotelorism detected in utero are 
associated with holoprosencephaly (Figure 3.38). As 
already pointed out for hypertelorism, the diagnosis is 
straightforward in the most severe cases, whereas in the 
less severe ones, measurement of the binocular and 
interocular diameters is of fundamental diagnostic 
importance. 
• Prognostic indicators. The fact that holoprosencephaly 
is associated in 80% of the cases detected prenatally 
makes the association of this severe central 
nervous system developmental abnormality the key 
prognostic indicator. 
• Association with other malformations. The most 
frequent association is with holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (about 
40%). The most frequently associated chromosomal 
aberration is trisomy 13, given its high incidence in 
holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. In addition to the already-mentioned holoprosencephaly, 
hypotelorism can also occur, less often, in 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Should hypotelorism be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, because of the high 
risk of trisomy 13. In addition, a thorough anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert, in order to 
detect the various defects characterizing the holoprosencephaly 
sequence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
poor and the mortality rate high because of the high 
association with trisomy 13. In those cases in which the 
chromosomes are normal, the risk of severe mental 
retardation is strictly related to the subtype of holoprosencephaly 
(see Chapter 2). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 83 
Figure 3.38 Hypotelorism. Three degrees of hypotelorism, which in most instances is associated with holoprosencephaly, are shown: 
(a) moderate hypotelorism, associated with a single nostril; (b) a single bony orbit with two adjacent eyebulbs, associated with arhinia and 
proboscis; (c) cyclopia (single orbit and single eyebulb), also associated with arhinia and proboscis. 
a b c 

Definition. Proboscis: single midline appendix of soft 
tissues (but can have a bony skeleton) departing from the 
nasal root area. Arhinia: complete absence of the nasal 
bones and of the nares. It can be associated or not with 
the proboscis. Single nostril: evidence of a single nasal 
opening. It represents the less severe anomaly of the 
nasal area associated with holoprosencephaly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As reported above, proboscis, 
arhinia, and single nostril are different expressions of 
the same midline developmental anomaly characteristic 
of holoprosencephaly, namely a field developmental 
derangement of the prechordal mesoderm. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view is not the 
same for the various defects. The midsagittal plane of the 
fetal profile permits recognition of the proboscis and of 
the arhinia (Figures 3.12, 3.39, and 3.40). The axial view 
of the orbits (Figure 3.41) allows detection of arhinia 
only (the proboscis lies on another more cranial plane), 
while single nostril, which represents the less severe holoprosencephaly-
related developmental anomaly of the 
nasal placode, can only be recognized on the oblique 
view of the lips (Figure 3.42; see also Chapter 2). 
The diagnosis of all the above-mentioned anomalies is 
straightforward and does not need any biometry. 
• Prognostic indicators. The fact that holoprosencephaly 
is constantly associated with these types of 
defects represents the most important negative prognostic 
factor. 
• Association with other malformations. There is a 
constant association with holoprosencephaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high. 
It is obviously dependent on the constant association 
with holoprosencephaly and on the 40% chromosomal 
risk of this condition, mostly related to trisomy 13. 
84 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ANOMALIES OF THE NOSE – 1: PROBOSCIS, ARHINIA, SINGLE NOSTRIL 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Proboscis: Fetal profile view: single midline mainly soft tissue formation departing from the 
nasal root area. Arhinia: Fetal profile view: complete absence of the nasal bones and soft tissues: Single nostril: 
oblique view of the lips: evidence of a single opening. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, and related to the constant association with holoprosencephaly 
(trisomy 13). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high, and related to the constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Outcome. Extremely poor, due to the constant association with holoprosencephaly. 
Figure 3.39 Proboscis in alobar holoprosencephaly. This midsagittal view of the facial profile shows the appendix (arrow) arising from 
the forehead: (a) two-dimensional ultrasound; (b) three-dimensional maximum mode rendering; (c) confirmation at autopsy. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high, because of the constant association with 
holoprosencephaly. 
Obstetric management. Should these severe abnormalities 
of the nose be recognized on ultrasound, karyotyping 
is mandatory, because of the high risk of 
trisomy 13. In addition, a thorough anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert, in order to detect 
the various defects characterizing the holoprosencephaly 
sequence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
is very poor and the survival minimal because of the association 
with holoprosencephaly and the 40% risk of a 
concomitant trisomy 13. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 85 
Figure 3.40 Arhinia in semilobar 
holoprosencephaly. (a) On this midsagittal 
view of the fetal face, the absence of 
the nose determines the extremely flat 
profile, confirmed at autopsy (b). 
Figure 3.41 Arhinia in semilobar holoprosencephaly. The absence 
of the nasal bones is also evident on this axial view of the orbits: note 
the depressed area between the orbits (arrowhead). 
a b 

Definition. There is no generally accepted definition 
of an ‘abnormal nose’, as this term has been created 
by the present authors. The aim of this small section is 
to draw the attention of the reader to the assessment 
of the overall aspect and harmony of the various components 
of the fetal profile and of the nose in particular. 
In textbooks on human dysmorphology,12 as well 
as in the OMIM website (On-Line Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
entrez), the number of syndromes featuring minor 
abnormalities of the nose is enormous. Anomalies of 
the nose that can be detected in the neonate include a 
low or wide nasal bridge, a small nose with or without 
anteverted nares, hypoplasia of the alae nasi, and 
choanal atresia. However, unfortunately (or luckily…) 
virtually none of these minor anomalies of the 
nose can be diagnosed with certainty in the fetus. In 
addition, the extreme variability of the normal human 
phenotype has to be considered. It is of the utmost 
importance to explain this wide phenotypic variability 
to the parents of the possibly abnormal fetus. 
Nonetheless, we believe that, in an appropriate diagnostic 
framework, the careful evaluation of even 
minor or apparently insignificant anomalies of the 
fetal profile may contribute to support, or rule out a 
diagnostic hypothesis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The minor developmental 
anomalies of the nose are determined by the underlying 
syndromic condition. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The key plane for the detection of 
minor anomalies of the nose is the midsagittal view of 
the fetal profile. Once again, it has to be underlined that 
such subjective approach to the assessment of the fetal 
nose appearance can be adopted only if a complex malformative 
cluster has already been diagnosed and there 
is a differential diagnostic doubt to be clarified. In this 
context, such an approach, based on the descriptions of 
facial features reported in neonatal dysmorphology 
books, may help to resolve the issue. The same diagnostic 
process can also be applied a posteriori, i.e. when the 
recognition of a malformative cluster has already led to 
the identification of a likely diagnosis: in this circumstance, 
the confirmation that an anomaly of the nose 
described for that syndrome is indeed present in the 
index fetus further supports the diagnosis.18 
• Prognostic indicators. The prognosis depends on the 
underlying syndromic condition, given that the anomalies 
of the nose described in this section are of no or 
mild clinical relevance. 
• Association with other malformations. As a general 
rule, syndromic conditions involving the face 
86 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.42 Single nostril in semilobar 
holoprosencephaly. This oblique view 
of the orbits allows demonstration of 
the single nostril. The confirmation at 
autopsy is shown on the right; also note 
the hypotelorism and microphthalmia. 
ANOMALIES OF THE NOSE – 2: THE ‘ABNORMAL’ NOSE 
Incidence. Very rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Fetal profile plane: minor abnormalities of the dimensions and the proportions of the nose; 
abnormal nasal root. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. Trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Variable. 
Outcome. Depends on the overall clinical context. 

often present with anomalies of the lips and/or 
micrognathia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low. 
It is true that fetuses with trisomy 21 have a small nose 
and a flat profile, but in most circumstances it is the 
detection of major anomalies and/or of other robust soft 
markers of aneuploidy, such as a thickened nuchal fold 
or hypoplastic/absent nasal bones,19,20 that leads to karyotyping 
and to the final diagnosis of trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is variable, 
depending on the clinical context. 
Obstetric management. Minor facial anomalies, such as an 
‘abnormal’ nose, are generally discovered after other 
significant malformations have already been diagnosed. If 
this occurs during the 2nd trimester, and if, following the 
prenatal counseling session, the parents opt to continue the 
pregnancy, serial ultrasound examinations should be 
scheduled, as additional features may arise late in gestation. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final prognosis 
depends on the underlying syndromic condition. 
In general, syndromes associated with abnormal facial 
features relatively often carry a moderate to high risk of 
mental retardation. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 87 
CLEFT LIP/PALATE 
Incidence. Relatively common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Views able to display lips, upper alveolar ridge and hard palate. On these views, the cleft 
appears as an interruption of the lip and/or the alveolar ridge/palate. It can be unilateral, bilateral, or median. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high, especially for the median (holoprosencephaly and trisomy 13) 
and the bilateral (trisomy 13, 18) variants. Very low for the isolated unilateral cleft lip. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, Fraser, EEC, Fryns, frontonasal dysplasia. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in syndromic cases. Good/extremely good for unilateral clefts. From acceptable 
to good for bilateral clefts. 
Definition. The defect may involve only the upper lip 
(cleft lip, CL), or extend to the alveolar ridge and, possibly, 
to the hard palate (cleft lip/palate, CLP). It can be 
unilateral, bilateral, or median. At birth, unilateral CL 
account for 29% of all clefts, unilateral CLP for 40%, 
bilateral CLP for 27%, and bilateral CL for the remaining 
5%. It should be underlined that the more severe 
facial clefts classified according the Tessier scheme21 are 
not considered in this section. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The lips and the palate originate 
from the first branchial arch between the 7th and 
the 12th weeks of gestation. In particular, the upper lip 
and the philtrum originate from the fusion of the medial 
nasal prominence with the lateral nasal prominences and 
the maxillary prominences. Similarly, the palate develops 
from the midline fusion of the secondary palatal 
shelves. If the lateral fusion process is blocked, then the 
lateral type of cleft lip/palate occurs; if, rather, it is the 
downward development of the medial nasal process that 
is arrested, this leads to the median type of cleft, which 
often extends laterally, since the absence of the median 
nasal process also prevents lateral fusion. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Even if the ultrasound diagnosis of 
CLP has been reported as early as the 12th week of gestation,
22 the limited development of facial soft tissues at 
this early stage of development poses significant limitations 
on diagnostic accuracy. The diagnosis of CLP is 
made using different views of the lower part of the face, 
as already mentioned. In particular, the cleft of the lip 
appears as a defect at the level of the upper lip (a rare 
example of bilateral CL is shown is Figure 3.43). If this is 
not associated with hard palate defects, the alveolar ridge 
is intact and the maxilla unremarkable. If, on the contrary, 
the cleft involves the bony structures, an abnormal 
communication between the oral and nasal cavities is 
seen; in this latter instance, distortion of the alae nasi is 
common (Figure 3.44; see also Figures 3.24, 3.28, and 
3.31). In the case of a bilateral CLP, additional tissue at 
the level of the philtrum is commonly seen (Figures 3.45 
and 3.46; see also Figures 3.25, 3.29, and 3.31). The 
diagnostic potential of the various ultrasound planes that 
can be employed for the assessment of the upper lip and 
palate is discussed below. The axial view of the maxilla 
allows direct recognition of the defect of the lip and 
the bony palate. If this view is obtained with a ventral 

(anterior) approach, the diagnostic accuracy is higher, as 
the ultrasound beam can penetrate through the defect up 
to the nasal cavity, and this gives a clearer idea of the 
width and the depth of the cleft (Figures 3.44–3.46). In 
comparison, the lateral approach allows detection of the 
defect of the upper alveolar ridge and of the palate, but 
does not usually allow assessment of the depth of the 
defect. In addition, in the case of bilateral CLP, the progressive 
absorption and refraction of ultrasound waves 
at the level of the defect closest to the transducer blurs 
the visualization of the farther cleft. Oblique views of the 
lips and the palate can demonstrate the anomalies of the 
soft tissues and of the bony part, respectively. It should 
be underlined that, in comparison with the axial views, 
the oblique views have the advantage of better displaying 
the spatial relationships between the lips and the nose, 
which can sometimes be distorted (Figures 3.44–3.46). 
Coronal views at the level of the face and the maxilla 
allow the best display of a median cleft, which is usually 
associated with holoprosencephaly (Figure 3.47). It 
should be noted that the midline sagittal view appears 
unremarkable in unilateral CLP, since the defect lies in 
another plane. Only in the case of bilateral CLP does this 
view appear abnormal, due to the additional tissue present 
at the level of the philtrum (Figure 3.48). A summary 
of the ultrasound approach to the diagnosis of 
different types of CLP, listing the pros and cons of the 
various scanning views, is given in Table 3.1. 
88 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.43 Bilateral cleft lip. With 
three-dimensional ultrasound, the multiplanar 
approach, associated with the 
surface rendering, allows demonstration 
of a double cleft of the upper lip 
(arrows): axial view on the top left 
window and coronal view on the lower 
left window. Note the normal alveolar 
ridge, under the lip, which excludes a 
concurrent cleft palate. The surfacerendering 
reconstruction (lower right 
window) demonstrates the appearance 
of the cleft lip (arrows). 
Figure 3.44 Unilateral cleft lip/palate. Unilateral cleft determining distortion of the alae nasi (27 weeks’ gestation). (a) Oblique view, 
demonstrating the lip defect and the distortion of the alae nasi (arrow). (b) Axial view, demonstrating the extent of the bony defect (arrows). 
(c) Coronal view, demonstrating the abnormal communication between nose and mouth (arrow). (d) The appearance of the defect at birth. 
a b c d 

Note. If the umbilical cord lies on the upper lip, this may 
raise the suspicion of a CLP: the vertical sonolucent area 
corresponding to the umbilical vein with its walls may 
sometimes lead to a false-positive diagnosis of CLP. It is 
sufficient to repeat the scan after a few minutes or to 
switch on the color/power Doppler to rule out a real 
defect (see Figure 3.20). 
• Prognostic indicators. The risk of chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal anomalies is higher for CLP 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 89 
Figure 3.45 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. 
Bilateral cleft lip/palate with additional 
tissue on the philtrum (22 weeks’ gestation). 
(a) Oblique view, demonstrating 
the double defect of the lip (arrows), 
and the additional tissue on the midline. 
(b) Axial view, demonstrating the double 
bony defect (arrows). (c) Coronal view, 
demonstrating the double communication 
between nose and mouth (arrows). 
(d) The appearance of the defect after 
termination of pregnancy. 
Figure 3.46 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. 
Another case of bilateral cleft lip/palate: 
this coronal view demonstrates the double 
bony defect. The confirmation at 
autopsy is shown on the right. 
a b 
c d 

than for CL, and higher for bilateral clefts than 
for unilateral ones. However, the worst prognosis 
is probably associated with the median cleft, because 
of its association with holoprosencephaly and/or 
other severe midline defects (frontonasal dysplasia). It 
also has to be considered that the cosmetic results 
depend upon the extent and the depth of the defect. 
• Association with other malformations. The single 
group of anomalies most frequently associated with 
CLP is represented by congenital heart disease. 
The role of 3D ultrasound in the characterization of CLP. 
Once such an anomaly has been detected, the next steps 
necessary for a thorough counseling session are the 
anatomic characterization of the defect and the assessment 
of its syndromic or isolated nature. In this context, 
the employment of 3D ultrasound has shown a number 
of advantages. Firstly, the use of a surface-rendered 
image of the defect enhances the communication of the 
diagnosis to parents. Secondly, the same image, together 
with the maximum-mode one, can be used for consultation 
with the plastic surgeon. Besides, the possibility to 
renavigate the volume together with other specialists 
allows discussion also of fine anatomic details, and this in 
turn makes the prenatal counseling session more accurate 
and effective. See also the discussion earlier in this chapter 
on the role of 3D ultrasound and Figures 3.21–3.31. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high for 
median clefts (holoprosencephaly) and for bilateral ones 
(15–30%). It is moderately high for unilateral CLP 
(5–15%), but minimal for isolated CL.23 CLP can be 
associated with trisomies 13 and 18 and with other rarer 
chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very high. 
The number of syndromes featuring CLP among the 
possible prenatally detectable signs is huge, and it would 
90 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.47 Median cleft lip/palate in lobar holoprosencephaly. (a) Axial view, demonstrating the midline defect of the lip and palate 
(arrow). (b) Midsagittal view, demonstrating the arhinia and the absence of the upper alveolar ridge (arrowhead). (c) Coronal view, 
demonstrating the abnormal communication between nose and mouth (caliper). (d) Three-dimensional surface-rendering reconstruction 
demonstrating the midline defect. (e) The appearance of the defect at birth. Note also that such a severe midline defect of the face is rarely 
associated with lobar holoprosencephaly. 
a b 
c d e 

be of limited value to report all of them here. Before 
listing the syndromes with CLP most frequently detected 
in the fetus, it is important to underline that a CLP may 
sometimes represent the only prenatally detectable sign 
of various syndromes of clinical importance; we believe 
that this information should be given to the parents 
during the counseling session. The syndromes associated 
with CLP that are most frequently diagnosed in the fetus 
are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome:9,10 look for . CLP, unilateral + 
unilateral microphthalmia and hemifacial microsomia 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . CLP, unilateral + 
laryngeal atresia, congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, 
external ear anomalies, and bilateral renal 
agenesis (see Chapter 10) 
• EEC (ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia) syndrome:12 
look for . CLP, unilateral + ectrodactyly (lobster claw 
anomaly of hands and feet) and maxillary hypoplasia 
• Frontonasal dysplasia:17 look for . CLP, median + 
anterior cephalocele and hypertelorism 
• Fryns syndrome:12 look for . CLP, unilateral + diaphragmatic 
hernia and central nervous system anomalies 
Obstetric management. Should CLP be detected in a 
fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed by 
an expert, in order to detect major and minor malformations 
possibly leading to the diagnosis of an underlying 
syndromic condition. Karyotyping is recommended, 
because of the relatively high risk of trisomy 13, especially 
in bilateral CLP. For isolated unilateral CLP and 
for CL, this option should be discussed with the parents. 
In the case of isolated CL/CLP, prenatal consultation 
with the reference surgeon, who may provide the parents 
with all necessary information regarding the timing and 
the results of the surgical procedure, is of the utmost 
importance. 
Postnatal therapy. It is very important to explain to the 
parents that the surgical correction will not be carried 
out at birth. Only by fully understanding this piece of 
information will the parents be able to cope with the 
continuous confrontation with the defect at home. The 
use of presurgical plates and/or strapping is controversial. 
However, they may help feeding and, at the same 
time, contribute to narrowing the cleft, making surgery 
easier. If used, it is important that they be fitted soon 
after birth by an experienced orthodontist. As far as the 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 91 
Figure 3.48 Bilateral cleft lip/palate. In 
these two cases, due to the presence of 
the additional tissue on the philtrum, the 
midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile 
is also abnormal, unlike in unilateral 
clefts, where it is unremarkable. 

Scanning plane Pros Cons 
Axial – ventral Clear diagnosis of cleft Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
extent and depth position 
Axial – lateral Good assessment of the In bilateral clefts, insufficient definition of 
extent of the lip defect, the defect located distal to the transducer 
less of the bony component 
Oblique – lips Excellent assessment of the Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
lip defect and of possibly position 
associated anomalies of the 
alae nasi 
Oblique – palate Good assessment of the bony Feasible only with the fetus in a favorable 
defect and of the relationship position. Does not give information on the 
with the nasal cavity. It lip component, since the plane is 
completes the previous view deeper than this structure 
Coronal – face Good assessment of median Lateral defects do not show up on this 
lip and nose defects view 
(holoprosencephaly) 
Coronal – palate Good assessment of the bony No information on lips and nose, since the 
defect and of the relationship plane is deeper than these superficial 
with the nasal cavity structures 
Sagittal – profile Enables detection of just the No information on unilateral clefts or on 
additional tissue on the bilateral ones except for assessment 
philtrum in bilateral clefts of the philtrum 
surgical approach is concerned, different protocols have 
been applied over the years in relation to the surgical 
technique and the timing of the surgical approach (also 
depending on the type of defect: unilateral versus bilateral, 
CL versus CLP, with or without distortion of the 
alae nasi). The classical ‘rule of 10’ (10 months of age, 
10 g/dl of hemoglobin, and 10 pounds (about 4.5 kg) of 
weight) is not accepted by all surgeons. Currently, there 
is no uniform protocol for the surgical approach to CLP, 
but the repair of the various components (lip, soft palate, 
and hard palate) is carried out at different times and in 
different sequences: closure of the lip and hard palate, 
followed by closure of the soft palate; or closure of the 
lip and soft palate, followed by closure of the hard 
palate; or closure of the lip, soft palate, and hard palate 
together; or closure of the soft palate, followed by the 
hard palate, followed by lip reconstruction.24 Possible 
residual velopharyngeal dysfunction is managed with the 
help of speech therapists through speech and language 
therapy, possibly before school age. It is important 
to underline that different aspects are involved in 
the assessment of the surgical correction of facial cleftings: 
aesthetic, morphometric, functional (language, high 
airway, hearing, and jaw function), and psycological.25 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The main prognostic 
determinant is the syndromic or isolated nature of 
the defect. In the latter instance, survival is unaffected, 
but the perceived quality of life is a function of the severity 
of the defect (bilateral versus unilateral, CL versus 
CLP) and of the consequent cosmetic and functional 
surgical outcome (speech, language, hearing, etc.25). 
92 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 3.1 Ultrasound diagnosis of cleft lip/palate. Pros and cons of the different ultrasound planes 

Definition. Abnormal shape and arrested development 
of the mandible. The defect is defined as retrognathia 
if the most affected axis is the anteroposterior one; if 
the whole mandible is affected, then the defect is defined 
as micrognathia. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The mandible develops from 
the first branchial arch: the mandibular processes merge 
on the midline to form the mandible and, more superficially, 
the lower lip. The normal development of the 
mandible can be blocked by genetic factors, as in chromosomal 
and non-chromosomal syndromes, or by enviromental 
ones. The latter mechanism applies to the 
severe micrognathia characteristically present in neuromuscular 
conditions such as FADS (fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence – see Chapter 10): in this case, it is the 
fixed contracture of the temporomandibular joint that 
prevents the opening of the mouth and consequently the 
normal development of the mandible. In severe cases, the 
same mechanism may also determine microstomia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of 
micrognathia is electively carried out on the sagittal view 
of the fetal profile. In this plane, the absence of the last 
feature characterizing the fetal profile, i.e. the chin, is 
recognized. This finding is consistent with the diagnosis 
of micrognathia, which, in the most severe cases, can be 
associated with a retraction of the lower lip (Figures 3.49 
and 3.50). In severe cases, this view alone is sufficient to 
subjectively diagnose micrognathia. However, less severe 
cases of micrognathia can be reliably diagnosed only by 
applying biometric techniques. Nomograms of the various 
mandibular diameters have been published. Among these, 
the Jaw Index5 shows fair diagnostic accuracy, since it 
normalizes the mandibular diameters on the biparietal 
diameter (BPD) allowing to identify a cut-off which is 
independent of gestational age. The Jaw Index is calculated 
as follows: Jaw Index = (anteroposterior mandibular 
diameter/BPD) × 100. A value of 23 represents the 95th 
centile. Another advantage of the Jaw Index is that it is 
measured on the axial view of the mandible; therefore, it 
also allows detection of micrognathia if the facial profile 
view cannot be obtained because of an unfavorable position 
of the fetus. It is useful to note that in the case of 
extremely severe micrognathia, if the axial plane of the 
mandible is obtained, it is possible to visualize on the same 
view both the maxillary and the mandibular alveolar 
ridges (Figure 3.51). 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 93 
MICROGNATHIA 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Fetal profile view: retrognathia/micrognathia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high: trisomies 13 and 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: FADS, multiple pterygium, Neu–Laxova, Nager, 
Treacher–Collins, Pierre–Robin, achondrogenesis, camptomelic dysplasia, diastrophic dysplasia, femoral 
hypoplasia–unusual facies syndrome. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in the majority of syndromic cases. Variable in primary mandibular defects 
(Pierre–Robin). 
Figure 3.49 Micrognathia in trisomy 
18. On the midsagittal view of the fetal 
facial profile, the micro/retrognathia is 
evident. The confirmation at autopsy is 
shown on the right. 

Note. As with the ‘abnormal nose’ described earlier 
in this chapter, the variation of the normal human 
phenotype is also extreme in the shape, dimensions, 
and protrusion of the mandible. Again, it is safe 
practice to consider the phenotype of the parents 
in the scanning room prior to defining as certainly 
abnormal the profile of the fetus that is under 
examination! 
• Prognostic indicators. The most severe forms of micrognathia 
are often syndromic. Also, if there is edema of the 
facial subcutaneous tissue, regardless of the degree 
of micrognathia, the risk of chromosomal and nonchromosomal 
syndromes is very high (Figure 3.50), 
and the prognosis consequently poorer. 
• Association with other malformations. Micrognathia 
is virtually never an isolated finding, being among the 
94 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.50 Severe micrognathia in 
FADS (fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence). (a)Onthis midsagittal view of 
the fetal facial profile, the severe 
micro/retrognathia is evident. (b) This 
oblique view of the lips demonstrates 
the associated microstomia, due to the 
block of the temporomandibular joint. 
(c) Confirmation of the diagnosis at birth 
(early neonatal death). 
Figure 3.51 Extremely severe micrognathia, in orofaciodigital syndrome. (a) On this midsagittal view of the fetal facial profile, the 
extremely severe micro/retrognathia is evident (arrowhead). (b) The retrognathic component is so severe that on this axial view of the 
mandible both the lower and the upper alveolar ridges (arrows) can be displayed; note also the microglossia. (c) Confirmation of diagnosis 
at autopsy.
a c 
b
a b c 

most common syndromic facial features. And in a 
significant number of those cases in which this apparently 
represents the only ultrasound abnormal finding, 
an underlying syndrome is often found after birth 
or at autopsy.12,26 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high. 
Trisomies 18 and 13 are among the chromosomal aberrations 
most frequently associated with micrognathia. In 
particular, at autopsy, 70% of trisomy 18 cases shows 
micrognathia of variable severity. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very 
high. A large number of non-chromosomal syndromes 
can be associated with micrognathia. We report below 
those most commonly encountered in the fetus, divided 
according to the pathogenetic mechanism. The first 
group includes those characterized by a defect of neuromuscular 
transmission (arthrogryposes): the FADS, 
(which also includes Pena–Shokeir syndrome27), multiple 
pterygium syndrome, and Neu–Laxova syndrome. 
In this group, micrognathia is the consequence, as 
already mentioned, of masseter contracture, which 
blocks the temporomandibular joint. The second group 
includes primary defects of mandibular development, 
such as Pierre–Robin anomaly. Finally, there are the 
skeletal dysplasias, in which micrognathia represents 
the expression of a skeletal developmental derangement. 
The most common skeletal dysplasias that feature, 
among other signs, micrognathia are camptomelic 
dysplasia, the group of short-rib polydactyly syndromes, 
and thanatophoric dysplasia. It should be 
underlined that all these syndromes are severe conditions 
with very high perinatal mortality rates, with the 
exception of the primary developmental defects of the 
mandible (Pierre–Robin anomaly). 
• FADS (Fetal Akinesia Deformation Sequence, including 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome):27 look for . micrognathia 
+ diffuse joint contractures, thoracic 
hypoplasia, clubfeet, ulnar deviations of the hands and 
extremely reduced fetal movements (see Chapter 10) 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:12 look for . micrognathia 
+ diffuse joint contractures and multiple 
pterygia at elbow and knee 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:12,28 look for . micrognathia 
+ microcephaly, agenesis of the corpus callosum, cerebellar 
hypoplasia (severe), hypertelorism, short limbs, 
joint contractures, syndactyly, early-onset fetal growth 
retardation, and polyhydramnios (see Chapter 10) 
• Nager syndrome:29 look for . micrognathia + ectrodactyly, 
mesomelic hypoplasia, and external ear 
anomalies 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome:12 look for . micrognathia 
+ external ear anomalies 
• Pierre–Robin anomaly:12 look for . micrognathia + 
glossoptosis and cleft palate 
• Achondrogenesis:12 look for . micrognathia + micromelia, 
calvarial hypomineralization, and hydrops 
(see Chapter 9) 
• Camptomelic dysplasia:12 look for . micrognathia + 
bowed and short femurs and tibiae (see Chapter 9) 
• Diastrophic dysplasia:12 look for . micrognathia + 
micromelia, ‘hitchhiker’ thumb, and kyphoscoliosis 
(see Chapter 9) 
• Femoral hypoplasia/unusual facies syndrome:12 look 
for . micrognathia + focal hypoplasia of one or both 
femurs, micrognathia, and maternal insulin-dependent 
diabetes (see Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. When micrognathia is diagnosed 
in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and minor anomalies 
possibly leading to the disclosure of an underlying syndromic 
condition. Karyotyping is recommended, because 
of the relatively high risk of trisomies 13 and 18. Care 
should be taken in planning delivery in the case of primary 
mandibular defects, such as the Pierre–Robin anomaly, in a 
tertiary referral center. In fact, life-threatening obstruction 
of the upper airways may occur at birth, and can lead to 
cerebral palsy from neonatal hypoxia if its occurrence is 
not predicted and adequately managed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis basically 
depends on the severity of the underlying syndrome. 
Survival is good only in the case of primary mandibular 
defects (e.g. Pierre–Robin syndrome). Quality of life, 
which depends upon the success of reconstructive surgery, 
is fair in a significant percentage of cases. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 95 
EXTERNAL EAR ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Relatively common (but seldom detected). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Parasagittal and axial views of the head, at the level of the ears. Pre-auricular tags; 
abnormal auricles, crumpled ears. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high: autosomal trisomies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high: Goldenhar, Fraser, Nager, Treacher–Collins. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable in syndromic cases. 

Definition. The aim of this section is to draw the attention 
of the reader to the anomalies of the external ear. 
These anomalies can be detected by ultrasound, and this 
finding can be employed in the differential diagnosis of 
various syndromes. As a premise, it should be underlined 
that the anomaly of the external ear most commonly 
associated with syndromic conditions, namely low-set 
ears, is not diagnosable with a good degree of certainty 
by 2D ultrasound. It has already been described how the 
use of 3D ultrasound has increased the diagnostic accuracy 
for this abnormal feature. Nomograms for the 
diameters of the external ear have been published 
(Appendix).30 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The external ear originates 
from the first and second branchial arches. The preauricular 
tag represents an anomalous differentiation 
of these embryonic structures. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view is the most 
lateral antero-posterior view of the fetal head, which 
allows the whole external ear to be displayed (Figures 
3.52 and 3.53; see also Figure 3.14). The occurrence of a 
pre-auricular tag can also be detected on the axial view of 
the orbits, since this plane displays the pre-auricular area, 
where the tags are, if present. Nomograms for the longitudinal 
ear diameter (Appendix) can be employed to 
confirm a diagnosis of microtia or, much more rarely, 
macrotia. The use of 3D ultrasound has also rendered this 
diagnosis much easier to achieve (Figures 3.32 and 3.53). 
• Prognostic indicators. Regardless of the shape of the 
external ear, it is the recognition of pre-auricular tags 
that represents the poorest prognostic sign, because of 
the high syndromic significance of this finding. 
• Association with other malformations. These 
include other developmental anomalies involving 
anatomic structures deriving from the first and 
second branchial arches, such as micrognathia and 
congenital heart disease. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
There is a close connection to the presence of trisomy 13 
and, to a lesser extent, trisomy 18. Down syndrome 
fetuses tend to have small ears. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. Pre-auricular tags may be present in a significant 
number of syndromes. The syndromes associated with 
external ear anomalies that are most frequently diagnosed 
in the fetus are as follows: 
• Goldenhar syndrome:9,10 look for . external ear 
anomalies (or tags) + hemifacial microsomia (unilateral) 
microphthalmia and clefting – (see Chapter 10) 
• Fraser syndrome:13 look for . external ear anomalies 
(or tags) + laryngeal atresia, congenital heart 
disease, microphthalmia (unilateral), and facial clefting 
(see Chapter 10) 
• Nager syndrome:29 look for . external ear anomalies 
(or tags) + ectrodactyly, micrognathia, and 
mesomelic hypoplasia 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome:12 look for . external ear 
anomalies (or tags) + micrognathia 
Obstetric management. The detection of severe external 
ear anomalies (tags, anotia, and small and wrinkled ears) 
usually follows the diagnosis of major fetal abnormalities. 
In the extremely rare cases in which the external 
ear anomaly represents the first abnormal finding on 
96 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.52 Pre-auricular tags – 
two-dimensional ultrasound. This 
parasagittal view at the level of the 
external ear demonstrates the abnormal 
pre-auricular appendices (arrows). The 
insets show the anatomic correlates. The 
dysmorphic features of the fetus after 
termination of pregnancy are shown on 
the right: note also the cleft lip and the 
hypertelorism. 

ultrasound, a detailed assessment of facial anatomy 
should be carried out, in order to disclose possible dysmorphisms. 
However, it should be considered that moderate 
microtia/macrotia may represent a familial trait and, 
as such, may be devoid of any prognostic significance. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends upon the severity of the underlying syndrome. 
Survival and quality of life are normal in the case of 
familial macrotia or microtia. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 97 
Figure 3.53 Pre-auricular tags – threedimensional 
ultrasound. This surfacerendering 
reconstruction demonstrates 
the wrinkled ear and the preauricular 
tag in this 30-week-old fetus. The 
confirmation of the diagnosis at birth 
(40 weeks) is show on the right. 
CONGENITAL HIGH-AIRWAY OBSTRUCTION SYNDROME (CHAOS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Facial profile view: oropharyngeal and cervical masses obstructing the upper airways. Axial 
view of the thorax: Laryngeal/tracheal atresia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low, except for Pierre–Robin syndrome (25%). 
Outcome. Mainly unfavorable, unless the EXIT procedure is employed. 
Definition. Different types of congenital and acquired 
anomalies may cause the CHAOS sequence. These 
anomalies become a perinatal emergency when they 
completely block the high airway: in this case, survival 
can only be assured if the obstructing mass is removed or 
bypassed (tracheotomy). These anomalies include laryngeal 
atresia (see Chapter 6), tracheal atresia, obstructing 
laryngeal cysts, obstructing tumors of the oropharynx 
and the cervical region, large thoracic masses such as 
cystic adenomatoid malformations of the lung, and rare 
cases of diaphragmatic hernia. 
Physiopathology. This group of anomalies is responsible 
for a partial or total obstruction of the upper airways 
at various levels. The obstruction can be located in 
the oropharynx (epignathus, lymphangiomas, etc.), or 
may involve more distal structures such as the larynx 
(laryngeal atresia) or the trachea (tracheal atresia and 
neck tumors). If these masses are very large, they can 
compromise swallowing of amniotic fluid relatively early 
in the course of the 3rd trimester, causing severe 
polyhydramnios. At birth, the priority is to promptly 
re-establish the patency of the upper airways in order to 
ensure normal ventilation.31–33 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The most common anomalies 
possibly causing CHAOS are the following: 
• Epignathus. This is a rare teratoma originating from 
the sphenoid bone or from the soft tissues of the 
oropharynx. It often achieves large dimensions, protruding 
from the mouth. It appears as an echogenic 
mass located in front of the mouth and nose of the 
fetus. The ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward 
a b 

and is made on the facial profile view. In the case of a 
dramatically fast-growing mass, the early compression 
can lead to developmental anomalies of the nose 
and the mouth (micrognathia and cleft palate). 
• Tumors of the tongue. An extremely rare location for 
a tumor is the tongue or, in general, the oral cavity. 
The mass will be prevalently cystic if of lymphangiomatous 
origin,34 or solid and hyperechoic in case 
of teratomas. If located in the oral cavity, the mass 
will grow within the mouth, eventually causing the 
lips to part (Figure 3.54). Only in the worst cases, 
such as in epignathus, will the mass continue its 
growth outside the fetal mouth. The ultrasound diagnosis 
is made on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile, 
for a general assessment: a detailed topographic 
study will then be carried out employing axial views 
of the maxilla, the oral region, and the mandible, to 
assess possible involvement of the submandibular 
area and the anterior neck region. 
• Pierre–Robin anomaly. This condition has already 
been described among the primary developmental 
defects of the mandible. It is mentioned here as it can 
cause clinically significant obstruction of the upper 
airways if the degree of micrognathia and the concurrent 
glossoptosis are severe. The degree of micrognathia 
and glossoptosis are best evaluated on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low, since 
these lesions are primarily tumor masses. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low, 
except for the Pierre–Robin anomaly, for which the 
association rate with syndromic conditions reaches 25% 
of cases. Of these, the syndromes potentially detectable 
in the fetus are diastrophic dysplasia (see Chapter 9), 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (see Chapter 10), and 
camptomelic dysplasia (see Chapter 9). 
Obstetric management and prognosis. The perinatal 
management of these conditions is complex and 
multidisciplinary. As already mentioned, upper-airway 
obstruction represents a neonatal emergency. There are 
two possible management options: (1) rapid delivery 
and immediate tracheotomy and (2) the so-called EXIT 
(ex-utero intrapartum treatment) procedure.32,33 The 
latter is currently the most widely accepted option for 
CHAOS management and is described briefly here. 
Incision through the abdominal layers is carried out with 
the standard approach. After entering the abdominal 
cavity, intraoperative ultrasound is performed in order 
to locate the insertion site of the placenta, which has to 
be carefully avoided in the successive hysterotomy. The 
hysterotomy is generally carried out with staplers, which 
ensure at the same time cutting and hemostasis of the 
myometrium. Amniorrhexys is then performed and 
the fetal head and neck are exposed. This is followed 
by intubation. Throughout this procedure, fetal wellbeing 
is monitored with oximetry and umbilical cord 
velocimetry. Once intubation has been completed, the 
umbilical cord is severed and the fetus delivered. If intubation 
fails, due to severe obstruction, then either a tracheotomy 
is performed or, according to the type of mass 
causing the obstruction, the tumor is removed surgically, 
if feasible. The outcome of the EXIT procedure depends 
mainly on the type of lesion causing the obstruction: it is 
very good for benign tumors of the neck (teratomas, 
etc.), but poor or very poor for extremely severe conditions 
such as laryngeal atresia or primary pulmonary 
hypoplasia.32,33 
98 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.54 Lymphangioma of the 
oropharynx, one of the anomalies 
potentially responsible for the CHAOS 
sequence. On the midsagittal view of 
the fetal face, the lips (LL) are pushed 
apart by the cystic intraoral mass (M) 
(F, forehead; N, nose). At birth, the 
lymphangioma (arrowheads) displaces 
the tongue. 

Definition. Although cystic hygromas account for 
most cervical masses in the fetus, there are other very 
rare entities that can originate at this level, such as 
anterior neck teratomas and goiter. Neck teratomas 
show histologically a prevalence of neuronal cells of 
ectodermal origin. Goiter consists of hypertrophic and 
hyperplastic thyroid follicles, and represents an 
expression of fetal hypothyroidism. The most common 
causes of fetal goiter are represented by maternal 
hyperthyroidism or, much more rarely, by maternal 
therapy with propiltiouracile. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As with most tumors, 
cervical teratomas are sporadic lesions. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
midsagittal view of the profile, but only when the 
head is extended, allowing the anterior neck region to 
be seen, and on the axial view of the thyroid, which 
allows direct assessment of the origin and the relationships 
of the mass with the other neck organs and 
vessels. Neck teratomas are usually solid and hyperechoic, 
or partly cystic, with possible calcified spots 
(Figure 3.55). Goiters appear as solid well-defined 
areas continuous with the thyroid gland, with which 
they share a weakly hyperechogenic appearance. 
• Prognostic indicators. The concurrent occurrence of 
evident polyhydramnios indicates the likely presence 
of esophageal compression. An abnormal and fixed 
hyperextension of the fetal head is a consequence of 
very large neck tumors. 
• Associations with other malformations. These are 
not known. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low, 
as for all tumor masses. Goiters also do not show any 
additional risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low, as for all tumor masses. Goiters also do not show 
any association with non-chromosomal syndromes. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 99 
OTHER TUMORS OF THE NECK 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Midsagittal view of the fetal profile; axial view of the thyroid region: anterior neck masses 
(mesenchymal tumors, goiter). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Variable, depending on the degree of upper-airway obstruction. Good for goiter (when due to maternal 
thyroid dysfunction). 
Figure 3.55 Neck teratoma. (a) On 
this midsagittal view of the fetal profile, 
the mass (arrows), located in the anterior 
neck region, appears to be causing 
severe hyperextension of the fetal 
head (N, nose). (b) An oblique view of 
the fetal neck demonstrating the 
mass (arrows) and the fetal head (H). 
(c) The huge teratoma at birth. 
a
b 
c 

Obstetric management. Should an anterior neck mass 
be diagnosed in a fetus, the occurrence of concurrent 
polyhydramnios should be evaluated. If present, this 
indicates the likely presence of esophageal compression 
and CHAOS. In these cases, an EXIT procedure (see 
above) should be considered. If polyhydramnios is 
absent, operative delivery by cesarean section is indicated 
due to the common occurrence of anomalous 
presentation and/or mechanical dystocia due to the 
neck hyperextension. 
Postnatal treatment. The final treatment of neck 
tumors consists in their surgical removal. However, it 
should be noted that a significant percentage of mesenchymal 
tumors tend to regress after birth. Therefore, 
unless immediate surgery is indicated due to the malignant 
nature of the tumor, induced neck deformities 
(congenital wryneck, sternocleidomastoid muscle 
hypoplasia, etc.) or impairment of swallowing, then 
prolonged follow-up may be the approach of choice. 
More than one tumor has macroscopically disappeared 
or dramatically shrunken in a few months after birth, 
allowing easier and less invasive surgical removal. 
Some authors have claimed that the regression 
observed in the neonatal period for numerous mesenchymal 
benign tumors is due to the fact that their 
growth is sustained in utero by the maternal hormonal 
(estrogenic) milieu, which is claimed to represent a 
hyperplastic stimulus. As soon as this hormonal storm 
ceases, with delivery, the growth of the tumor is no 
longer stimulated and the mass shrinks significantly. 
Goiters can also undergo the same dramatic changes 
(partial or complete regression) once thyroid hormone 
receptors are no longer downregulated by maternal 
hyperthyroidism. Surgery is indicated in the rare cases 
in which significant esophageal compression occurs. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis is 
usually good for both conditions, and quality of life is 
not affected in the absence of mechanical sequelae due to 
these masses. Congenital muscular torticollis (wryneck), 
temporomandibular joint anomalies, dental malocclusion, 
etc. may require orthopedic surgery, orthodontic 
procedures, and physiotherapy. 
100 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 3.56 Normal cranial sutures and fontanelles. Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering allows clear visualization of all 
cranial sutures and fontanelles. However, in order to obtain adequate images, care should be taken to maintain a perpendicular 
insonation angle with the suture of interest. These images are of a fetus at 22 weeks’ gestation. (a) Metopic suture (arrowheads). (b) 
Coronal and temporoparietal sutures (arrowheads). (c) Anterior fontanelle (arrowheads) and sagittal suture (arrow). (d) Posterior 
fontanelle (arrow) and parieto-occipital suture. 
ABNORMALITIES OF CRANIAL SUTURES 
Assessment of cranial sutures can only be performed 
using 3D ultrasound. All sutures and fontanelles can be 
displayed applying transparent maximum mode rendering 
to previously acquired volumes of the fetal head. 
However, care should be taken in selecting an adequate 
approach for the study of each suture: due to the physics 
of ultrasound, only structures at an angle > 45° (90° 
would be the optimum) with the insonating beam will be 
clearly displayed. Hence, the structure of interest should 
always be in front of the insonating beam: volumes of 
the fetal face cannot be used to display the anterior 
fontanelle and, vice versa, volumes acquired with the 
objective to study the anterior fontanelle cannot be used 
to assess the metopic suture in detail. Normal images of 
the metopic, coronal, sagittal, and parieto-occipital 
sutures and of the anterior and posterior fontanelles are 
shown in Figure 3.56. 
The reliable assessment of sutures and fontanelles by 
3D ultrasound has led to the recognition of their abnormalities. 
These include delayed fusion/ossification, premature 
fusion (synostoses), and presence of additional 
bones (Figure 3.57). 
Recently, attention has focused on the aspect of the 
metopic suture, both for its intrinsic value and probably 
a b c d 

because it is easily studied retrospectively in stored 
volumes of fetal faces. Study of the metopic suture has 
demonstrated that ossification of the frontal bones starts 
at 9 weeks at the level of the supraorbital ridges, spreading 
them medially and laterally: at 12 weeks, the frontal 
bones are described as thick eyebrows. At 13 weeks, the 
frontal bones meet in the midline at the level of the nasal 
root, and the ossification then progresses upwards. The 
gap between the two frontal bones starts to close at 
around 16 weeks in the supranasal region, and this 
fusion progresses with advancing gestation, so that at 
32 weeks there is apparent closure of the metopic suture, 
starting from the glabella and then moving towards the 
anterior fontanelle.35 It has recently been demonstrated 
that this process is delayed or altered in a number of 
pathologic conditions, ranging from central nervous system 
malformations (Dandy–Walker malformation), 
agenesis of the corpus callosum, and (holoprosencephaly) 
to Down syndrome and skeletal dysplasias.36 In particular, 
recognized abnormal appearances of the metopic 
suture are V- or Y-shaped suture, U-shaped suture, 
premature closure, and additional bone. These aspects are 
shown in Figure 3.57. In addition to these findings, 3D 
ultrasound also allows the detection of synostoses, which 
are typical of some disorders associated with abnormal 
skull shape, such as Apert syndrome37 and thanatophoric 
dysplasia. Abnormal development of the fontanelles can 
also be demonstrated with this technique: in our experience, 
ossification of the fontanelles is delayed in the case 
of hydrocephalus and acondroplasia (Figure 3.58). 
In summary, a new diagnostic horizon has been 
opened by 3D ultrasound – namely, abnormalities 
of the cranial sutures. This diagnostic field has so far 
been only sampled, and the preliminary results are 
those reported here. However, this represents one of 
the most promising areas for investment in future 
research, considering that a significant number of syndromic 
conditions have among their typical signs a 
delayed ossification of the sutures, and of the metopic 
suture in particular. It is likely that other new interesting 
anomalies of the suture ossification process will 
soon be found. 
CRANIOFACIAL AND NECK ANOMALIES 101 
Figure 3.57 Abnormal cranial sutures. (a) Normal metopic suture at 22 weeks’ gestation. (b) U-shaped metopic suture and severely unossified 
anterior fontanelle in severe hydrocephalus (22 weeks’ gestation; note also incipient macrocrania). (c) U-shaped metopic suture in a 
fetus affected with Apert syndrome (23 weeks’ gestation). (d) Completely sealed metopic suture in a fetus affected with semilobar holoprosencephaly 
(20 weeks’ gestation). 
Figure 3.58 Abnormal fontanelles. (a) Normal anterior fontanelle at 22 weeks’ gestation. (b) Wide anterior fontanelle in severe 
hydrocephalus (22 weeks’ gestation). (c) Wide anterior fontanelle and underossified sagittal suture in another case of early hydrocephalus 
(19 weeks’ gestation). (d,e) Two cases of achondroplasia at 26 and 29 weeks’ gestation respectively, showing extremely wide anterior 
fontanelles. 
a b c d 
a b c d e 

1. Jeanty P, Romero R, Staudach A, Hobbins JC. Facial anatomy of 
the fetus. J Ultrasound Med 1986; 5: 607–16. 
2. Rotten M, Levaillant JM. Two and three-dimensional 
sonographic assessment of the fetal face. 1. A systematic analysis 
of the normal face. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 
224–31. 
3. Jeanty P, Dramaix-Wilmet M, Van Gansbeke D, et al. 
Fetal ocular biometry by ultrasound. Radiology 1982; 143: 
513–16. 
4. Kimes KR, Mooney MP, Siegel MI, Todhunter JS. Size and 
growth rate of the tongue in normal and cleft lip and palate human 
fetal specimens. Cleft Palate Craniofac J 1991; 28: 212–16. 
5. Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
micrognathia in the fetus. The Jaw Index. Obstet Gynecol 1999; 
93: 382–6. 
6. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
7. Chervenak FA, McCullough LB. An ethical critique of boutique 
fetal imaging: a case for the medicalization of fetal imaging. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 2005; 192: 31–3. 
8. Platt LD. Three-dimensional ultrasound, 2000. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 295–8. 
9. Martinelli P, Maruotti GM, Agangi A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
hemifacial microsomia and ipsilateral cerebellar hypoplasia in a 
fetus with oculoauricolovertebral spectrum. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2004; 199–201. 
10. Volpe P, Gentile M. Three-dimensional diagnosis of Goldenhar 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 798-800. 
11. Paladini D, D’Armiento MR, Ardovino I, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
diagnosis of the cerebro-oculo-facio-skeleta (COFS) syndrome. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 91–3. 
12. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
13. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a family with 
negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
14. Vogt G, Puho E, Czeizel AE. Population-based case–control study 
of isolated congenital cataract. Birth Defects Res Part A 2005; 73: 
997–1005. 
15. Jeffrey BG, Birch EE, Stager DR Jr, Stager DR Sr, Weakley DR. 
Early binocular visual experience may improve binocular sensory 
outcomes in children after surgery for congenital unilateral 
cataract. J AAPOS 2001; 5: 209–16. 
16. O’Keefe M, Fenton S, Lanigan B. Visual outcomes and complications 
of posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation 
in the first year of life. J Cataract Refract Surg 2001; 27: 
2006–11. 
17. Martinelli P, Russo R, Agangi A, Paladini D. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of frontonasal dysplasia. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 375–9. 
18. Paladini D, Borghese AM, Arienzo M et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of Pallister–Killian syndrome in the 2nd 
trimester of pregnancy: the importance of the fetal facial profile. 
Prenat Diagn 2000; 20: 996–8. 
19. Vintzileos AM, Walters C, Yeo L. Absent nasal bone: a specific 
marker for second-trimester fetuses with Down syndrome. 
Ultrasound Med Biol 2003; 29: 5S. 
20. Benoit B, Chaoui R. Three-dimensional ultrasound with maximal 
mode rendering: a novel technique for the diagnosis of bilateral 
or unilateral absence or hypoplasia of nasal bones in secondtrimester 
screening for down syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2005; 25: 19–24. 
21. Tessier P. Anatomical classification facial, cranio-facial and 
latero-facial clefts. J Maxillofac Surg 1976; 4: 69–92. 
22. Bronshtein M, Blumenfeld I, Kohn J, et al. Detection of cleft 
lip by early second trimester transvaginal sonography. Obstet 
Gynecol 1994; 84: 73–5. 
23. Nyberg DA, Sickler GK, Hegge FN, et al. Fetal cleft lip with and 
without cleft palate: US classification and outcome. Radiology 
1995; 195: 677–80. 
24. Sommerlad BC. The management of cleft lip and palate. Curr 
Pediatr 2002; 12: 43–50. 
25. Timmons MJ, Wyatt RA, Murphy T. Speech after repair of isolated 
cleft palate and cleft lip and palate. Br J Plastic Surg 2001; 
54: 377–84. 
26. Vettraino IM, Wesley L, Bronsteen R, et al. Clinical outcome of 
fetuses with sonographic diagnosis of isoalted micrognathia. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 102: 801–5. 
27. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
in three consecutive pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2001; 17: 163–5. 
28. Neu–Laxova syndrome: detailed prenatal diagnostic and postmortem 
findings and literature review. Am J Med Genet A 2004; 
125: 240–9. 
29. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Lamberti A, Lapadula C, Martinelli P. 
Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Nager syndrome. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 195–7. 
30. Chitkara U, Lee L, EI-Sayed YV, et al. Ultrasonographic ear 
length measurement in normal second – and third trimester 
fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2000; 183: 230–4. 
31. Lim FY, Crombleholme TM, Hedrick HL, et al. Congenital high 
airway obstruction syndrome: natural history and management. 
J Pediatr Surg 2003; 38: 940–5. 
32. Bouchard S, Johnson MP, Flake AW, et al. The EXIT procedure: 
experience and outcome in 31 Cases. J Pediatr Surg 2002; 37: 
418–26. 
33. Hirose S, Harrison MR. The ex utero intrapartum treatment 
(EXIT) procedure. Semin Neonatol 2003; 8: 207–14. 
34. Paladini D, Morra T, Guida F, et al. Prenatal diagnosis and 
perinatal management of a lingual lymphangioma. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 1998; 11: 141–3. 
35. Faro C, Benoit B, Wegrzyn P, Chaoui R, Nicolaides KH. 
Three-dimensional sonographic description of the fetal frontal 
bones and metopic suture. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
618–21. 
36. Chaoui R, Levaillant M, Benoit B, et al. Three-dimensional 
sonographic description of abnormal metopic suture in secondand 
third-trimester fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
761–4. 
37. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyng P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
102 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
REFERENCES 

Etiology and pathogenesis. Cystic hygroma (CH) is 
thought to arise from impaired drainage of the jugular 
lymphatic sacs (JLS) or from altered lymphangiogenesis.1 
The JLS are the first part of the lymphatic system to 
develop: at the 5th week, the internal jugular veins give 
rise to lymphatic buds, which fuse and form the JLS. The 
peripheral lymphatic system is formed by sprouting from 
these sacs. The JLS in human fetuses normally reorganize 
into lymphatic nodes after 10 weeks of gestation. The formation 
of the lymphatic system is completed by ingrowth 
of the thoracic duct into the left lymphatic sac, which 
thereby connects several lymphatic vessels. After reorganization 
of the JLS into lymphatic nodes, the connection 
of the thoracic duct to the internal jugular vein is the main 
site at which drainage of lymphatic fluid takes place.2 
Ultrasound diagnosis. CH develops, typically, late in the 
1st trimester and is characterized by the presence of bilateral 
fluid-filled cavities in the fetal neck. An axial view of 
the fetal neck is required in order to make the diagnosis.3 
The fluid-filled cavities consist of cystic dilatations of the 
JLS, and are commonly partitioned by a thick fibrous 
band corresponding to the nuchal ligament (Figure 4.1). 
There is an ongoing debate regarding the differentiation 
between increased nuchal translucency (NT) and CH in 
the 1st trimester of pregnancy. For this purpose, several 
authors have recently advocated the use of the axial plane 
of the fetal neck at the base of the skull to differentiate 
between the two conditions.3,4 On this view, the presence 
of subcutaneous edema of the neck or diffuse thickening, 
with fine septations, should not be diagnosed as CH, but 
represents the anatomic spectrum of NT; on the contrary, 
the recognition of bilateral cystic jugular lymphatic sacs is 
typical of CH (Figure 4.2). However, according to other 
authors,2 the visualization of mildly isolated distended 
jugular lymphatic sacs is probably not sufficient to establish 
a diagnosis of cystic hygroma (Figure 4.3). When 
detected in the 1st trimester, CH can evolve into different 
pictures: it can progress towards generalized hydrops, 
resolve completely, or persist in part as nuchal edema, 
irrespective of the fetal karyotype. The resolution of the 
hygroma has been related to an early partial and transient 
lymphatic obstruction or to a delay in jugular lymphatic 
connection that results in temporary lymphatic obstruction, 
which resolves with time. Lesions that persist into 
the 2nd trimester are characterized by giant cysts that 
completely fill the amniotic cavity. Often, with increasing 
lymphedema of the upper trunk, neck, and base of the 
skull, fluid-filled regions with septa are found inside the 
skin. Eventually, the progression of the lymphedema 
leads to effusions in the body cavities. In addition, when 
the venous return to the heart is impeded, hydrops 
through the jugular lymphatic obstructive sequence 
(JLOS) may develop.1 
Chapter 4 
Cystic hygroma and non-immune 
hydrops fetalis 
CYSTIC HYGROMA (CH) 
103 
Incidence. High. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. It is characterized by bilateral cystic structures of the posterior neck with one or more 
typical septations (commonly in the 2nd trimester). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (35–50%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Poor in most cases, especially for the high frequency of associated anomalies. Only 10% of cases survive 
without major morbidity. 

• Differential diagnosis. The main differential diagnosis 
of CH includes occipital cephalocele (OC), cervical 
teratoma, increased nuchal fold, and NT. In OC, a 
calvarial bony defect is present. In cervical teratoma, 
the fetal neck is often hyperextended and a solid 
or mixed, solid-cystic, mass is present (teratomas 
frequently arise in the anterior neck region). The 
increased nuchal fold is not fluid; it may be a 
by-product of CH but should not be regarded as CH. 
The differential diagnosis with an increased NT has 
been addressed above. Figure 4.4 shows the sonographic 
appearance of several conditions that should 
be differentiated from CH. 
• Prognostic indicators. Several studies have analyzed 
the prognostic significance of classifying hygromas 
into septated and non-septated forms. Although 
some studies have suggested that the presence of 
septations predicts an increased likehood of aneuploidy 
and poor fetal outcome,5 this concept has not 
been confirmed by other authors.6 
• Association with other malformations. CH is associated 
with other malformations in up to 60% of 
cases, including cardiac defects, skeletal dysplasias, 
diaphragmatic hernia, and central nervous system 
(CNS) anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. About 
35–50% of cases of CH have an abnormal karyotype. 
In the 2nd trimester, the most common chromosomal 
anomaly associated with a large CH, often with typical 
septations, is Turner syndrome. In the 1st trimester, 
there is the same proportion of trisomies 21 and 18 and 
Turner syndrome.4 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. 
The most common syndromes associated with CH are as 
follows: 
• Noonan syndrome:7 look for .CH + congenital heart 
disease (pulmonary stenosis and cardiomyopathy), 
facial anomalies, and fetal growth retardation (FGR) 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:7 look for . CH + 
micrognathia, camptodactyly, joint contractures, ptergia 
at knees and elbows and FGR (see also Chapter 10) 
104 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 4.1 Cystic hygroma at 16 weeks’ gestation – Turner syndrome. (a) On the axial view, the possible presence of septa (arrows) is 
evaluated. (b) On the midsagittal view, the extent of the retronuchal hygroma is assessed (arrowheads). (c) Confirmation at autopsy. 
In this case, significant subcutaneous edema was also present. 
a c 
b 

• Fryns syndrome:7 look for . CH + diaphragmatic 
hernia, microphthalmia, CNS anomalies, and distal 
limb anomalies. 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:7 look for . CH + CNS 
anomalies, microcephaly, joint contractures, micrognathia, 
and FGR (see also Chapter 10) 
Obstetric management. The sonographic detection of CH 
should prompt a detailed examination of fetal anatomy 
in order to detect associated anomalies and signs of 
hydrops. The presence of CH is a strong indication for 
karyotyping, because of the high risk of aneuploidy. The 
disease course of a fetus with a cystic hygroma detected in 
CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 105 
Figure 4.2 Cystic hygroma at 13 weeks’ gestation. The multiplanar approach allows simultaneous visualization of the severe septate 
hygroma (arrows) on the axial (a) and, (b) midsagittal view. (c) Three-dimensional surface rendering, demonstrating the thoracic extension 
of the lymphangiectasia (arrows). (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Figure 4.3 Multiplanar imaging of a fetus with increased nuchal translucency (NT) and dilated jugular lymphatic sacs. The axial image 
(top left panel) shows mildly dilated jugular lymphatics (arrows), possibly suggesting cystic hygroma. The midsagittal view (top right 
panel), shows enlarged NT (arrow). 
a d 
b 
c 

the first trimester may be unpredictable; in fact, there is 
no reliable method to predict which hygromas will regress 
and which will progress to frank non-immune hydrops 
fetalis (NIHF). Also, if the karyotype is normal and 
no associated anomalies are found, the parents should 
still be counseled about the uncertain prognosis. If 
the pregnancy is continued, the fetus should be followed 
closely with detailed serial ultrasound. Large CH 
in fetuses reaching term of gestation can complicate 
obstetric and perinatal management. Infants with large 
prenatally detected hygromas may require delivery by 
cesarean section. There are reports of successful vaginal 
delivery after intrauterine cyst decompression. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Only 10% of 
fetuses with CH survive without major morbidity. In 
fact, CH is often associated with chromosomal anomalies, 
hydrops, and fetal death. Many fetuses with CH 
seen during the 1st trimester die spontaneously before 20 
weeks’ gestation. An even poorer prognosis is expected if 
CH is associated with other anomalies, including chromosomal 
aberrations.1,4 CH is also a marker of numerous 
genetic syndromes with normal karyotype, and the 
poor survival rate in this condition is mainly due to its 
association with hydrops that develops as a result of the 
JLOS.1 JLOS illustrates the compression of the venous 
return to the fetal heart by congested jugular lymphatic 
sacs and subsequent cardiac failure as early as in the 
1st trimester. In cases of CH with normal karyotype and 
no associated malformations, the parents should still be 
counseled about the uncertain prognosis. If an isolated 
CH not associated with chromosomal anomalies or any 
malformations has resolved, it is likely that the infant 
will be normal; however, resolution of the hygroma 
per se does not imply a good prognosis, as resolution 
has been documented in fetuses with genetic anomalies. 
It is also important to note that long-term developmental 
follow-up of infants with resolved hygromas is not 
available. 
Postnatal therapy. At present, complete excision remains 
the treatment of choice for CH. It can be a difficult procedure 
due to the infiltrative nature of CH. However, 
before attempting excision of a CH, the extent of the 
lesion and its relationship to surrounding structures 
must be clearly defined by magnetic resonance imaging. 
Postoperative complications, including recurrence, 
wound seromas, infection, and nerve damage, occur in 
more than 30% of cases. Recently, sclerosing agents (e.g. 
bleomycin) have also been used to treat CH. 
106 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 4.4 Differential diagnosis of retronuchal anomalies. (a) Septate cystic hygroma at 16 weeks’ gestation. (b) Nuchal fold in trisomy 
21 at 20 weeks’ gestation. (c) Severe hydrops with subcutaneous edema and lymphangiectasia (arrowheads) at 19 weeks’ gestation. 
(d) Nuchal translucency > 99th centile in trisomy 21 at 13 weeks’ gestation. (e) Occipital meningoencephalocele, with a large meningeal 
sac (arrowheads e, herniated brain) at 21 weeks’ gestation. (f) Retronuchal edema with lymphangiectasia in FADS (fetal akinesia 
deformation sequence) at 20 weeks’ gestation. 
a b c 
d e f 

Definition. Fetal hydrops represents a aspecific condition 
characterized by an increase of total body water content. 
In such a condition, the excess fluid collects by ultrafiltration 
in body cavities (pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal 
effusions) and/or in the subcutaneous tissue. Placental 
edema and polyhydramnios are frequently associated 
(30–70%). Fetal hydrops is divided into two etiologic 
groups: immune fetal hydrops and non-immune hydrops 
fetalis (NIHF); the former is due to maternal Rhesus 
immunization, while the latter has a wide spectrum of 
possible causes. Immune hydrops was decidedly more frequent 
until prophylaxis against Rhesus immunization 
was implemented worldwide. Currently, less than 10% 
of all cases of fetal hydrops, with national variations, are 
due to Rhesus immunization. In this chapter, only NIHF 
will be illustrated. By definition, the term NIHF refers to 
fluid collections in at least two body cavities or to one fluid 
collection plus diffuse subcutaneous edema. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of NIHF 
includes a huge number of different causes. Cardiac 
causes are those most frequently responsible for NIHF, 
accounting for 20–40% of cases, whereas no cause (idiopathic 
hydrops) – or at least no sonographically recognizable 
cause – is found in 30–50% of cases. A partial list of 
the numerous conditions associated with NIHF is given 
in Table 4.1. The etiology of NIHF comprises primarily 
four types of pathogenetically different causes: 
1. Cardiac failure and related conditions. Cardiac failure 
can be due to a low output or to a high output. 
The former is caused by primary cardiac conditions, 
including functional and structural defects. Among 
the functional causes, severe bradyarrhythmias (complete 
heart block) and severe tachyarrhythmias 
(supraventricular parossistic tachycardia and atrial 
flutter) result in low cardiac output due to the 
extreme bradycardia and the impaired diastolic filling 
associated with increased preload, respectively. With 
regard to the structural causes (congenital heart disease) 
it should be noted that the presence of the two 
shunts represented by a patent ductus arteriosus and 
a patent foramen ovale is able to reduce the hemodynamic 
impact of isolated obstructive lesions (tricuspid 
atresia or hypoplastic left heart) and septal lesions 
(atrioventricular or ventricular septal defects). In contrast, 
cardiac failure often develops in the case of 
severe volume overload due to severe valvular insufficiency 
(severe Ebstein’s anomaly, critical aortic stenosis 
with mitral insufficiency, pulmonary atresia with 
intact ventricular septum and tricuspid insufficiency). 
The basic cause of cardiac failure in these cases is the 
pump deficit. The same mechanism leads to cardiac 
failure and NIHF in the case of cardiomyopathies 
associated with severe impairment of the systolic 
function. Among the extracardiac conditions possibly 
responsible for high output heart failure and NIHF, 
it should be noted that the most common are those 
featuring arterio-venous fistulas. These include placental 
chorioangioma, sacrococcygeal teratoma, 
aneurysm of the vein of Galen, twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome (TTTS) (recipient twin), and acardius 
twin (TRAP (Twin-Reversed-Arterial Perfusion) 
sequence). These conditions have in common an 
increased blood volume (perfusion of the tumor mass 
or recipient or acardiac twin) that cannot be managed 
by the immature fetal heart, with consequent cardiac 
failure. Much rarer is the venous compression in the 
case of large thoracic or cardiac tumors/masses. 
2. Chromosomal anomalies. The chromosomal anomaly 
most frequently associated with CH and NIHF is 
monosomy X. Trisomy 21 and a significant number of 
other autosomal trisomies (13 and 18) can also be 
associated with early NIHF. Finally, it should be noted 
that Down syndrome may also be associated with lateonset 
moderate hydrops, often involving pleural effusion 
and ascites or subcutaneous edema; in these cases, 
the cause is thought to be local lymphatic obstruction. 
CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 107 
NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS (NIHF) 
Incidence. Frequent. 1 in 3000 births, but high intrauterine death rate. 
Diagnosis. Fluid collection in serosal cavities (ascites, hydrothorax, pericardial effusion), subcutaneous edema, 
prevalently of head and thorax, but sometimes also of limbs. Polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20%): monosomy X, autosomal trisomies 21, 18, 13. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high. Skeletal dysplasias, non-chromosomal syndromes, storage 
diseases, infections. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable, except for cases associated with potentially treatable causes such as anemia 
from parvovirus B19 infection and supraventricular parossistic tachycardia. 

108 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 4.1 Causes of non-immune hydrops in the fetus (NIHF) by anatomic region 
Cause by region Frequency of hydrops 
Brain 
Cerebral hemorrhage Low 
Aneurysm of the vein of Galen High 
Cerebral tumors Low 
Heart 
CHD featuring valve insufficiency Relatively high 
CHD featuring impaired cardiac function Relatively high 
(cardiomyopathies, myocarditis, tachyarrhythmias, CHB) 
Cardiac tumors Low 
Thorax (heart excluded) 
Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML) Low 
Pulmonary sequestration Moderate 
Laryngeal atresia High 
Mediastinal tumors (teratomas, mainly) Moderate 
Abdomen – gastrointestinal tract 
Diaphragmatic hernia Low 
Meconium peritonitis Moderate 
Hepatitis High 
Hepatic fibrosis Moderate 
Abdomen – genitourinary system 
Urethral obstruction Moderate 
Autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease Low 
Renal vein thrombosis High 
Ovarian cyst torsion Low 
Tumors and conditions featuring high output cardiac failure 
Mediastinal teratoma Moderate 
Neuroblastoma Moderate 
Hepatoblastoma Moderate 
Nephroblastoma Moderate 
Sacro-coccygeal teratoma High 
Galen vein aneurysm High 
Placental chorioangioma High 
Twin to twin transfusion syndrome High 
Hematologic/vascular causes of fetal anemia 
Cerebral, subdural hemorrhage Low 
Umbilical, renal, caval thrombosis High 
Autoimmune thrombocytopenia Moderate 
3. Skeletal dysplasias and syndromes. The skeletal 
dysplasias most commonly associated with NIHF 
are the hypophosphatasia and the group of 
short-rib polydactyly syndromes. The type and 
number of non-chromosomal syndromes possibly 
associated with NIHF is enormous. It is useful to 
remember here the neuroarthrogryposes (fetal akinesia 
deformation sequence (FADS), Neu–Laxova 
syndrome, and multiple–pterygium syndrome – 
see Chapter 10), Fraser syndrome (see Chapter 10), 
Oro-facio-digital syndrome, Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome (see Chapter 10), and various storage 
diseases (mucopolysaccharidoses and mucolipidoses). 
Among the isolated conditions, very rarely 
and only for large lesions, cystic adenomatoid malformation 
of the lung and pulmonary sequestration 
(see Chapter 6) can lead to hydrops due to caval 
compression. In contrast, laryngeal atresia is 

CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 109 
almost invariably associated with hydrops (see 
Chapter 10). 
4. Infections. NIHF is a non-specific sign of various 
infections vertically transmitted from mother to 
fetus, including both viral and non-viral infections. 
In the case of viral infections, the development 
of NIHF is probably due to different and synchronous 
mechanisms: inflammation, myocarditis with 
pump deficit, hemolytic anemia and/or hepatitis, 
and hepatitis-induced hypoproteinemia. The viruses 
most frequently associated with fetal hydrops 
are: parvovirus B19, coxsackievirus, herpesvirus 
(varicella), cytomegalovirus (CMV), adenovirus, and 
influenza virus type B. Among the non-viral infections, 
the most common are syphilis, listeriosis, and 
toxoplasmosis. 
The final result of the various conditions mentioned 
above is a breakdown of equilibrium between intracapillary 
and extracapillary pressures, with consequent fluid 
ultrafiltration in the interstitial space. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. NIHF can develop at any time 
during pregnancy, depending on its cause. If associated 
with syndromes and/or chromosomal aberrations, it is 
usually of early onset, being apparent in the 1st 
trimester. If this is the case, it is often associated with 
CH and diffuse subcutaneous edema of the head and 
body, referred to as ‘space suit’. If NIHF is due to 
maternal infections or cardiac failure, its onset can also 
be in the late 2nd or 3rd trimester. The fluid collections 
– in the abdomen, pleura, or pericardium – appear as 
sonolucent areas with different shapes characteristic 
of the different locations. Subcutaneous edema appears 
as a moderately hyperechoic thickening of the soft 
tissue of the fetal face, trunk, and sometimes limbs. The 
diagnostic views depend on the site of the fluid collection. 
In the most severe cases, the midsagittal view of 
the fetus, at low magnification (Figure 4.5), can provide 
an overall idea of the regions involved, as it is possible 
to display simultaneously ascites, hydrothorax, pericardial 
effusion, and subcutaneous edema. The same plane 
also allows detection of the frequently associated CH. 
In moderate or initial hydrops, the fluid collection may 
be limited to one or two sites, and therefore its diagnosis 
needs dedicated planes. Axial views of the head, neck 
and thorax may allow assessment of the extent and 
severity of the effusions and the subcutaneous edema 
(Figure 4.6). With regards to the ascites, it should be 
noted that, initially, the fluid collects in the pelvis only, 
and therefore it should be sought in this region and not 
at the level of the liver. 
• Differential diagnosis. NIHF should be differentiated 
from isolated effusions, which may have a completely 
different underlying cause. 
• Prognostic indicators. NIHF is per se a condition with 
poor prognosis. A positive prognostic indicator is 
recognition of a potentially treatable cause of the 
hydrops, such as parossistic tachycardia (usually 
responsive to antiarrhythmic drugs), a parvovirus 
B19 infection (managed with intrauterine blood 
transfusion on the basis of measurement of middle 
cerebral artery systolic peak velocity8). 
Figure 4.5 Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). A midsagittal view of the fetal body at low magnification can provide an overall idea of 
the distribution and severity of hydrops. In this case, an extremely severe edema of the fetal head (arrowheads), ascites (asc), and polyhydramnios 
can be seen. 

110 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Association with other malformations. See ‘Etiology 
and pathogenesis’. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, especially 
for early-onset NIHF (20%). The chromosomal anomalies 
most frequently associated with NIHF are Turner 
syndrome, autosomal trisomies (13, 18, and 21), and 
rarer aberrations, including partial deletions and unbalanced 
translocations. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high (see ‘Etiology and pathogenesis’). It is not useful to 
list here the huge number of syndromes possibly associated 
with NIHF. 
Obstetric management. Since few causes of NIHF can benefit 
from intrauterine treatment, a detailed assessment of all 
the possible causes previously listed should be performed; 
this entails a thorough anatomic scan and fetal echocardiography 
to confirm or rule out the most frequent determinant 
of NIHF, namely cardiac defects. Karyotyping is also 
mandatory, due to the high risk of aneuploidy. Maternal 
serological assessment should be carried out as well, in 
order to detect possible recent seroconversion for CMV, 
parvovirus B19, coxsackievirus, Toxoplasma, etc. 
Intrauterine therapy. The forms of NIHF potentially 
reversible following intrauterine treatment are only 
those due to (1) tachyarrhythmias (supraventricular 
parossistic tachycardia and atrial flutter) and (2) 
parvovirus B19 infection with ascertained fetal anemia. 
In the former, transplacental or (in unresponsive cases) 
direct intraumbilical therapy with antiarrhythmic drugs 
(digoxin, flecainide, or labetalol) can restore a sinus 
rhythm, with consequent clearance of the hydrops. In 
the case of severe fetal anemia, detected by Doppler 
velocimetry of the middle cerebral artery,8,9 due to parvovirus 
B19 infection, intrauterine blood transfusions 
may help the fetus in the acute phase of the infection, 
with good neonatal outcome. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis of 
NIHF is extremely poor. The intrauterine mortality rate 
is very high, and only the few cases in which the abovementioned 
causes have been recognized can expect a 
good outcome in a significant percentage of cases. 
Figure 4.6 Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF). After the midsagittal view has provided an overall idea of the hydrops distribution, axial 
views may be used to assess in detail the various anatomic regions: (a) hydrothorax and subcutaneous edema (arrowheads) (LL, left 
lung; RL, right lung; (b) ascites (asc); (c) placental edema and polyhydramnios in TTTS; (d) diffuse severe hydrops of the fetal trunk (H, 
heart); (e) diffuse severe hydrops of the cervical region, without hygroma (the arrow indicates the scapula). 
a b c 
d e 

CYSTIC HYGROMA AND NON-IMMUNE HYDROPS FETALIS 111 
REFERENCES 
1. Chevernak FA, Isaacson G, Blakemore KJ, et al. Fetal cystic hygroma. 
Cause and natural history. N Engl J Med 1983; 309: 822–5. 
2. Bekker MN, Haak MC, Rekoert-Hollander M, et al. Increased 
nuchal translucency and distended jugular lymphatic sacs on firsttrimester 
ultrasound. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 239–45. 
3. Ville Y. Nuchal translucency in the first trimester of pregnancy: 
ten years on and still a pain in the neck? Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2001; 18: 5–8. 
4. Kharrat R, Yamamoto M, Roume J, et al. Karyotype and outcome 
of fetuses diagnosed with cystic hygroma in the first 
trimester in relation to nuchal translucency thickness. Prenat 
Diagn 2006; 26: 369–72. 
5. Bronshtein M, Bar-Hava I, Blumenfeld I, et al. The difference 
between septated and non-septated nuchal cystic hygroma in the 
early second trimester. Obstet Gynecol 1993; 81: 683–7. 
6. Brumfield CG, Wenstron KD, Davis RO, et al. Second trimester 
cystic hygroma: prognosis of septated and nonseptated lesions. 
Obstet Gynecol 1996; 88: 979–82. 
7. Stevenson RE, Hall JC, Goodman RM, eds. Human Malformations 
and Related Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1993. 
8. Hernandez-Andrade E, Scheier M, Dezerega V, Carmo A, 
Nicolaides KH. Fetal middle cerebral artery peak systolic velocity 
in the investigation of non-immune hydrops. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2004; 23: 442–5. 
9. Mari G, Adrignolo A, Abuhamad AZ, et al. Diagnosis of fetal anemia 
with Doppler ultrasound in the pregnancy complicated by 
maternal blood group immunization. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
1995; 5: 400–5. 

Chapter 5 
Congenital heart disease 
SEQUENTIAL ANATOMY AND FUNCTIONAL 
ASSESSMENT OF THE HEART: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
The spectrum of congenital heart disease (CHD) 
that can be encountered in the fetus is wide, with a significant 
number of very complex defects. The description 
of these defects can benefit from a sequential 
segmental analysis, which consists of a step-by-step 
procedure that defines the central cardiovascular connections, 
beginning from the venous pole to the arterial 
one. Only in this way is it possible to understand and 
effectively describe the anatomy of complex fetal CHD. 
To perform a sequential segmental analysis of the fetal 
heart, the first step is the description of the viscero-atrial 
situs. Then, the atrioventricular and ventriculo-arterial 
connections are defined and described. 
Situs. As a premise, it should be considered that, of all the 
anomalies occurring in the case of left or right isomerism 
(situs ambiguus), only those involving the venae cavae 
and, to a lesser extent, the pulmonary veins can be 
recognized in the fetus. Abnormalities in the spatial relationships 
between the bronchi and the pulmonary arteries 
and the number of pulmonary lobes cannot be detected 
in utero. With these limitations in mind, the viscero-atrial 
situs can be described as follows.1,2 
Situs solitus. The liver and inferior vena cava are in 
the right hemiabdomen, and the spleen, stomach, and 
descending aorta are in the left. There is a trilobed lung 
with three bronchi on the right, and a bilobed lung with 
two bronchi on the left. The morphologic right atrium is 
on the right and the morphologic left atrium on the left. 
Situs inversus. This is a mirror image of situs solitus, and 
is not usually associated with CHD, though there are 
some CHDs that can occur together with situs inversus. 
Right atrial isomerism (asplenic syndrome). In this 
case, all left-sided structures are absent. The liver is 
centrally positioned due to the asplenia; the inferior 
vena cava and the aorta are usually close to one 
another and positioned on the same side of the spine. 
The lungs are both trilobed with three bronchi. Also, 
the atrial appendages are both morphologically right. 
Right atrial isomerism is frequently associated with 
complex CHD. 
Left atrial isomerism (polysplenic syndrome). The liver is 
also centrally positioned in this case, but it is surrounded 
by several small splenic islets (polysplenia). The inferior 
vena cava is interrupted, and the systemic return is represented 
by an azygos continuation, adjacent to the 
descending aorta, which drains into the superior vena 
cava. Both lungs are bilobed with two bronchi. The atrial 
appendages are morphologically left. Major CHDs are 
associated in more than 50% of cases. 
Atrioventricular connections 
Atrioventricular concordance. This is the normal situation 
in which, with two atria and two ventricles, the 
right atrium connects to the morphologically right ventricle 
and the left atrium to the morphologically left ventricle. 
This relationship can occur within a situs solitus 
or inversus. 
Atrioventricular discordance. In this abnormal situation, 
with two atria and two ventricles, the right atrium 
connects to the morphologically left ventricle and 
the left atrium connects to the morphologically right 
ventricle. 
Double atrioventricular inlet. In this case, there are two 
atria connecting to the same ventricle. The second ventricular 
chamber is generally hypoplastic and sometimes 
connected to the dominant chamber through a ventricular 
septal defect. In this situation, the morphology of the 
dominant ventricle should be assigned, whether of left 
113 

ventricular, right ventricular, or (rarely) indeterminate 
morphology. 
Single atrioventricular inlet. In this case, there is only 
one atrium, which connects to the dominant ventricle, 
while the second atrium connects only to the other 
atrium via the foramen ovale. The second atrioventricular 
connection is absent, due to atresia or imperforation 
of the ipsilateral atrioventricular valve. Also in this 
case, the second chamber is hypoplastic and may or 
may not communicate with the dominant ventricle. It 
should also be determined if the single ventricle is on 
the right, due to mitral atresia, or on the left, due to 
tricuspid atresia. 
Atrioventricular valves. Once the type of atrioventricular 
connection has been determined, it is necessary to 
describe the possible anomalies of the atrioventricular 
valves: each valve can be imperforate, atretic, fused 
with the other (a common atrioventricular valve, as in 
the atrioventricular septal defect), or over-riding a ventricular 
septal defect. 
Ventriculo-arterial connections 
Ventriculo-arterial concordance. In this situation, with 
two ventricles and two great arteries, each artery is 
connected to its morphologically correct counterpart: the 
pulmonary artery arises from the morphologically right 
ventricle and the aorta emerges from the morphologically 
left ventricle. These definitions of the ventriculo-arterial 
junction apply regardless of the situs and the atrioventricular 
connection. 
Ventriculo-arterial discordance. In this situation, the 
pulmonary artery is connected to the morphologically 
left ventricle, and the aorta to the morphologically right 
ventricle. 
Double outlet. In this case, more than 50% of each 
vessel is in connection with the same ventricle. It should 
then be determined if the double outlet occurs from a 
morphologically right (most common), left, or indeterminate 
ventricle. 
Single outlet. In this case, there is only one arterial trunk 
connecting to the ventricles. This may occur due to pulmonary 
atresia, aortic atresia, or common arterial trunk. 
In all cases, the ventricle(s) to which the single patent 
arterial vessel is connected should be defined. 
Ventriculo-arterial valves. In this case, the anomaly of 
the valve should be defined: atretic, imperforate, dysplastic, 
or overriding a ventricular septal defect. 
Additional anomalies. Any defects of the heart that have 
not been described in the sequential analysis can then be 
reported. These may include positional anomalies of the 
heart; levocardia, mesocardia, dextrocardia or defects of 
the single segments (interatrial or interventricular 
defects, aortic coarctation, etc.). 
114 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TIMING OF EXAMINATION, ULTRASOUND 
APPROACH, AND SCANNING PLANES 
Timing of examination. Assessment of the central 
cardiovascular connections is electively performed from 
18 weeks’ gestation onwards. However, major CHD can 
also be detected earlier, at 12–14 weeks, in high-risk cases. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). 
Complete assessment of fetal cardiac anatomy requires 
different views necessary to evaluate the central connections, 
from the veno-atrial junction to the ventriculoarterial 
one, and the ductal and aortic arches. Only by 
obtaining these views is it possible to confirm a normal 
sequential anatomy. The totality of these views constitutes 
fetal echocardiography, which also comprises a 
functional evaluation of the heart by color Doppler and, 
if necessary, pulsed-wave Doppler. However, in the 
midtrimester anomaly scan, only a partial assessment 
of the heart is generally required; this includes the 
4-chamber view and, in some countries, the outflow tract 
views.3 Since both the anomaly scan and fetal echocardiography 
are generally carried out in the 2nd trimester, most 
of the sonographic images reported in this chapter have 
been taken at 19–22 weeks’ gestation unless stated otherwise. 
The views can be summarized as follows: 
• Axial views: 
– 4-chamber view (Figures 5.1–5.7) 
– 3-vessel view (Figures 5.8 and 5.9) 
• Oblique views: 
– Long axis of the left ventricle (Figures 5.10–5.13) 
– Long axis of the right ventricle (Figures 5.11 and 
5.14) 
– Short axis of the right ventricle (Figures 5.12 and 
5.14) 
• Sagittal views: 
– Cavo-atrial junction (Figure 5.15) 
– Aortic arch (Figure 5.16) 

This represents the key plane for the ultrasound diagnosis 
of CHD: all anomalies of the atria, the atrioventricular 
valves, the septa (inter-atrial and interventricular – with 
the significant exception of the outlet and malalignment 
ventricular septal defects), and the ventricles are recognized 
in this view. At the same time, it allows a suspicion 
to be obtained of a significant number of the severe malformations 
affecting the ventriculo-arterial junction. 
Normal 4-chamber view. This represents an axial view 
of the fetal thorax. It is defined as an apical 4-chamber 
view (Figure 5.1a), if the cardiac apex is directed 
towards the transducer and the interventricular septum 
is aligned with the insonating beam, and as a transverse 
4-chamber view (Figure 5.1b) if the interventricular septum 
is at 90° angle with the insonating beam. For a correct 
assessment of the 4-chamber view, both approaches 
should be sought. In fact, due to the physics of ultrasound, 
only the anatomic structures at right-angles (or at 
an acute angle) to the insonating beam will be correctly 
displayed on the screen. As a result, the atrioventricular 
plane and the posterior atrial walls are better assessed 
on the apical 4-chamber view, whereas the septa, the 
myocardial walls, and the chordae tendinae are better 
displayed on the transverse 4-chamber view. Assignment 
of the cardiac chambers is made following an anteroposterior 
axis connecting the spine posteriorly with the 
sternum anteriorly: in front of the spine is the descending 
thoracic aorta, and the cardiac chamber adjacent to the 
aorta is the left atrium, while the chamber located just 
below the sternum is the right ventricle. The remaining 
two chambers (right atrium and left ventricle) are consequently 
assigned. A reliable marker that enables one to 
check the axiality of the 4-chamber view is given by the 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 115 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE BY SCANNING PLANE 
4-CHAMBER VIEW AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
Atrial defects. Single atrium; atrial enlargement from severe atrioventricular insufficiency; type II atrial septal 
defects (only the larger ones); congenital mega-atrium. 
Septal defects. Ventricular septal defect; complete/partial atrioventricular septal defect. 
Single atrioventricular inlet. Tricuspid atresia; hypoplastic left heart syndrome; single-inlet single ventricle; 
hypoplastic right heart. 
Double atrioventricular inlet. Double-inlet single ventricle. 
Ventricular disproportion. Aortic coarctation; mitral stenosis; critical aortic stenosis; pulmonary atresia/critical 
stenosis. 
Impaired contractility, unilateral. Critical aortic stenosis; pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. 
Impaired contractility, bilateral. Cardiomyopathies. 
Myocardial hypertrophy, bilateral. Cardiomyopathies. 
Figure 5.1 (a) Apical 4-chamber view. The atrioventricular plane and the drainage of two pulmonary veins are best imaged on this view. 
(b) Transverse 4-chamber view. With the lateral approach, the best-insonated structures are the myocardial free walls, the interventricular 
septum, the interatrial septum with the foramen ovale flap, the chordae tendinae, and the papillary muscles of the atrioventricular valves. 
On this view, the diameters of the cardiac chambers and of the atrioventricular annuli can be measured, if necessary. For the assignment of 
the cardiac chambers, see the text. LA, left atrium; pv, pulmonary veins; RV, right ventricle; arrowhead: thoracic descending aorta. 
a b 

ribs: in the fetus, these are horizontal, and therefore, if 
the 4-chamber view is correctly aligned, one complete 
rib on each side of the thorax will appear. On the other 
hand, in case of ill-alignment, several rib segments will 
be displayed on the screen. The following is a checklist 
of the anatomic structures to assess on the 4-chamber 
view (Figure 5.2): (a) two-third of the heart in the left 
hemithorax; (b) the cardiac apex pointing to the left of 
the midline (levocardia) with a 45° (± 20°) cardiac axis 
(this is calculated tracing a line along the interventricular 
septum and measuring the angle between this line and 
the midsagittal line, traced between the sternum and 
the spine); (c) at least two of the four pulmonary veins 
draining into the left atrium; (d) two atria of similar size; 
(e) the flap of the foramen ovale opening into the left 
atrium; (f) two separate atrioventricular valves, with offset 
appearance (the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve 
inserts just below the septal leaflet of the mitral valve) 
and regular excursion; (g) two ventricles of roughly similar 
size, with the right one slightly wider and rounder than 
the left, due to the presence of the moderator band in its 
apical part (the left ventricle forms the cardiac apex); 
(h) free right and left myocardial walls of similar thickness 
and with regular contractility; (i) an intact interventricular 
septum. With regard to sonographic assessment of 
the interventricular septum, it should be noted that an 
116 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.2 Checklist of the features to 
assess on the 4-chamber view. (a) Twothirds 
of the heart in left hemithorax. 
(b) Apex on the left, with 45° cardiac 
axis (levocardia). (c) At least two 
pulmonary veins draining in the left 
atrium. (d) Two atria of similar size. 
(e) Foramen ovale flap opening into the 
left atrium. (f) Presence of the crux of 
the heart, with offset aspect of the two 
atrioventricular valves, which show normal 
systodiastolic excursion. (g) Two 
ventricles of similar diameter, with mild 
prevalence of the right one, which also 
shows a rounder appearance because 
of the presence of the moderator band. 
The left ventricle forms the cardiac apex. 
(h) Equal thickness of the free ventricular 
walls, with normal contractility. 
(i) Intact interventricular septum. In 
addition, the rhythm should be checked. 
a f
g
h
i 
b
c
d
e 

artifact can occur if this structure is assessed on the 
apical 4-chamber view: absorption of the ultrasound 
waves by the whole length of the septum creates a 
‘dropout’ artifact just below the atrioventricular plane, 
and this may be mistaken for an inlet ventricular septal 
defect. This is why the interventricular septum should be 
electively assessed on the transverse 4-chamber view – at 
least for the part that is indeed visible on this plane. In 
fact, the interventricular septum wedges towards the 
aortic root, at the center of the heart, and this subaortic 
tract of the septum cannot be visualized on the 4-chamber 
view, since it lies in another plane. To assess the 
subaortic tract of the septum, the long axis of the left 
ventricle should be visualized (see below). 
Major anomalies recognizable on the 4-chamber view 
are listed in Figure 5.3. 
Atrial anomalies. A common atrium is associated in most 
instances with a complete atrioventricular septal defect 
(Figure 5.4a): there is generally no evidence of an interatrial 
septum, (some remnants can sometimes be seen). In 
the case of type II atrial septal defect (of which only the 
largest can be suspected at ultrasound), there is a wide 
foramen ovale flap that floats freely between the two 
atria, and often the septum primum is not identifiable as 
such, but the flap departs from the atrioventricular plane 
(Figure 5.4b). If a common atrium is suspected, the first 
step is to double-check the scanning view: if the plane is 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 117 
Figure 5.3 Anomalies recognizable 
on the 4-chamber view. (a) Normal 
heart. (b) Right atriomegaly from 
tricuspid dysplasia and insufficiency. 
(c) Ebstein’s anomaly, with apical displacement 
of the insertion of the tricuspid 
valve. (d) Ventricular septal defect. 
(e) Atrioventricular septal defect (with 
common atrioventricular valve). (f) Left 
ventricular hypoplasia and mitral atresia 
(hypoplastic left heart syndrome). 
(g) Right ventricular hypoplasia (plus 
ventricular septal defect) due to tricuspid 
atresia. (h) Double-inlet single ventricle. 
(i) Ventricular disproportion and 
moderate prevalence of the right ventricle 
(an indirect sign of aortic coarctation). 
(j) Biventricular hypertrophy 
(cardiomyopathy). (k) Tumors (rhabdomyomatosis). 
RA, right atrium; CA, 
common atrium; LA, left atrium; SV, 
single ventricle. 
a g
h
i
j 
k 
b
c
d
e
f 

slightly posteriorized, the normal coronary sinus can be 
mistaken for an ostium primum atrial septal defect. The 
correct 4-chamber view is just cranial to the view in 
which the coronary sinus is visible. If the impression of a 
common atrium persists, then the atrioventricular plane 
should be assessed, as an atrioventricular septal defect is 
the anomaly most commonly associated with a single 
atrium. If atrial enlargement is detected, this is almost 
always due to an insufficiency of the correspondent atrioventricular 
valve. It should be underlined that this finding 
of an increased atrial volume is much more commonly 
seen on the right side than on the left: the former finding 
can be associated with Ebstein’s anomaly (Figure 5.4c) 
and with tricuspid dysplasia, which in turn is often associated 
with pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. On the contrary, 
left atrial enlargement is due to mitral insufficiency, 
which is almost always associated with critical aortic 
stenosis. The final anomaly that can be detected while 
assessing the atria is absence of the septum primum, usually 
in the context of a partial atrioventricular septal 
defect (Figure 5.4d). 
Septal anomalies. A ventricular septal defect (VSD) can 
be recognized on the 4-chamber view only if it involves 
the inlet perimembranous area or the muscular part of 
the septum (Figure 5.5a,b). The defects involving the outlet, 
subaortic, portion can be detected only on the long 
axis of the left ventricle. A muscular VSD appears as an 
interruption of the septal continuity of variable dimensions, 
preferably shown on a transverse 4-chamber view, 
because of the above-mentioned physics of ultrasound. 
An inlet VSD, on the contrary, is best appreciated on an 
apical 4-chamber view, as a small absence of echoes just 
below the atrioventricular plane (Figure 5.5b). This type 
of defect is significantly associated with trisomy 21. An 
atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is defined as complete 
if there is only one atrioventricular valve deriving from 
the fusion of the two orifices (Figure 5.5c). The partial 
variant of atrioventricular septal defect is rarely diagnosed 
in the fetus, and is characterized by a defect of the 
septum primum associated with loss of the normal offset 
appearance of the atrioventricular plane (Figure 5.4d). 
Single atrioventricular inlet. A single inlet can be due to 
atresia/imperforation of the mitral or the tricuspid valve. 
118 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.4 Atrial anomalies: 4-chamber view. (a) Common 
atrium (CA) in complete atrioventricular septal defect. (b) Wide 
foramen ovale (arrowhead) in atrial septal defect type II (ostium 
secundum). (c) Severe right atriomegaly due to tricuspid insufficiency 
in Ebstein’s anomaly. The arrow indicates the severe displacement 
of the septal and posterior tricuspid leaflets (RA, right 
atrium). (d) Absence of the septum primum (arrow): in partial atrioventricular 
septal defect. 
Figure 5.5 Septal defects: 4-chamber view. (a) Double muscular ventricular septal defects (arrows). (b) Ventricular septal defect, 
inlet type (arrow). (c) Complete atrioventricular septal defect, with common atrioventricular valve and common atrium (CA). LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
c 
a b c 
d 

The former is usually seen in the context of a hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome (Figure 5.6a) (the isolated form of 
mitral atresia is extremely rare). On the contrary, in the 
case of tricuspid atresia (Figure 5.6b), the ventricle is 
hypoplastic but the outflow (pulmonary artery) can be 
normal. However, if both the tricuspid and pulmonary 
valves are atretic, then the right ventricle is virtual and 
the defect, which is called hypoplastic right heart, is 
the mirror image of the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. 
The final possibility is the single-inlet single ventricle 
(Figure 5.6c), a very rare anomaly in which a single 
atrium connects to a single dominant ventricle via a single 
patent atrioventricular valve. 
Double-inlet single ventricle. In this rare anomaly 
(Figure 5.7a), there are two normal atria that connect to 
the same ventricle via two separate atrioventricular valves. 
Ventricular disproportion. If the right ventricle is larger 
than the left ventricle, and the mitral annulus is significantly 
smaller than the tricuspid annulus, the defect can 
be a rare mitral stenosis (Figure 5.7b), which can be 
associated with aortic stenosis and coarctation in Shone 
syndrome. However, the defect most commonly associated 
with ventricular disproportion (right ventricle 
larger than the left) is aortic coarctation (Figure 5.7c). 
Finally, it should be pointed out that the same appearance, 
with a right ventricle larger than the left, can also 
represent a transient benign finding that will regress 
spontaneously after birth. 
Impaired contractility, unilateral. If unilateral, impaired 
contractility cannot be due to a primary myocardial disorder, 
but is the consequence of an increase in interventricular 
pressure and/or volume. Hence, if right-sided, it 
is usually due to pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis; if it 
is the left ventricular myocardial wall that is affected, then 
critical aortic stenosis is likely to be the underlying cause. 
Impaired contractility, bilateral. If the whole myocardium 
is affected, then a primary disorder of cardiomyocytes 
(cardiomyopathy or myocarditis) is likely 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 119 
Figure 5.6 Single ventricular inlet: 4-chamber view (a) Hypoplastic left heart: the mitral valve is atretic and the left ventricle is extremely 
hypoplastic (arrowhead). (b) Tricuspid atresia: the tricuspid valve is atretic and the right ventricle is hypoplastic (arrowhead). A small inlet 
ventricular septal defect connects the rudimentary right chamber with the left ventricle. (c) Single-inlet single ventricle: there is a single wide 
atrium connected through a single atrioventricular valve to a single ventricular chamber. LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SV, single 
ventricle. 
Figure 5.7 Ventricular anomalies: 4-chamber view. (a) Double-inlet single ventricle: two atria connect with the same ventricle through 
two separate atrioventricular valves. (b) Moderate left ventricular hypoplasia (arrow) due to mitral stenosis (the annulus is reduced in size 
in comparison with the tricuspid one. Note also the moderately dilated coronary sinus, due to a concurrent persistence of the left superior 
vena cava draining into the coronary sinus (arrowhead). (c) Ventricular disproportion due to prevalence of the right chambers. This can be 
an indirect sign of aortic coarctation (arrowheads). LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SV, single ventricle. 
a b c 
a b c 

to be present. In these cases, the myocardial walls 
are often thickened, the ejection fraction is reduced, 
and atrioventricular valvular regurgitation is often 
associated. In the case of myocarditis, the heart is usually 
dilated, the walls are less hypertrophied, and 
there should be serological evidence of maternal 
infection. 
Myocardial hypertrophy, bilateral. This is usually due to 
primary or secondary cardiomyopathy. 
120 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
3-VESSEL VIEW AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
This represents an axial view of the upper mediastinum, to 
evaluate the pulmonary artery, ascending aorta and superior 
vena cava in relation to their relative sizes and relationships. 
It is important to underline that the abnormalities of 
the ventriculo-arterial connections, such as transposition of 
the great arteries, may not show up on the 3-vessel view, as 
this plane is higher than the ventriculo-arterial connection. 
Normal 3-vessel view (Figure 5.8a). As already mentioned, 
this is an axial view of the upper mediastinum; 
in particular, the three vessels are (from right to left) the 
superior vena cava, the aorta, and the pulmonary artery. 
If the transducer is slightly tilted, the junction of the ductus 
arteriosus with the isthmic tract of the aortic arch 
becomes visible. The thymus is also visible just behind 
the sternum, whereas the two arches are in the prevertebral 
area, on the left of the trachea. Some AA have used 
the view with confluence of two arches to emphasize 
vascular relationships to the fetal trachea as well; in fact 
it is called the 3 vessel and trachea view (Figure 5.8c, d). 
As a result, the abnormalities of the great vessels, the 
aortic arch, and the thymus (aplasia/hypoplasia, typical 
of 22q11 microdeletion) can be recognized on this view. 
Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction (Figure 5.8b). 
Persistence of the left superior vena cava may or may not 
be associated with agenesis of the right superior vena cava. 
If both vessels are present at the same time, then a fourth 
small vessel can be seen on the left of the pulmonary artery; 
if the right superior vena cava is absent, then the left superior 
vena cava will be larger, as it will be the only venous 
return for the cerebral circulation; at the same time, the 
rightmost vessel (right superior vena cava) will be absent. 
Aortic arch anomalies (Figure 5.8c,d). In coarctation 
of the aorta, the vessel in the middle, corresponding 
to the aorta, will be severely or moderately hypoplastic, 
Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction. Persistence of the left superior vena cava; agenesis of the right superior 
vena cava. 
Aortic artery/arch anomalies. Aortic atresia; aortic coarctation; aortic arch interruption; right aortic arch; double 
aortic arch. 
Pulmonary artery anomalies. Pulmonary atresia. 
Thymus anomalies. Aplasia; hypoplasia. 
Figure 5.8 Anomalies of the 3-vessel view. In all images, the 
arrowhead indicates the position of the trachea. (a) In the 
normal fetus, the thymus (T) is located in front of the three 
vessels, with the pulmonary artery (P) on the left, the aorta 
(A) in the middle, and the superior vena cava on the right. (b) 
In the case of persistence of the left superior vena cava 
(LSVC), this vessel is found on the left of the pulmonary 
artery. In the case shown here, the concurrent agenesis of the 
right superior vena cava led to the significant dilatation of the 
former vessel. (c) In the case of severe aortic coarctation, the 
aorta, in the middle, appears extremely reduced in size in 
comparison with the adjacent ductal arch. Note the persistent 
left superior vena cava on the left of the ductal arch. (d) In the 
case of right aortic arch, which is frequently associated with 
22q11 microdeletion, the trachea is located between the ductal 
arch (on the left) and the aortic arch (on the right). AO, 
aortic arch; DA, ductal arch. 
A b 
c d 

This is the second most important view after the 
4-chamber view. 
Long axis of the left ventricle, normal (Figure 5.12a,b). 
This view is obtained by rotating the transducer slightly 
towards the right fetal shoulder, in order to visualize the 
ascending aorta: this vessel arises from the left ventricle 
and points towards the right shoulder prior to curving 
into the aortic arch. 
Checklist. (1) The presence of a vessel that connects with 
the morphologically left ventricle positioned on the left 
and that can be defined as the aorta (branching at wide 
angle far from the semilunar valve). (2) Septo-aortic continuity. 
(3) The presence of a semilunar valve showing 
normal systo-diastolic excursion (the leaflets disappear 
completely during systole, being flattened on the aortic 
walls). (4) The presence of crossover: the direction of the 
aorta is at roughly 90° to the direction of the pulmonary 
trunk displayed on the long axis of the right ventricle. (5) 
The size of the vessel is similar to (slightly smaller than) 
that of the other vessel visualized on the long axis of the 
right ventricle. 
Septal anomalies (Figure 5.13a,b). In a malalignment 
VSD, the infundibular septum is anteriorly displaced, 
and this leads to the aortic overriding. This feature is 
shared by most conotruncal anomalies, and, if detected, 
should prompt a thorough assessment of the right 
outflow for the differential diagnosis (Figure 5.11). On 
the contrary, in the case of a simple outlet VSD, there is 
only a discontinuity of the septum, but this is normally 
aligned with the anterior aortic wall. 
Crossover anomalies (Figure 5.13c,d). If two parallel 
vessels are displayed on the long axis of the left ventricle, 
then an anomaly of crossover is present. In this 
case, if each vessel arises from one ventricle, then the 
diagnosis will be transposition of the great arteries; if, 
on the contrary, both vessels are connected to the same 
ventricle, which is almost always the right one, then a 
double-outlet right ventricle is diagnosed. A doubleoutlet 
left ventricle is an extremely rare condition. 
Anomalies of the aorta (Figure 5.13e). In most cases of 
critical aortic stenosis, the 4-chamber view is significantly 
abnormal, and this leads to the diagnosis. On the long axis 
of the left ventricle, the aortic annulus is hypoplastic, and 
the dysplastic and thickened valve remains in the lumen of 
the vessel throughout the cardiac cycle. The ascending 
aorta can be enlarged or hypoplastic. In the case of a 
common arterial trunk, the main pulmonary artery or the 
two branches arise directly from the aortic vessel, which is 
overriding a malalignment VSD. The truncal valve, which 
derives from the abnormal fusion of the two semilunar 
valves, is often dysplastic and insufficient. 
according to the degree of coarctation. The differential 
diagnosis with interruption of the aortic arch can be only 
made if the 3-vessel and trachea view (with the confluence 
of the two arches) is obtained. If the aortic arch is interrupted, 
the course of the ascending aorta is more vertical 
and the confluence of the ductal, and the aortic arch can 
not be demonstrated. In the case of a right aortic arch, this 
will be on the right of the trachea, and the trachea will be 
between the pulmonary and the aortic arch (Figure 5.8d). 
Pulmonary artery anomalies. In pulmonary atresia, the 
leftmost vessel, corresponding to the pulmonary artery, 
shows a reduction in size. 
Thymus anomalies (Figure 5.9). In the case of thymus 
aplasia, the three vessels are located just behind the sternum, 
and the thymus cannot be visualized. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 121 
Septal anomalies. Outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD); malalignment VSD. 
Anomalies of the aorta. Critical aortic stenosis; aortic atresia; common arterial trunk. 
Crossover anomalies. Transposition of the great arteries; double-outlet right ventricle. 
Figure 5.9 Anomalies of the 3-vessel view. (a) Thymus hypoplasia, 
in a fetus at 34 weeks’ gestation with tetralogy of Fallot and 
22q11 microdeletion. (b) Normal thymus at 33 weeks’ gestation. 
Note the different dimensions. A, aortic arch; P, pulmonary artery; 
T, thymus. 
LONG AXIS OF THE LEFT VENTRICLE AND RELATED 
MALFORMATIONS
a b 

122 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Normal 
Anomalies of efferent vessel Anomalies of crossover 
Anomalies of 
septo-aortic continuity 
Assessment of right outflow tract 
Figure 5.10 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of CHD detectable on the left outflow tract view. (a) Normal. (b) 
Anomalies of outflow: critical aortic stenosis, (b1) without gross anomalies of the left ventricle or (b2) with severe endocardial fibroelastosis. 
(c) Anomalies (lack) of crossover: (c1) double-outlet right ventricle, if both great vessels are connected with the right (anterior) ventricle; 
(c2) transposition of the great arteries, if each vessel is connected with the contralateral ventricle (left ventricle–pulmonary artery and 
right ventricle–aorta). (d) Anomalies of septo-aortic continuity: (d1) simple outlet ventricular septal defect (VSD) if the septum is normally 
aligned with the anterior aortic wall; (d2) malalignment VSD, if the infundibular septum is anteriorly displaced and the aorta overrides the 
defect. In this case, to reach the final diagnosis is necessary to assess the right outflow (see Figure 5.11). Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, 
right ventricle. 
a 
b1 
b2 
d1 
c1
d2 
c2 

CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 123 
Figure 5.11 Diagnostic algorithm for the differential diagnosis of CHD featuring a malalignment ventricular septal defect (VSD), 
detected on the left outflow tract view (a) (see also Figure 5.10). (b) If the right outflow is normal, the diagnosis remains malalignment 
VSD. (c) If the right outflow is reduced in size, the diagnosis is classic tetralogy of Fallot. (d) If the right outflow is absent (atretic), the 
diagnosis is pulmonary atresia plus VSD. (e) If the pulmonary trunk and branches are severely dilated, the diagnosis is tetralogy of Fallot 
with functionally absent pulmonary valve. (f) Finally, if the pulmonary artery does not arise from the right ventricle, but rather from the 
aorta, the diagnosis is common arterial trunk. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; SVC, superior vena 
cava; Tr, common arterial trunk. 
a 
b c
e 
f 
d 

Two different views may be used to assess the right outflow 
tract: the short and long axes of the right ventricle. 
The former is ideally more complete, since all connections 
of the right heart are displayed; however, it should 
be noted that this plane is easily achieved only if the fetus 
is lying with a posterior spine. On the contrary, the long 
axis, which depicts just the infundibular part and the 
main pulmonary artery with the semilunar valve, can be 
obtained with virtually all fetal positions. 
Long axis of the right ventricle, normal. This view is 
obtained from the long axis of the left ventricle, by curving 
the transducer towards the fetal head. 
Checklist. (1) The presence of a vessel that connects 
to the morphologically right ventricle positioned on 
the right and that can be defined as the pulmonary 
artery (acute angle bifurcation). (2) The presence of a 
semilunar valve showing normal systo-diastolic excursion 
(the leaflets disappear completely during systole, 
flattening on the pulmonary artery walls). (3) The 
presence of crossover: the direction of the pulmonary 
artery is at roughly 90° to the direction of the aorta 
displayed on the adjacent long axis of the left ventricle. 
(4) The size of the vessel is similar to (slightly larger 
than) that of the aorta visualized on the long axis of the 
left ventricle. 
124 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.12 Left and right outflows. (a) Long axis of the left ventricle 
– systole: the aorta arising from the left ventricle is shown; 
the mitral valve is closed, while the aortic semilunar valve is not 
visible since the cusps are flattened along the aortic walls. (b) Long 
axis of the left ventricle – diastole: the mitral valve opens, showing 
its leaflets, while the aortic valve closes, appearing as a bright dot 
within the left outflow tract. (c) Short axis of the right ventricle – 
systole: the whole of the right heart is visible, with the right atrium, 
the closed tricuspid valve, the tripartite right ventricle, the pulmonary 
trunk, and branches; also on the right side, the semilunar 
valve is not visible during systole, while the tricuspid valve is 
closed. (d) Short axis of the right ventricle – diastole: the pulmonary 
valve closes, while the tricuspid valve is open. Ao, aorta; 
LV, left ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.13 Left outflow tract anomalies. (a) Malalignment 
ventricular septal defect (VSD): the aorta overrides a wide septal 
defect. (b) Outlet VSD, consisting of a simple defect of the outflow 
perimembranous part of the septum. Note the normal alignment 
of the interventricular septum with the anterior aortic wall 
(arrowhead). (c) Transposition of the great arteries: two parallel 
vessels are seen arising each from one ventricle. (d) Double-outlet 
right ventricle: two vessels both arising from the right (anterior) 
ventricle are visible. In this condition, the pulmonary 
outflow is often stenotic, as in this case. (e) Critical aortic stenosis: 
endocardial fibroelastosis and a hypoplastic aortic annulus 
are visible. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; 
RV, right ventricle. 
LONG/SHORT AXIS OF THE RIGHT VENTRICLE 
AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
Pulmonary trunk anomalies. Pulmonary atresia/stenosis; absent pulmonary valve syndrome. 
a a b c 
d e 
b 
c d 

This is a longitudinal view of the fetal thorax, displaying 
the systemic venous returns. Therefore, the only 
anomaly that may be detected on this view is the rare 
absence of the inferior vena cava, replaced by an azygos 
continuation, typically associated with left atrial 
isomerism. 
Cavo-atrial junction, normal (Figure 5.15a). In 
this longitudinal view of the fetal thorax, both venae 
cavae are seen entering the right atrium (seagull 
wings view). 
Checklist. (1) The presence of both venae cavae entering 
the right atrium. (2) Both venae cavae should have the 
same size. 
Short axis of the right ventricle, normal (Figure 5.12c,d). 
To obtain this view, from the 4-chamber view, the transducer 
should perform a rotation mirroring that needed 
for the long axis of the left ventricle, i.e., towards the left 
fetal shoulder. 
Checklist (same as for the long axis of the right ventricle). 
(1) The presence of a vessel that connects to the morphologically 
right ventricle positioned on the right and that 
can be defined as the pulmonary artery (acute angle bifurcation). 
(2) The presence of a semilunar valve showing 
normal systo-diastolic excursion (the leaflets disappear 
completely during systole, flattening on the pulmonary 
artery walls). (3) The presence of crossover: the direction 
of the pulmonary artery is at roughly 90° to the direction 
of the aorta, which in this case is visible in the middle of 
the image, in cross-section. (4) The size of the vessel is 
similar to (slightly larger than) that of the aorta. 
Pulmonary trunk anomalies. In the case of moderate 
pulmonary stenosis (Figure 5.14a), the semilunar valve 
is dysplastic and thickened, with incomplete opening 
during systole. Post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary 
artery can be associated. On the contrary, in the case of 
pulmonary atresia (Figure 5.14b), the pulmonary trunk 
and the branches are often hypoplastic, although the 
vessel can appear to be of normal size if a formerly 
stenotic valve has become atretic only late in gestation, 
as may sometimes happen. In the case of pulmonary 
atresia with VSD, the main pulmonary artery may also 
be absent, with the two branches departing directly 
from the ductus arteriosus. Finally, in the case of 
absent pulmonary valve syndrome with or without 
tetralogy of Fallot – (Figure 5.14c), the pulmonary 
trunk and branches are severely dilated due to the conspicuous 
steno-insufficiency of the functionally absent 
pulmonary valve.
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 125 
Figure 5.14 Right outflow tract anomalies. (a) Moderate pulmonary stenosis: note the thickened pulmonary valve cusps and the 
post-stenotic ectasia. (b) Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum: the pulmonary trunk and branches (arrows) are significantly 
hypoplastic, due to the valve atresia. Note also the thickened pulmonary valve. (c) Tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve: the 
image shows severe dilatation of the pulmonary trunk and branches, consequent to the severe insufficiency caused by the functional 
absence of the rudimentary pulmonary valve. LPA, left pulmonary artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.15 Anomalies of the cavo-atrial junction. (a) Situs solitus: 
normal venous return, with drainage of the superior and inferior 
venae cavae into the right atrium. (b) Situs ambiguus (left 
isomerism): the inferior vena cava (?) is absent and one suprahepatic 
vein (SH) drains directly into the right atrium. The systemic 
return is abnormal and consists of an azygos continuation (not visible 
in this image) draining into the superior vena cava. IVC, inferior 
vena cava; RA, right atrium; SVC, superior vena cava. 
CAVO-ATRIAL JUNCTION AND RELATED MALFORMATIONS 
a 
a b 
b c 

Absence of the inferior vena cava (Figure 5.15b). In 
left atrial isomerism, the systemic return is abnormal: 
the inferior vena cava is absent, the suprahepatic veins 
drain directly into the right atrium, and there is 
an azygos continuation draining into the superior 
vena cava. 
126 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
LONGITUDINAL VIEW OF THE AORTIC ARCH 
On this view, the whole course of the aortic arch, from 
the left ventricle to the abdominal aorta, is displayed. 
The neck vessels are also visible in most instances. 
In the case of transposition of the great arteries, the 
course of the aortic arch is wider than normal, due to 
the more anterior position of the ascending aorta, 
arising from the substernal right ventricle. The two 
aspects of the normal arch and the transposed arch 
have been said to resemble an umbrella handle and a 
hockey stick, respectively. 
Figure 5.16 Longitudinal view of the aortic arch. 
This view, obtained with a ventral approach, demonstrates 
the ascending aorta, the aortic arch with the 
neck vessels (arrowheads), and the descending aorta. 
3D/4D FETAL ECHOCARDIOGRAPHY – CARDIO-STIC 
Background and technique. In the fetus, the main factor 
limiting the 3D assessment of a dynamic organ such as 
the heart is absence of a triggering source, which in the 
adult allows coupling of the different frames acquired 
during the cardiac cycle. This problem has been overcome 
with the spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC) 
protocol. In this technique, the array inside the transducer 
housing performs a single slow sweep, recording a 
single 3D dataset. This volume consists of a high number 
of 2D frames. STIC derives the heart rate from the periodicity 
of the movements of the cardiac structures, and 
eventually a single virtual cardiac cycle, each frame of 
which is the result of the overlay of many acquired 
frames, is reconstructed. As a result, this technique cannot 
be used in case of fetal arrhythmias (transient or persistent), 
since the abnormal fetal heart rate would 
compromise the adequacy of the acquired volume. Once 
acquired, the volume is opened and can be used offline 
for multiplanar navigation and/or four-dimensional 
image renderings using the various modes already 
described in other sections of this chapter. 
Acquisition. The volume to acquire should include the 
whole thorax, from the subdiaphragmatic venous returns 
to the upper mediastinum (3-vessel view). With such a 
volume, all echocardiographic planes may be obtained 
offline with the multiplanar mode. The best approach to 
acquire an adequate volume is to start the acquisition 
procedure while displaying an apical 4-chamber view. 
Modes of analysis. There are different rendering modes 
that may enhance the characterization of cardiac 
anatomy in normal and abnormal conditions. 
Multiplanar mode. This represents the basic mode for 
exploration and navigation of the volume. The fetal heart 
can be thoroughly assessed, and all echocardiographic 
planes needed in fetal echocardiography can be achieved 

offline (Figure 5.17). It has to be underlined that the 
facility with which a beginner as well as an experienced 
operator can navigate the volume of the heart and great 
vessels contributes significantly to a better understanding 
of the three-dimensionality of the central cardiovascular 
structures.4 
Glassbody mode. The possibility of coupling a transparent 
mode for the grayscale image with a surface mode 
for the color Doppler signal allows a display on the same 
image of the diastolic filling of the ventricles and the systolic 
ejection of blood through the great vessels, giving a 
striking 3D cast of the crossover (Figure 5.18). This 
approach also contributes to the understanding of the 
relatively complex anatomy of the outflow tracts.5 
Surface mode. This mode is used to display, with different 
threshold and postprocessing filters, the anatomic 
structures of the four chamber and, less often, of the outflows 
(Figure 5.19). In particular, this mode allows 
planes to be visualized that cannot be obtained with 2D 
ultrasound, such as the coronal view of the atrioventricular 
valves or the en-face view of the interventricular 
septum (Figure 5.20). 
Inversion mode. This mode inverts the color code 
assigned to each pixel, displaying in black the echogenic 
structures (formerly displayed in white) and, vice versa, 
in white the sonolucent pixels. This simple conversion 
allows one to produce cast-like images of the cardiac 
chambers and outflows that may resemble those seen 
during cardiac catheterization (Figure 5.21). 
Tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This is one of 
the latest developments in 3D ultrasound. It allows one 
to display on a single panel a variable number of reconstructed 
2D sections, as in a computed tomograpic or 
magnetic resonance imaging scan. In particular, it displays 
parallel slices that are orthogonal to the plane of 
acquisition.6 Therefore, if the acquisition is performed 
orthogonally to the fetal body (e.g. starting from the apical 
or transverse 4-chamber view), and if the volume is 
sufficiently large, all consecutive slices from the transverse 
abdominal to the high mediastinum with the ductal 
and aortic arches will be displayed simultaneously and 
automatically (Figure 5.22). 
B-flow. Finally, the B-flow mode is able to display 
casts of cardiovascular structures, starting from grayscale 
image, without the need for Doppler. This modality 
is very helpful in characterizing complex CHD 
(Figure 5.23).7 
Diagnostic role of 4D echocardiography. The possible 
applications of 4D echocardiography are enormous. Its 
potential role in fetal cardiology teaching and training is 
huge: the possibility to display live and in three dimensions 
the four chambers and the outflows in normal and 
abnormal conditions significantly enhances the understanding 
of complex concepts such as impaired contractility 
and pump failure. In this way, also, the learning 
curve for fetal echocardiography will dramatically 
improve. The use of Cardio-STIC may also be beneficial 
if applied in the screening setting: the possibility to 
acquire a volume of the outflows rapidly while displaying 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 127 
Figure 5.17 Cardio-STIC: grayscale 
multiplanar imaging. This image 
modality allows simultaneous visualization 
of the cardiac anatomic structures 
on the three orthogonal planes. By 
positioning the caliper on the structure 
of interest, it is possible to assess its 
characteristics on the three planes. The 
image is in motion, and consists of 
a reconstructed virtual cardiac cycle 
played in a cineloop sequence. 

a simple 4-chamber view enables the operator to navigate 
it offline and extract the outflow tract views. In a 
diagnostic setting, the possibility of investigating cardiac 
defects using planes not obtainable by conventional 2D 
ultrasound, such as the coronal view of the atrioventricular 
valves, significantly increases the confidence with 
which some difficult diagnoses can be reached. In addition, 
the possibility of exploiting the potential of the various 
rendering modes in order to assess and display 
abnormal and hypoplastic vessels is likely to improve 
the characterization of rare anomalies. Finally, 4D 
echocardiography can be used advantageously also for 
peer-review and second opinions; and the expert has the 
possibility to re-do the fetal echocardiographic examination 
by navigating the volume. 
When is it useful to use Cardio-STIC? We feel that it 
may represent a good rule, if there is such a possibility, 
128 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.18 Cardio-STIC: color 
Doppler. Glassbody rendering with 
transparent maximum mode. This 
image modality allows a display of the 
3D color Doppler thanks to the transparency 
of the grayscale image. As a 
result, with appropriate adjustments of 
settings, it is possible to actually visualize 
the crossover of the great vessels. 
(a) Conventional color Doppler image 
of the left outflow: to check the 
crossover, in 2D imaging, it is necessary 
to image both the left and right 
outflows. (b) With the glassbody mode, 
the crossover is recognizable on a single 
image. Ao, ascending aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, 
right ventricle. 
Figure 5.19 Cardio-STIC: surface 
rendering. Ebstein’s anomaly. The 
use of the surface mode allows one to 
visualize in detail the abnormal tricuspid 
valve, the dysplastic leaflets of 
which are plastered down along the 
interventricular septum (arrows). Note 
also the clear depiction of the foramen 
ovale and the abnormal chordae tendinae 
of the tricuspid valve (above the 
arrows, within the ventricular cavity). 
LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

to acquire at least one grayscale and one color Doppler 
volume of the fetal heart in each patient. This can then 
be used as archived material only or may become useful 
in case of medicolegal litigation or consultation. With 
regard to abnormal cases, in the following sections on 
CHD, 4D images will be illustrated and discussed whenever 
they may significantly improve diagnostic and/or 
prognostic accuracy. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 129 
Figure 5.20 Cardio-STIC: surface rendering. Scanning 
planes not obtainable with 2D echocardiography. 
(a) Normal heart: coronal view of the atrioventricular 
plane. The reconstructed coronal view allows visualization 
of the two leaflets of the mitral valve (arrowheads) 
and the three leaflets of the tricuspid valve (arrows). 
(b) Apical muscular VSD. The possibility of displaying 
the en face view of the interventricular septum, from 
within the right ventricle, allows one to define the size 
and the location of the defect (arrowhead). RA, right 
atrium. 
Figure 5.21 Cardio-STIC: inversion mode. This image 
modality inverts the color assigned to the black and 
white pixels, providing a cast-like image of the cardiac 
chambers. This figure shows a normal fetal heart during 
diastole: note the characteristic different shapes of the 
ventricles (the right one is rounded due to the moderator 
band at the apex) and the black spots representing 
the valve leaflets with the chordae tendinae (arrows). 
The arrowheads indicate two pulmonary veins entering 
the left atrium. 
a b 

130 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.22 Cardio-STIC: tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This image modality allows one to display on a single panel a variable 
number of parallel reconstructed 2D sections that are orthogonal to the plane of acquisition. Therefore, if the acquisition is performed 
orthogonal to the fetal body, and if the volume is sufficiently large, all consecutive slices from the transverse abdominal to the high mediastinum 
with the ductal and aortic arches will be displayed automatically. These images show a normal heart: the sequential anatomy can be 
assessed, from the abdominal situs (lower row, right window) up to the aortic arch (upper row, central window). The displayed planes are 
visible on the left window of the upper row. The arrow indicates the trachea and the arrowhead the transverse aortic arch. Ao, ascending 
aorta; LA, left atrium; LV, left ventricle; Pa, main pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.23 Cardio-STIC. B-flow imaging 
demonstrating the normal venous 
returns. The rendered image shows the 
inferior and superior venae cavae 
(arrows) draining into the right atrium. 
The whole aortic arch and supra-hepatic 
veins draining into the inferior vena cava 
are also visible, Ao, descending aorta; shv, 
supra-hepatic veins). 

Definition. The essential feature of the pulmonary veins 
when abnormally connected is that they drain into a site 
other than the morphological left atrium. Total anomalous 
pulmonary venous connection (TAPVC) accounts 
for approximately 2% of CHD in postnatal life. TAPVC 
is characterized by the anomalous drainage of all the 
pulmonary veins, whereas partial anomalous pulmonary 
venous connection (PAPVC) is characterized by the 
anomalous drainage of one, two, or three of the four 
pulmonary veins. 
Anatomy. Among the various classifications proposed, 
that due to Darling et al8 is the most frequently used. In 
reference to the drainage anomaly this classification distinguishes 
four types of TAPVC: 
• Type 1: supracardiac (50% of cases). The four pulmonary 
veins drain into a venous collector located 
behind the left atrium. This collector is traditionally 
termed the confluence. From this horizontal collector, 
a vertical vein runs up to reach the innominate vein; 
this then terminates in the right superior vena cava. 
At times, the vertical vein may be obstructed due to 
extrinsic compression by the bronchus and the ipsilateral 
pulmonary artery; these obstructions are rarely 
severe in the perinatal period. 
• Type 2: cardiac (25% of cases). The pulmonary veins 
drain through the coronary sinus or, more rarely, 
directly into the right atrium. Usually, there is no 
obstruction. 
• Type 3: infracardiac or infradiaphragmatic (20% of 
cases). The confluence of the pulmonary veins enters a 
descending vertical vein that passes into the abdomen 
through the esophageal orifice of the diaphragm. 
It then usually drains into the portal vein or, more 
rarely, into the ductus venosus or the inferior vena 
cava. When the infracardiac connection is to the portal 
venous system the abnormal venous return is 
almost always obstructed. 
• Type 4: mixed (5% of cases). The pulmonary veins 
drain separately to different anomalous sites. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Anomalous connection of the 
pulmonary veins is notoriously misdiagnosed prenatally, 
especially when isolated. In the few cases described prenatally, 
TAPVC is often associated with other cardiac 
anomalies in the context of heterotaxy syndromes. The 
diagnosis is suspected on the 4-chamber view. Indirect 
signs of TAPVC are: (1) moderate atrioventricular disproportion 
(Figure 5.24a), with the right sections larger 
than the left ones (in supradiaphragmatic forms) and (2) a 
pulmonary artery significantly larger than the ascending 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 131 
Figure 5.24 Anomalous pulmonary venous connection. (a) In a 4-chamber view obtained in a fetus with TAPVC, there is an atrioventricular 
disproportion, with the right sections larger than the left ones. AD, right atrium; AS, left atrium, VD, right ventricle; VS, left ventricle. 
(b) A venous confluence chamber (arrow) can be seen behind the left atrium (H, heart). (c) Spectral Doppler detects the typical pulmonary 
velocity waveform. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 
ANOMALOUS PULMONARY VENOUS CONNECTION 
Incidence. 2% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. In the apical 4-chamber view, the drainage of the pulmonary veins into the left atrium is not visualized. 
Often, a venous chamber or a venous collector are seen behind the left atrium. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High – if cardiosplenic syndromes included. 
Outcome. The prognosis depends on the association with other CHD, on the presence of obstructions, and on 
how early the postnatal diagnosis is made. If isolated and diagnosed early, mortality varies from 1% to 10%. 
a b c 

aorta. The fetal echocardiographic clues to the diagnosis 
of TAPVC include failure to demonstrate a direct pulmonary 
venous connection to the left atrium, the detection 
of a venous confluence chamber behind the left 
atrium (Figure 5.24b), and the visualization of an ascending 
or descending vertical vein.9 In cases of PAVPC, 
the visualization of at least one direct pulmonary venous 
connection to the left atrium makes the suspicion of this 
anomaly even harder to raise.10,11 Color Doppler (with 
low pulse repetition frequency (PRF) to detect the 
extremely low-velocity pulmonary venous flow) may be 
used to confirm the vascular nature of the sonolucent 
area behind the left atrium (differentiating it from the 
esophagus – Figure 5.24b). Spectral Doppler assessment 
can then be used to detect the typical pulmonary velocity 
waveform (Figure 5.24c). 4D echocardiography can 
be advantageously used to locate normal and abnormal 
pulmonary venous returns. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should take into account 
other causes of atrioventricular disproportion, such 
as aortic coarctation (see later in this chapter). The 
recognition of at least one pulmonary vein entering 
the left atrium would rule out TAPVC; on the contrary, 
the detection of a venous chamber with typical 
pulmonary venous velocity waveform at Doppler 
assessment confirms the presence of TAPVC. 
• Prognostic indicators. The presence of an obstructive 
abnormal pulmonary venous return represents 
an unfavorable prognostic indicator because it is 
one of the few real neonatal emergencies due to 
a congenital cardiac defect. Also, the association 
with heterotaxy syndromes represents a poor prognostic 
sign. 
• Association with other malformations. TAPVC is 
often associated with complex cardiac anomalies, 
often in the context of heterotaxy syndromes. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high if cardiosplenic 
syndromes are included (otherwise, it is low). 
PAPVC can be associated with rare syndromic conditions, 
such as the Cat-eye syndrome.10 
Obstetric management. In the few cases in which 
TAPVC is diagnosed prenatally, this should prompt 
in utero transfer to a tertiary referral center where cardiac 
surgery can be performed, because in the case of 
severe obstruction, it may be necessary to intervene in 
the first few hours of life. 
Postnatal therapy. Non-obstructed TAPVCs are usually 
asymptomatic at birth; nevertheless, they must be 
operated upon during the first 2 months of life in order 
to reduce operative risks to a minimum. As mentioned 
above, obstructed TAPVC represent one of the few real 
emergencies in pediatric cardiac surgery. In fact, while 
nearly all the other critical heart defects can be pharmacologically 
(prostaglandins, diuretics, etc.) or mechanically 
(controlled mechanical ventilation) managed for 24–72 
hours, immediate surgery represents the only option for 
severely obstructed TAPVCs. The neonate with TAPVC 
will show a combination of cyanosis, dyspnea, heart 
failure, anuresis, and acidosis. The operation consists of 
reconnecting the confluence of the pulmonary veins with 
the left atrium, and is generally done via median sternotomy 
with hypothermy and circulatory arrest. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In utero, 
TAPVCs have no hemodynamic consequences, unless 
associated with complex heart defects (e.g., heterotaxy 
syndromes). After birth, the prognosis depends on the 
association with the above-mentioned heart anomalies, 
on the presence of obstruction, and on how early the 
postnatal diagnosis is made. In isolated TAPVC, 
regardless of the anatomic type, if the patient comes to 
surgery early and in good clinical condition, mortality 
and morbidity rates are not high (1–10%) and longterm 
life expectancy is good. On the contrary, when the 
diagnosis, and consequently surgery, are delayed, the 
surgical mortality is high and similar to that characterizing 
heterotaxy syndromes. 
132 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ATRIAL SEPTAL DEFECT (ASD) – TYPE II 
Incidence. Exceptionally detected in utero. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ostium secundum: wide foramen ovale; intact septum primum. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Not assessable, due to the extremely low detection rate in the fetus. Relatively 
high in post–natal life (15–15%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: 25–30%. Holt–Oram. 
Outcome. Very good. 

Definition. The normal development of the interatrial 
septum is complex and occurs in different stages, being 
completed only after birth with the closure of the foramen 
ovale. If the closure of the fossa ovalis is not complete, a 
type II atrial septal defect (ASD) occurs. It should be 
noted that only a very limited number of ASDs can be suspected 
in utero, due to the normal patency of the foramen 
ovale in the fetus. In addition, we are aware of no reports 
describing the prenatal diagnosis of sinus venosus ASDs. 
Therefore, with the exception of the few reported diagnoses 
of ostium primum ASD (partial atrioventricular 
septal defect), the only type of ASD that can be (rarely) 
suspected in utero is that involving the septum secundum. 
It should also be underlined that it is not possible at all to 
discriminate in utero between this type of defect and the 
simple patent foramen ovale, which will close in most 
instances after a few months of life. Finally, it should be 
pointed out that a normal appearance of the interatrial 
septum does not rule out the possibility of an ASD. 
Anatomy. According to the site of the defect, the ASD is 
classified as follows: 
• ASD type II (ostium secundum): wide defect of the 
fossa ovalis, due to incomplete closure of the foramen 
ovale. 
• ASD, sinus venosus: the defect extends toward the 
orifice of the superior or inferior vena cava. 
• ASD, coronary sinus: the defect extends toward the 
coronary sinus, and is often associated with anomalies 
of the coronary sinus itself. 
• septum primum defect (partial atrioventricular septal 
defect – see the section on AVSD later in this chapter). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Bearing in mind what has been 
pointed out above, this section will consider the suspicion 
rather than the diagnosis of type II ASD. In our experience, 
there are two different aspects of the interatrial septum 
that may be associated with this type of ASD, on the 
4-chamber view: (1) an extremely wide foramen ovale: 
>7–8mm in its maximum opening (Figure 5.25) and (2) 
non-visualization of the flap ‘hinges’, with a flap that 
starts bulging at its connection with the atrioventricular 
plane rather than at the upper edge of the septum primum, 
and up to its farther insertion at the level of the posterior 
atrial wall. Functional assessment with color 
Doppler (with a low PRF for low-velocity venous flows) 
allows recognition of the wide interatrial shunt, sometimes 
with bidirectional flow (Figure 5.26). 
• Artifacts. If the presence of a type II ASD is suspected, 
the first step is always to doublecheck the scanning 
view: in fact, if the plane is slightly posteriorized, the 
normal coronary sinus can be mistaken for an ostium 
primum ASD. The correct 4-chamber view is just 
cranial to the view in which the coronary sinus is visible, 
since this structure is positioned on the inferior 
surface of the heart, in the atrioventricular groove. 
This artifact is even more pronounced in the case of 
persistence of the left superior vena cava; in fact, this 
vessel usually drains into the coronary sinus, which 
dilates significantly to accomodate the increased 
venous flow coming from the cerebral area through 
the left superior vena cava (Figure 5.27a). A hint suggesting 
that the scanning view is not correct is the 
absence of the foramen ovale flap: if the transducer is 
moved a few millimeters towards the fetal head, the 
correct plane, with the interatrial septum and the 
foramen ovale flap, comes into view (Figure 5.27b). 
• Differential diagnosis. This should include a partial 
atrioventricular septal defect (Figure 5.4d), which is 
characterized by a septum primum defect, located in 
the lower part of the interatrial septum, just above the 
atrioventricular plane; and the dilated coronary sinus 
typical of a persistent left superior vena cava (see 
above). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high in 
postnatal life (5–15%, mainly trisomy 21). It is not assessable 
in the fetus due to the extremely low detection rate. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 133 
Figure 5.25 Atrial septal defect: two cases of ASD confirmed at birth. (a) On the apical 4-chamber view¸ an extremely wide (8 mm) foramen 
ovale can be seen. (b) Also in this case, on the transverse 4-chamber view, the large size of the foramen ovale is evident; the flap is seen 
in the left atrium. (c) Same case as in (b): color Doppler demonstrates the extent of the shunt. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b c 

Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low but 
not zero in postnatal life. ASD can be associated with the 
following conditions:12 
• Holt–Oram syndrome: Look for .ASD + syndactyly 
+ positive family history. 
• Chondroectodermal dysplasia: Look for . ASD 
(or VSD/AVSD) + thoracic hypoplasia + postaxial 
polydactyly (mainly, hands) + acromesomelia. 
• Alagille syndrome (OMIM 118450): Look for . 
ASD + vertebral anomalies (hemivertebrae) + short 
ulnae anomalies. 
• Noonan syndrome (not detectable in the fetus): Look 
for .ASD + (short stature + typical facies + pterygia). 
Obstetric management. Should an ASD be suspected 
prenatally, a thorough search for possibly associated 
cardiac and extracardiac anomalies has to be carried 
out. If the suspected ASD is isolated, it should be 
underlined once more to the parents that a definite 
diagnosis will be made only after birth and that there is 
a consistent possibility that the presence of the defect 
will not be confirmed. The obstetric management of 
the delivery is unchanged and the delivery can safely 
occur in a local hospital, because there is no risk of 
neonatal emergencies. Echocardiography should be 
performed during the first week of life to assess the 
situation and, if necessary, schedule a follow-up scan 
(patent foramen ovale). 
Postnatal therapy. A significant percentage of foramen 
ovale patencies will close during the first year of life. In 
those cases for which an interventional procedure is 
deemed necessary, closure using interventional catheterization 
has become the treatment of choice. Alternatively, 
surgical placement of a pericardial patch across the 
defect can be carried out. The procedure-related risks are 
extremely low. 
134 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.26 Atrial septal defect: this is 
the same case as in Figure 5.25(b,c). The 
combined use of M-mode and color 
Doppler, positioning the cursor across 
the foramen ovale, allows demonstration 
of the bidirectional flow, with a significant 
left-to-right component (in red), 
which is normally absent. 
Figure 5.27 Artefact: false-positive atrial septal defect. In the case 
of a persistent left superior vena cava draining into the coronary 
sinus, the latter dilates significantly to accomodate the increased 
blood flow. As a result, it displaces cranially the atria with the interatrial 
septum, with the coronary sinus being located in the atrioventricular 
groove. (a) On ultrasound, this condition makes the 
identification of the actual interatrial defect difficult, since this is 
masked by the dilated coronary sinus, which may mimic an atrial 
septal defect (?). (b) If care is taken to obtain a more appropriate 
4-chamber view (just cranial to that shown in (a), the artefact is 
removed, the normal interatrial septum is seen (arrow), and sometimes 
the coronary sinus appears as a round sonolucent area on the 
outer outline of the heart, between the left atrium and ventricle. 
a b 

Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the ASD is 
isolated, as in most instances, survival and quality of life 
are unaffected, regardless of the need for an interventional 
procedure. Only in the unlikely case in which an ASD is 
detected late, when it has already caused irreversible 
pulmonary hypertension, does the life expectancy 
decrease and there may be severe complications adversely 
affecting survival and quality of life. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 135 
VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (VSD) 
Incidence. Very high. In postnatal life, VSDs account for 30% of all CHD. In utero, VSDs account for only 10% 
of detected CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view/left-outflow view: defect of the interventricular septum. It can involve the 
perimembranous (inlet or outlet) or the muscular part of the septum. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (in utero). Extremely low after birth. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (in utero). 
Outcome. Very good, if the defect is isolated. Poor if associated with syndromes or other malformative clusters. 
Definition. The VSD represents one of the most important 
sources of false-negative diagnoses in utero. This 
accounts for the striking difference in the prevalence of 
this defect if fetal and neonatal series are compared: 
VSDs account for 30–35% of all CHD detected after 
birth,13 but only for 10% of cases in fetal series.14,15 In 
addition, in the fetus, VSDs are very often associated 
with chromosomal anomalies and/or syndromic conditions,
16 whereas in the neonate, most VSDs are isolated 
and bear a relatively low risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
This consistent discrepancy is due to a selection 
bias: since the occurrence of a VSD does not conspicuously 
alter the 4-chamber view, which represents the 
basic screening view for CHD in utero, isolated VSDs 
tend to be overlooked. On the contrary, if another 
extracardiac anomaly has already been recognized, it is 
likely that this will lead the operator to have a higher 
degree of suspicion, the 4-chamber view will be more 
carefully evaluated or fetal echocardiography will be 
performed – and small VSDs may also be detected. The 
pathogenetic mechanism responsible for the VSD is a 
delay in the septal closure process: this is demonstrated 
by the fact that a high number of VSD close during the 
first year of life or, also, in utero.16,17 
Anatomy. VSDs can be located anywhere in the interventricular 
septum; they can be single or multiple, and range 
in size from 2 mm to several millimeters. VSDs are subdivided 
into perimembranous (of the inlet and outlet portions) 
and muscular types. Muscular VSDs can involve 
the inlet, trabecular or outlet portions. Another, rarer, 
type of VSD is the so-called ‘doubly committed’ VSD, in 
which the roof of the defect, located in the infundibular 
portion, is represented by the fibrous annuli of the aortic 
and pulmonary valves. Finally, there is also another 
type of VSD that has a completely different origin and 
hemodynamics – the malalignment VSD. This type of 
defect will be described in the next section, but it belongs 
to the conotruncal anomalies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnostic view depends on 
the site of the VSD: if this involves the inlet portion of 
the muscular/perimembranous component, it will be 
diagnosed on the 4-chamber view (Figure 5.28); if the 
defect is located in the outlet portion, it will be evident 
on the left outflow tract view only (Figure 5.29a). 
Sonographically, the VSD appears as an interruption of 
the septum. Since the anatomic structures are better 
appreciated if at a 90° angle to the insonating beam, the 
best view to display the defect is a transverse 4-chamber 
view. It should be underlined that a small muscular 
defect, especially if located at the apex, may not show up 
on grayscale ultrasound, and will become visible only 
when color Doppler is superimposed (Figure 5.28b). As 
already mentioned, outlet VSDs (as well as malalignment 
VSDs) can be recognized on the left outflow tract 
view only, since the subaortic part of the septum is outside 
the plane of the 4-chamber view. Care should be 
taken in assessing the alignment between the remaining 
part of the septum, caudal to the defect, and the anterior 
aortic wall: if the septum is correctly aligned with the 
anterior wall of the aorta, then the defect will be defined 
as a simple perimembranous outlet defect (Figure 5.29a); 
if, on the contrary, the infundibular septum is anteriorly 
displaced and the aorta overrides the septum, then 
the defect will be defined as a malalignment VSD (Figure 
5.29b). On color Doppler, bidirectional flow across the 
VSD is found (Figure 5.28), unless another CHD that 
raises the pressure on one side of the heart is present at 
the same time (pulmonary atresia, aortic coarctation, 

etc.). Pulsed-wave Doppler is not useful. 4D echocardiography 
may be used to demonstrate the VSD on the en face 
view of the interventricular septum, which is easily 
obtained through multiplanar imaging, whereas it is 
extremely difficult to display with 2D ultrasound.18,19 On 
this view, the presence of a VSD can be reliably 
confirmed and its area easily measured (Figure 5.30). 
• Artefacts. An artefact can occur if the interventricular 
septum is assessed on the apical 4-chamber view: 
the absorption of the ultrasound waves by the whole 
length of the septum creates a ‘dropout’ artefact just 
below the atrioventricular plane, and this may be 
mistaken for an inlet VSD. This is why the interventricular 
septum should be electively assessed on the 
transverse 4-chamber view – at least for the part 
that is indeed visible on this plane (Figure 5.31a). 
Should this doubt arise, it is sufficient to change the 
approach from ventral to lateral in order to remove 
the artefact. There are another two artefacts that can 
occur while displaying the left outflow tract. The first 
is a pseudo-malalignment VSD, which can be created 
if the left outflow is approached too laterally (Figure 
5.31b). The second is a false outlet VSD, which is 
due to the shadow of the aortic annulus and/or to the 
origin of one of the coronary arteries: the doubt is 
solved when the level of the apparent defect is considered, 
as it is at the level or above the semilunar 
valve (Figure 5.31c). If the doubt persists, it is sufficient 
to approach the left outflow more laterally 
(from a transverse 4-chamber view): in this way, the 
septum and the anterior aortic wall are insonated 
perpendicularly, and this removes all shadows and 
consequently the artefact. 
• Differential diagnosis. The first thing to rule out is a 
false VSD, as just mentioned. The only other type of 
136 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.28 Ventricular septal defect (VSD). VSDs detectable on 
the 4-chamber view include inlet and muscular defects. (a) Small 
muscular VSD of the middle part of the septum, evident on 2D 
imaging and color Doppler (27 weeks’ gestation). (b) Another small 
muscular VSD of the middle part of the septum, which is not clearly 
evident on 2D ultrasound (left), but demonstrated on color Doppler 
(31 weeks’ gestation). (c) Double VSDs of the middle part of the 
septum, confirmed on color Doppler (right) (27 weeks’ gestation). 
RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.29 Ventricular septal defect (VSD). VSDs not detectable 
on the 4-chamber view but only on the left outflow tract view 
include: (a) outlet subaortic perimembranous VSD (color Doppler 
demonstration on the right, 31 weeks’ gestation); (b) malalignment 
VSD, with the ascending aorta overriding the VSD (color Doppler 
demonstration on the right, 27 weeks’ gestation). Ao, aorta; LV, 
left ventricle; RV, right ventricle. 
a a
b 
b
c 

CHD that can, to a certain extent, enter in the differential 
diagnosis is the AVSD, especially in its partial 
form (see Figure 5.4d): during systole, with the 
atrioventricular valve(s) closed, both a complete and, 
more so, a partial AVSD may be mistaken at first 
sight for a VSD. It is sufficient to reassess the heart 
during the next diastole to detect the wide atrioventricular 
communication in the complete form and to 
recognize the septum primum defect (which is obviously 
absent in case of a simple VSD) in the partial 
atrioventricular canal. In addition, the normal offset 
appearance of the atrioventricular plane is lost in both 
variants of AVSD. 
• Prognostic indicators. A distinction should be 
made between the cardiac prognosis and the overall 
prognosis. If isolated, a VSD has a very good prognosis; 
relatively negative prognostic signs include a large 
size (indicating that spontaneous closure is unlikely), 
a location adjacent to the conduction system (there is 
a risk of a surgical lesion with consequent need for a 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 137 
Figure 5.30 Cardio-STIC: glassbody 
mode. This image modality allows one 
to display the 3D color Doppler thanks 
to the transparency of the grayscale 
image. As a result, with adequate adjustments 
of the settings, it is possible to 
actually visualize en face the interventricular 
septum and, in this case, the 
large defect (arrowheads) highlighted 
by the contrast offered by the color 
Doppler signal. IVS, interventricular 
septum; RA, right atrium. 
Figure 5.31 Artefact: false-positive VSD. (a) On the apical 4-chamber view, the progressive ultrasound dropout across the inter-ventricular 
septum creates a false appearance of an inlet VSD (arrow); it is sufficient to change the insonation approach and obtain a transverse 
4-chamber view to remove the artefact. (b) False appearance of malalignment VSD (below the closed aortic valve: arrows), due to a wrong 
insonation approach. In this case, it is sufficient to re-obtain the left outflow tract with an adequate approach to remove the artefact. (c) False 
appearance of outlet VSD, due to ultrasound dropout caused by shadowing from the aortic valve annulus and/or by coronary arteries visualization: 
however, in this case, the false VSD is located at the level of or above the valve, which denotes the artifactual origin of the finding. 
a b c 

138 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
pacemaker), the occurrence of malalignment (in 
which case, it is no longer a simple VSD but also, 
from a hemodynamic point of view, a conotruncal 
anomaly). With regard to overall prognosis, the main 
prognostic indicator in the fetus is the site of the 
defect: in utero, inlet VSDs are associated with Down 
syndrome in up to 50% of cases, while malalignment 
VSDs are frequently associated with trisomies 18 and 
13.16 On the contrary, outlet VSDs are associated 
with a normal karyotype in most cases and are more 
likely to close spontaneously in utero, similarly to 
muscular VSDs.16 
• Association with other malformations. No preferential 
association with any given type of extracardiac 
anomaly has been reported. 
• Natural history. The VSD is one of the few lesions 
that may disappear, by spontaneous closure, during 
prenatal life. This event usually occurs to the small 
peri-membranous defects of the inlet/outlet areas 
and to the muscular ones.16,17 Hence, it is possible 
that a VSD detected at 20 weeks’ gestation disappears 
at a follow-up scan during the 3rd trimester. 
However, it should be considered that if a previously 
recognized VSD is no longer visible, it might 
actually have closed or it may also never have been 
there and have represented a false positive diagnosis 
at the previous scan. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Most 
common autosomal trisomies can be associated with 
VSDs: trisomies 21 (inlet), 18 and 13 (malalignment). 
The interventricular septum is often involved also in 
cases of rare chromosomal arrangements or unbalanced 
translocations. In different fetal series, the risk of chromosomal 
anomalies for VSDs ranges from 20% to 
40%.14–17 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. The number of syndromic conditions that feature a 
VSD among the typical signs is huge. There is no single 
syndrome that is exclusively associated with a VSD. On 
the contrary, it should be underlined that the interventricular 
septum is among the preferred targets for many 
genetic/chromosomal conditions. 
Obstetric management. Should a VSD be detected in 
a fetus, a careful assessment of the cardiac and extracardiac 
anatomy should be carried out by an expert. 
Recommendation of fetal karyotyping is controversial: 
most perinatologists are in favor, while pediatric cardiologists 
are against it. Probably, the best approach is to 
raise the issue discreetly during the initial counseling session 
and then act according to the wishes of the parents. 
The diagnosis of an isolated VSD does not alter the 
obstetric management, nor does it represent an indication 
for cesarean section. The patient can deliver in the local 
hospital, since a VSD does not represent a neonatal emergency. 
The neonate should then be referred to a pediatric 
cardiology/cardiac surgery unit for management and 
follow-up. 
Postnatal therapy. The timing of and the need for treatment 
depend basically on the size of the defect and on the 
consequent extent of the interventricular shunt. In most 
cases, the shunt is not severe enough to warrant operative 
closure during the first months of life. As already mentioned, 
the natural history of VSDs has demonstrated that 
40–60% undergo spontaneous closure by 12 months of 
life.20 However, if a VSD does not close spontaneously and 
the shunt is significant, this causes an irreversible overload 
of the pulmonary circulation (Eisenmerger complex). To 
avoid this dangerous complication, surgical correction 
should be performed in those cases at risk. The most 
widely accepted approach to the closure of a VSD is based 
on the site and size of the defect: large defects (lesion 
diameter = aortic diameter, right ventricular/left ventricular 
(RV/LV) pressure >0.7) should be closed at 3–6 
months of life. The closure procedure will be surgical for 
perimembranous, inlet and infundibular subaortic defects. 
Defects of the muscular component and of the trabecular 
septum can be closed by interventional catheterization. In 
intermediate-size VSDs (lesion diameter < aortic diameter, 
RV/LV pressure <0.5, pulmonary overload with 
QP/QS=2/1), the closure (surgical or with a device) should 
be done within the 3rd year of life. Small VSDs (RV/LV 
pressure <0.3, moderate pulmonary overload with 
QP/QS<1.5) can be left or closed with a device. Finally, 
multiple VSDs can be closed after 6 months of life, if the 
shunt is not severe.21 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In postnatal 
series, the prognosis for isolated VSDs is extremely 
favorable, with a high rate of spontaneous closure 
(up to 90% of cases, if the smallest muscular defects 
are included) and normal life expectancy both for 
untreated non-restrictive VSDs and for large ones if 
operated. In contrast, prenatal series show lower survival 
rates, as is often the case when comparing prenatal 
and postnatal data for CHD: the intrauterine 
mortality rate can reach 11% and the neonatal mortality 
rate 31%, with a 5-year survival rate of 40%.14–17 It 
is clear that these data are affected by the aforementioned 
selection bias, which leads to preferential recognition 
of VSDs associated with major extracardiac 
malformations. If all cases associated with chromosomal 
anomalies and non-chromosomal syndromes are 
excluded, the survival rate and quality of life are the 
same as those reported in postnatal cohorts. 

Definition. Malalignment VSD is characterized by a 
malalignment between the infundibular septum, anteriorly 
displaced in relation to the underlying trabecular 
component, and the ascending aorta, with this vessel 
overriding the defect. 
Anatomy. In most cases, the malalignment VSD is a 
component of a conotruncal anomaly, such as tetralogy 
of Fallot, common arterial trunk, etc. (Figures 5.10 and 
5.11). These CHDs are described elesewhere in this 
chapter. Here, only isolated malalignment VSD will be 
described. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Malalignment VSD is detected 
only on the long axis view of the left ventricle, as already 
mentioned. The 4-chamber view is unremarkable, unless 
other anomalies of the atrioventricular junction are associated. 
The defect appears as an interruption of the 
subaortic component of the interventricular septum, 
with the residual part of the septum pointing to the middle 
of the aorta (Figure 5.29b) rather than to the anterior 
aortic wall, as in simple outlet VSD (Figure 5.29a). The 
aorta will consequently override the defect. On color 
Doppler, the classic ‘Y’ shape is detected, with the two 
arms of the ‘Y’ corresponding to ejection of blood from 
both ventricles into the ascending aorta (Figure 5.29b). 
Pulsed-wave Doppler is not useful. 
• Artifacts. As already mentioned, an artifact can occur 
when displaying the left outflow tract, i.e., a pseudomalalignment 
VSD, which can be created if the left 
outflow is approached too laterally (Figure 5.31b). It 
is sufficient to change the sonographic approach, 
adopting a perpendicular insonation of the 4-chamber 
and left outflow tract views to remove all artifacts. 
• Differential diagnosis. The first issue is to distinguish 
malalignment VSD from simple outlet VSD: this is 
done by verifying the presence or absence of the 
normal alignment between the residual part of the 
interventricular septum and the anterior aortic wall 
(Figure 5.29a,b). Secondly, the possibility of an 
artifact should be ruled out. Finally, the most important 
issue is to exclude the presence of more complex 
conotruncal anomalies and confirm that the malalignment 
VSD is isolated (Figures 5.10 and 5.11). 
• Prognostic indicators. The main prognostic indicator 
is the presence/absence of associated chromosomal 
anomalies and/or non-chromosomal syndromes. If 
these are present, then the prognosis is unfavorable. 
• Association with other malformations. This occurs 
only in the context of chromosomal anomalies or 
syndromic conditions. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high (50%), 
with trisomies 18, 13, and some rare chromosomal 
arrangements. In a minority of cases, a malalignment 
VSD can also be associated with the 22q11 microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high. A large number of syndromic disorders may be 
associated with a malalignment VSD. In fact, the 
conotruncal area is often involved in the case of genetic 
or chromosomal conditions. 
Obstetric management. Should a malalignment VSD 
be detected in a fetus, the first issue is to exclude 
the defect as being a component of a more complex 
conotruncal anomaly. In addition, due to the high risk 
of chromosomal anomalies and syndromic conditions, 
both karyotyping and a thorough anatomy scan should 
be performed. With regard to the karyotyping, if there 
are other anomalies suggesting the possible presence of 
the 22q11 microdeletion, such as thymus aplasia, then 
a fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis of 
the DiGeorge critical region (DGCR) is warranted, in 
addition to classical G-banding. As with most CHDs, 
the presence of a malalignment VSD does not change 
the mode or timing of delivery. The lesion is not 
ductus-dependent, but the left-to-right shunt can 
be significant, and therefore the neonate should be 
transferred in the early neonatal period to a pediatric 
cardiology unit. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 139 
MALALIGNMENT VSD 
Incidence. Relatively high. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Long axis of the left ventricle: defect of the subaortic component of the septum, with 
anterior displacement of the infundibular septum and consequent aortic overriding. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high (50%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high. 
Outcome. Good if isolated, unfavorable if associated with syndromic and chromosomal disorders. 

Postnatal therapy. A malalignment VSD, due to its architecture, 
cannot close spontaneously. Besides, the shunt is 
significant, and this generally leads to the need for surgical 
closure by 3–6 months of age. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the defect is 
isolated, the prognosis is good, with optimal survival rates 
and normal quality of life. If chromosomal anomalies or 
syndromes are associated, the prognosis is very poor. 
140 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ATRIOVENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (AVSD) 
Incidence. Very high. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view. Complete AVSD – common atrium; single atrioventricular valve; wide 
ventricular defect. Partial AVSD: ostium primum ASD; two separate atrioventricular valves with loss of offset 
appearance on atrioventricular plane. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high (70%) for complete AVSD. Probably less, but not assessable in 
the fetus, for partial AVSD (low detection rate). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Cardiac outcome is good in isolated forms and in Down syndrome. Much poorer in forms associated 
with cardiosplenic syndromes. 
Definition. AVSD is also defined as atrioventricular canal 
or endocardial cushion defect; the last term underlines the 
embryologic origin of the defect, which derives from an 
abnormal fusion of the endocardial cushions at an 
embryonic age of 34–36 days. The blood enters the ventricles 
through the common atrioventricular valve and 
then divides over the residual interventricular septum. 
Anatomy. An AVSD consists of concurrent anomalies 
of the atrial septum, the atrioventricular plane and the 
interventricular septum. The complete form is characterized 
by a common atrium, a single atrioventricular valve 
(usually with five leaflets), deriving from a lack of separation 
of the two atrioventricular annuli, and a wide defect 
of the interventricular septum. As a result, the central 
crux of the heart is lacking. In most cases, the two ventricles 
are of normal size: in this case, the lesion is defined as 
balanced AVSD. If, on the contrary, one of the two ventricles 
is hypoplastic, the AVSD is defined as unbalanced. 
Incomplete or partial AVSD is characterized by an 
ostium primum ASD, two separate atrioventricular 
valves (with a cleft of the mitral valve undetectable in the 
fetus) and, occasionally, a small VSD (intermediate variant). 
AVSD, especially if unbalanced, can be associated 
with cardiosplenic syndromes. If this is the case, then 
other anomalies, such as double-outlet right ventricle, 
complete heart block, or pulmonary atresia, may be associated. 
The association of AVSD with tetralogy of Fallot 
is typical of Down syndrome. In a minority of cases, aortic 
coarctation can also be associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is made 
on the 4-chamber view. 
Complete AVSD (Figure 5.32) There is a common 
atrium, due to absence of the interatrial septum (scant 
remnants can be seen in some cases), and a common 
atrioventricular valve, deriving from the fusion of the 
two orifices. As a consequence, the normal offset aspect 
of the atrioventricular plane is lost, and this structure 
appears as a bar ‘doming’ towards the ventricles during 
the systole. A defect of the interventricular septum is 
always associated. The two ventricles can be of normal 
size, or one of the two can be severely hypoplastic, 
especially in the case of cardiosplenic syndromes (Figure 
5.33). The ventriculo-arterial connections should be 
checked, to rule out concurrent anomalies at this level, 
such as tetralogy of Fallot and double-outlet right ventricle. 
Color Doppler assessment reveals, in a complete, 
balanced AVSD, the common atrioventricular diastolic 
filling, with a Y-shaped color Doppler image (Figure 
5.32d). Insufficiency of the common atrioventricular 
valve should also be assessed (Figure 5.32c). In the case 
of unbalanced complete AVSD, color Doppler may help 
to define the degree of ventricular hypoplasia or, in the 
case of severely hypoplastic chambers, the absence of 
diastolic filling (Figure 5.33d). Pulsed-wave Doppler 
may be used to quantify common valve regurgitation, if 
present. 4D echocardiography may be used to assess the 
anatomy of the atrioventricular common valve, 
although it plays a secondary role in this case. 
Partial AVSD (Figure 5.34) The defect of the septum 
primum should be recognized, above the atrioventricular 
plane, on a transverse 4-chamber view. Also in this case, 
the offset aspect of the atrioventricular plane is lost, 
but the valves are separate. 

• Differential diagnosis. The differentiation from a 
simple inlet VSD is simple, as in the latter the atrial 
septum is normal and the offset aspect of the 
atrioventricular plane is unremarkable. With unbalanced 
AVSD, differentiation from a hypoplastic left 
heart or tricuspid atresia (according to the side of 
the hypoplastic ventricle) can be difficult (Figure 
5.33c,d). Assessment of the atrioventricular plane, 
with recognition of the common valve and the presence 
in hypoplastic left heart syndrome of an atretic 
threadlike aorta may help to resolve any doubt. 
Partial AVSD is difficult to diagnose due to the fact 
that its sonographic appearance is strikingly similar to 
that of a normal heart. 
• Prognostic indicators. The main poor prognostic indicator 
is the association with other CHD (especially 
cardiosplenic syndromes); significant regurgitation of 
the common atrioventricular valve can also represent 
a relatively bad prognostic indicator. If the AVSD is 
part of a complex syndrome, then the overall prognosis 
will be that of the underlying condition. 
• Association with other malformations. The association 
with cardiosplenic syndromes is consistent, ranging 
from 25% to 50% in most prenatal series.14,15,22,23 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high 
(40–70%). Complete balanced AVSD is the single anomaly 
most commonly associated with Down syndrome 
in the fetus.14,15,22,23 Much more rarely, AVSD can also be 
associated with other autosomal trisomies (13 and 18). 
On the contrary, if the AVSD is in the context of a cardiosplenic 
syndrome, the risk of a chromosomal anomaly 
is virtually absent, since this complex type of CHD 
seems to protect from such anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. 
In addition to cardiosplenic syndromes, AVSD can be 
associated with other syndromic conditions and skeletal 
dysplasias:12 
• Chondroectodermal dysplasia: Look for .AVSD (or 
ASD) + thoracic hypoplasia + postaxial polydactyly 
(hands) + acromesomelia. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 141 
Figure 5.32 Atrioventricular septal defect. (AVSD) complete, 
balanced (22 weeks’ gestation). This is characterized by a common 
atrium, a single atrioventricular valve, and a ‘high’ VSD of variable 
size. (a,b) on 2D ultrasound, during systole (a), the single atrioventricular 
plane, the loss of the normal offset appearance of the 
atrioventricular valves, and the interventricular and interatrial 
septal defects are seen. During diastole (b), the loss of the crux of 
the heart is seen. (c,d) On color Doppler, during systole (c), the 
insufficiency of the common atrioventricular valve can be seen, 
when present (arrowhead); during diastole, (d), the classic Yshaped 
sign of the ventricular inflow is shown. CA, common 
atrium; LV, left ventricle. 
Figure 5.33 Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) complete, 
unbalanced in atrial isomerism (21–22 weeks’ gestation). 
(a) Moderate ventricular disproportion (right ventricle larger 
than left). However, the azygos continuation (arrowhead) adjacent 
to the descending thoracic aorta should arouse suspicion of 
a situs abnormality. (b) Unbalanced AVSD, with severe hypoplasia 
of the right ventricle (arrow). (c) Unbalanced AVSD, with 
severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle (arrow). (d) In the same 
case as in (c), color Doppler demonstrates overriding of the atrioventricular 
valve and obstruction of the left part of the 
valve, responsible for the hypoplasia. CA, common atrium; 
RV, right ventricle. 
a b a c 
c d 
b d 

• Short rib–polydactyly: Look for.AVSD (inconstantly 
associated) + micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia + 
postaxial polydactyly. 
Obstetric management. If a balanced complete AVSD 
is detected in a fetus, and other cardiac defects are 
excluded (isomerism, double-outlet right ventricle, etc.), 
karyotyping is mandatory because of the extremely high 
risk of Down syndrome, which in the fetus is 50–70%. On 
the contrary, if the AVSD is a component of a cardioplenic 
syndrome, karyotyping may be avoided. With regard to 
partial AVSD, we believe that karyotyping is also warranted 
(regardless of the scanty data available in the fetus), 
because of the consistent association with Down syndrome 
reported in postnatal series. Obstetric management 
is not altered by detection of an AVSD: the lesion does not 
represent a neonatal emergency, if other cardiac defects are 
not associated. There is no need for in utero transport to a 
referral center. After birth, the neonate should be referred 
to a pediatric cardiology unit, which will take care of the 
subsequent management and follow-up. However, if 
AVSD is associated with cardiosplenic syndromes and/or 
other CHD, the delivery should be arranged in a tertiary 
referral center to allow adequate perinatal management. 
Postnatal therapy. Partial AVSD is generally asymptomatic, 
being basically an ASD. Only in a few cases is 
the cleft of the mitral valve (which is a component of 
the defect), so severe as to warrant treatment in the 
early neonatal period, especially if the left ventricle is 
hypoplastic: these are the worst cases, which need an 
early surgical approach. In complete balanced AVSD, 
radical surgery is generally performed between 3 and 
6 months of life: the surgical procedures include closure 
of the VSD and ASD with a patch and reconstruction 
of the two atrioventricular valves. The approach to 
unbalanced AVSD is much more difficult – it is a surgical 
procedure similar to that needed in the case of a univentricular 
heart, especially if the dominant chamber is the 
right one: in this case, a Norwood three-stage procedure 
is needed (see the section on hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome later in this chapter). 
142 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.34 Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) (29 weeks’ gestation). This is characterized by an atrial septal defect (ASD) of the 
ostium primum type (absence of the septum primum), with two atrioventricular valves, which do not show the normal offset aspect. (a,b) 
On 2D ultrasound, during systole (a), on the apical 4-chamber view, the lack of the normal offset aspect is seen (arrowheads). While in 
diastole (b), two separate atrioventricular valves are demonstrated. (c) Color Doppler helps to confirm the presence of the ASD and, when 
present, of the VSD (arrows). (d) In systole, but on the transverse 4-chamber view, the loss of the offset appearance of the atrioventricular 
valves is confirmed (arrowheads). (e) In diastole, the ostium primum defect is shown, just above the atrioventricular plane (arrow). 
(f) Color Doppler demonstrates flow across the ostium primum defect (arrow), across the normal foramen ovale (to the right of the ostium 
primum), and across the small VSD (to the left of the ostium primum). RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
d e f 
c 

Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The life 
expectancy of neonates with a partial AVSD is good, 
with a normal quality of life. The only cases with a 
significantly worse prognosis are those associated with a 
hypoplastic left ventricle and severe insufficiency of the 
abnormal mitral valve, which need early surgery. With 
respect to classic balanced complete AVSD, if surgical 
correction is performed when indicated (i.e., at 3–6 
months of life), the operative mortality rate is < 5%, with 
a similarly low incidence of complications (< 5%) and an 
89% intervention-free survival rate at 20 years. The 
association with Down syndrome does not alter life 
expectancy, and, conversely, the occurrence of an AVSD 
in individuals with Down syndrome does not seem to 
have any bad effect on prognosis, either. On the contrary, 
unbalanced AVSD has a very poor prognosis, with 
a high infant mortality rate, especially in the context of 
cardiosplenic syndromes.21,24 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 143 
TRICUSPID DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. 1% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 4-chamber view. The tricuspid valve appears thickened and hyperechoic; the leaflets show 
limited systo-diastolic excursion. Color Doppler demonstrates the degree of valvular insufficiency. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. If the lesion is isolated and of moderate severity, survival is very good. If there is associated pulmonary 
atresia, the prognosis depends on the features of this anomaly. 
Definition. There is a wide range of heterogeneous 
lesions that can be defined as tricuspid dysplasia. In the 
most severe cases, the leaflets are severely dysplastic, 
the chordae tendinae are hypoplastic, and consequently 
the degree of insufficiency will be high. At the other end 
of the spectrum, there are benign cases showing only 
mild thickening and limited malfunction. The latter cases 
are compatible with a virtually normal life. 
Anatomy. The mild forms may show only small nodular 
thickenings at the level of the free margins of the leaflets; 
in severely abnormal valves, the leaflet can be highly 
distorted, with anomalous insertion of the chordae tendinae 
on the ventricular walls. Tricuspid dysplasia rarely 
occurs as an isolated lesion: it is often associated with 
Ebstein’s anomaly and/or pulmonary atresia with intact 
ventricular septum. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the apical 4-chamber view, the 
leaflets of the tricuspid valve appear thickened and hyperechoic 
(Figure 5.35a) and show reduced systo-diastolic 
excursion with incomplete closure during systole. Color 
Doppler can be used to document the insufficiency of the 
dysplastic valve (Figure 5.35b): if the insufficiency is 
severe, the regurgitant high-velocity jet reaches the roof 
of the atrium and causes an inversion of the velocity 
waveform at the level of the ductus venosus. If tricuspid 
dysplasia is detected, it is of the utmost importance to 
assess the right pulmonary outflow, because pulmonary 
atresia is often associated. Spectral Doppler can be used 
to quantify the regurgitation. In the case of severe tricuspid 
insufficiency, cardiomegaly due to conspicuous right 
atrial enlargement and possibly signs of frank cardiac 
failure (e.g. pericardial effusion or hydrops) can be associated. 
It is important to note that the assessment of 
this type of lesion may benefit from 4D echocardiography: 
this technique allows a better appreciation of the 
anatomy and functional deficit of the dysplastic valve. In 
fact, 3D surface reconstruction allows visualization of the 
abnormal valve in planes that cannot be obtained with 
conventional 2D imaging (Figure 5.36). 
Figure 5.35 Tricuspid dysplasia (33 weeks’ gestation). (a) 4- 
chamber view demonstrating right atrial enlargement due to the 
severe dysplasia of the tricuspid valve (thickened and hyperechoic 
leaflets). (b) Color Doppler demonstrates the severe systolic regurgitation: 
the high-velocity jet reaches the posterior atrial wall and 
curves along the atrial wall towards the foramen ovale. The arrow 
indicates the left outflow tract. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

• Differential diagnosis. It is sometimes very difficult to 
differentiate some mild forms of tricuspid dysplasia 
from Ebstein’s anomaly, but it should be noted that 
the outcome of the two lesions is similarly favorable. 
On the contrary, it is extremely important in the 3rd 
trimester to differentiate moderate tricuspid dysplasia 
from premature constriction/closure of the ductus 
arteriosus: in both, the right ventricle and atrium can 
be dilated, but in the latter, the tricuspid valve is 
anatomically normal: the regurgitation is due to the 
high intraventricular pressure. Any doubt is solved 
when the 3-vessel view is assessed with color and spectral 
Doppler: in the case of premature constriction of 
the ductus arteriosus, there is a high velocity across a 
small ductus and the velocity waveform is characterized 
by an extremely high peak velocity and a PI <1.3, 
with high flow also during diastole.25 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor prognostic signs are 
the presence of heart failure (hydrops, ascites, pericardial 
and pleural effusions, and polyhydramnios), 
tachyarrhythmia, massive right atrial enlargement 
from severe tricuspid insufficiency, and absence of 
forward flow across the pulmonary valve (functional 
pulmonary atresia). However, these signs are usually 
present only if the resulting dysplasia is associated 
with pulmonary atresia/critical stenosis. It should also 
be noted that, due to the physiopathology of the fetal 
heart, the tricuspid valve is the first site to be involved 
in the case of cardiac overload also from possible 
non-cardiac causes of high-output cardiac failure, 
such as twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome or sacrococcygeal 
teratoma. Therefore, the presence of such 
conditions can be considered a very poor prognostic 
sign. Finally, it should be noted that trivial tricuspid 
regurgitation, usually not associated with an underlying 
valve dysplasia, has recently been included among 
the soft markers of Down syndrome in both the 1st 
and in the 2nd trimesters.26 
Obstetric management. In the rare cases of severe tricuspid 
dysplasia with conspicuous insufficiency and heart 
failure, the perinatal mortality rate is very high: survival 
depends on delivery in a tertiary referral center allowing 
prompt transfer of the neonate to a pediatric cardiac 
surgery unit and/or neonatal intensive care unit. For less 
severe cases, if the degree of regurgitation is deemed 
severe enough to cause cyanosis at birth, delivery should 
take place in a tertiary referral center with an intensive 
care unit. If tricuspid regurgitation is trivial, there is no 
need for in utero transport, and the neonate can be 
assessed echocardiographically and clinically after a few 
days of life. 
Postnatal therapy. In the mild variant of tricuspid dysplasia, 
the simple switch from the fetal to the neonatal circulation, 
with consequent reduction of pressure levels in the 
right heart, leads to a dramatic improvement in the clinical 
situation, resulting in an immediate increase in oxygen 
saturation. On the contrary, the perinatal mortality 
rate is very high for the most severe cases, especially if 
heart failure is already present. However, isolated tricuspid 
dysplasia is rarely so severe as to cause heart failure. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In mild to moderate 
cases, life expectancy and quality of life are virtually 
normal. The rare forms of severe tricuspid dysplasia 
causing heart failure are responsible for a high rate of 
perinatal death. 
144 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.36 Tricuspid dysplasia with additional tissue on the 
valve, associated with pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum (33 weeks’ gestation). 3D rendering enhances the visualization 
of dysplasia of the valve, the chordae tendinae and the 
papillary muscles. (a) 2D imaging, showing the thickened and 
hyperechoic tricuspid valve, with additional tissue on the leaflet 
(arrows), which determines severe insufficiency and atriomegaly. 
(b) 3D surface-rendering demonstrating the free movement of the 
additional tissue towards the atrium following the high-pressure 
regurgitant jet across the incompletely closed valve (arrow). (c) 
During diastole, the additional tissue is pushed within the right 
ventricle. (d) Positioning the region of interest within the right 
ventricle, it is possible to display the severe dyplasia, which 
involves the leaflets, the chordae tendinae, and the papillary muscles. 
The additional tissue is shown by the small arrows. LV, left 
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
c d 

Definition. Ebstein’s anomaly is characterized by a 
malformative complex of the tricuspid valve. The valve 
is downwardly displaced into the right ventricle. As 
a consequence, a variable part of the right ventricle is 
atrialized. 
Anatomy. The septal and posterior leaflets of the 
tricuspid valve do not insert at the annular level as 
usual, but remain adherent to the ventricular walls. 
These leaflets appear plastered down into the right ventricular 
wall, while the anterior leaflet, which has a normal 
insertion at the level of the annulus, is redundant 
(spinnaker-like) and shows multiple attachments on the 
walls of the right ventricle, limiting its excursion. The 
valve is always severely dysplastic. As a result, in 
Ebstein’s anomaly, the valve can be both stenotic and 
severely insufficient. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the most severe cases, on the 
transverse or apical 4-chamber view, the first finding is 
conspicuous cardiomegaly, mainly due to right atrial 
enlargement (Figure 5.37a). The septal and posterior 
leaflets of the dysplastic tricuspid valve appear to be 
inserted lower than the atrioventricular plane (Figure 
5.37a). The mean distance between the mitral and 
tricuspid attachments of the leaflet on the septum is 
> 8 mm, but can be lower in mild cases of Ebstein’s 
anomaly. The tricuspid leaflets appear thickened and 
show reduced systo-diastolic excursion. The right ventricle 
can be hypoplastic or dilated, if the valve is severely 
insufficient. Color Doppler assessment allows quantification 
of the severity of the regurgitation (Figure 5.37b). 
Finally, the concurrent presence of pulmonary atresia 
should be confirmed or excluded by checking the right 
outflow tract. 4D echocardiography allows detailed 
characterization of the abnormalities of the tricuspid 
valve (see pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum, Figure 5.19). 
• Differential diagnosis. It is sometimes difficult to 
differentiate isolated tricuspid dysplasia from mild 
cases of Ebstein’s anomaly, although there is little difference 
in terms of prognosis (what matters is the 
degree of insufficiency). What is important to differentiate 
from Ebstein’s anomaly is premature closure of 
the ductus arteriosus: both share severe tricuspid insufficiency, 
but in premature closure, the tricuspid is normal 
and there is high-velocity turbulent flow across 
the ductus arteriosus, which is absent in Ebstein’s 
anomaly. It is also important to differentiate the isolated 
form of Ebstein’s anomaly from the tricuspid 
dyplasia/insufficiency that is frequently seen in pulmonary 
atresia with intact ventricular septum. 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor sonographic prognostic 
indicators are: the presence of heart failure, with fetal 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 145 
Figure 5.37 Ebstein’s anomaly (35 weeks’ gestation). (a) Image 
showing the significant displacement of the tricuspid annulus 
within the right ventricle, with the dysplastic posterior and septal 
leaflets adhering to the interventricular septum (arrows). The consequent 
severe insufficiency is responsible for the huge cardiomegaly. 
(b) Color Doppler demonstrating the severe tricuspid insufficiency, 
with aliasing and turbulence at the level of the downwardly 
displaced valve (orange area). 
EBSTEIN’S ANOMALY 
Incidence. 1% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the apical 4-chamber view, the tricuspid valve is severely abnormal: the leaflets are 
thickened and hyperechoic, and the septal and posterior leaflets are plastered down into the right ventricular wall. 
Color Doppler investigation demonstrates the constant insufficiency of the valve. The frequently associated 
pulmonary atresia can be detected on the right-outflow views. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low: 3–5%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. The prognosis is poor for most of the cases detected in utero. Mild Ebstein’s anomaly is rarely detected 
before birth. 
a b 

hydrops; massive cardiomegaly due to severe right 
atrial enlargement; an enlarged right ventricle with 
thin and acontractile walls; and absence of forward 
flow in the pulmonary artery, indicative of functional 
and/or anatomic atresia. 
• Association with other malformations. Ebstein’s anomaly 
is usually sporadic and not associated with other 
major anomalies. As far as the heart is concerned, ASD 
and pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum 
are the defects most commonly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low 
(3–5%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be discussed 
with the parents, as the incidence of chromosomal 
anomalies is low. The mother should be referred to a tertiary 
center for delivery: the possibility of respiratory distress 
and/or of pump failure in severe cases may require 
resuscitation and active cardiovascular management. 
Postnatal therapy. In severe cases, the neonate shows heart 
failure, cardiomegaly and cyanosis. In favorable cases, 
with the fall in pulmonary resistance that occurs after a 
few days of life, the tricuspid regurgitation decreases significantly 
and the oxygen saturation improves. These cases 
usually remain asymptomatic for years, and surgical 
correction (tricuspid valvuloplasty with right ventricular 
folding and closure of the ASD) can be delayed for several 
years. The short- and long-term results of this elective 
surgery are good, with an early mortality rate of lesser 
than 5% and a 20-year survival rate of greater than 90%, 
with a reintervention rate of 5%. However, most of the 
cases detected in the fetus have a different course: they 
need intensive respiratory assistance, and nitric oxide and 
prostaglandin E1 infusion to decrease pulmonary resistance 
and prevent closure of the ductus arteriosus. If pulmonary 
atresia is associated, it may be necessary to 
proceed to radiofrequency or surgical opening of the pulmonary 
valve and to a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt 
(modified Blalock–Taussig shunt) to mantain adequate 
pulmonary blood flow. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Defining the outcome 
of Ebstein’s anomaly is difficult, bearing in mind 
that there are cases who die in utero and cases who live 
an almost normal life. As already mentioned, most of 
the cases detected in utero are at the worse end of the 
spectrum, often showing severe cardiomegaly and heart 
failure. This is due to the fact that only those cases 
in which the 4-chamber view is severely abnormal are 
recognized in utero. In fetal series, the overall intrauterine 
mortality rate is as high as 40%; 20–30% die in the 
neonatal period and the remaining 30% survive more 
than 1 month. Neonates with Ebstein’s anomaly requiring 
intensive care have a 50% mortality rate, but if they 
survive more than 1 month, then the life expectancy 
increases. 
146 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TRICUSPID ATRESIA 
Definition. In tricuspid atresia, the right atrioventricular 
connection is absent due to complete atresia or imperforation 
of the tricuspid valve. 
Anatomy. Tricuspid atresia is characterized by absence 
of the right atrioventricular connection. The valve can be 
completely atretic, with the connection being replaced by 
a fibrous bar, or, rarely, can be imperforate. The small 
rudimentary right ventricle is displaced anterosuperiorly 
and fills through a constantly associated inlet VSD. 
The ventriculo-arterial junction can be concordant or, 
less often, discordant. In rare instances, a double outlet 
from the left or the hypoplastic right ventricle can be 
associated. A type II (ostium secundum) ASD is often 
associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
4-chamber view: there is a dominant left ventricle, a 
Incidence. Low: 0.7–2% of CHD in the fetus and neonate, respectively. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view: the right atrioventricular valve is atretic, the right ventricle 
is hypoplastic, and a VSD is constantly associated. The outflow tract views should be sought to exclude 
ventriculo-arterial discordance, which can be associated in 30% of cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low: 2%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Good. In cases without ventriculo-arterial discordance, survival rates reach 65–70% at 15 years. Life 
expectancy decreases in case of ventriculo-arterial discordance and/or if other malformations are associated. 

rudimentary right ventricular chamber, and a small VSD 
allowing filling of the right ventricle (Figure 5.38a). The 
tricuspid valve is absent and replaced by hyperechoic 
fibrous tissue. Color Doppler can be used to confirm the 
absence of right atrioventricular filling, to demonstrate 
flow across the VSD, and to assess the ventriculo-arterial 
connection (Figure 5.38b). 4D echocardiography may 
help in assessing the ventriculo-arterial connection. 
• Differential diagnosis. The diagnosis of tricuspid atresia 
is relatively simple. However, care should be taken 
to identify the side of the hypoplastic chamber so as 
not to mistake a tricuspid atresia for a hypoplastic left 
heart (see later in this chapter) or vice versa, given the 
completely different prognoses of the two lesions! 
Another rare anomaly to be differentiated from tricuspid 
atresia is an unbalanced complete AVSD with 
a dominant left ventricle: in this case, recognition of 
the common atrioventricular valve and the frequent 
association of cardiosplenic syndrome may orientate 
the diagnosis towards unbalanced AVSD. 
• Prognostic indicators. The association of ventriculoarterial 
discordance and/or of a double outlet connection 
represents one of the most important poor 
prognostic factors. A restrictive VSD is also a relatively 
poor prognostic factor, possibly indicating the 
need for early surgery. 
• Association with other malformations. Except for the 
already-mentioned cardiac anomalies, there is no particular 
association with extracardiac malformations. 
Fetal growth retardation (FGR) is frequently 
observed in tricuspid atresia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low (2%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping should be 
discussed with the parents, as the incidence of chromosomal 
anomalies is low. Fetal growth should be monitored, 
given the relatively high incidence of FGR. It is 
advisable for delivery to occur in a tertiary referral 
center, although in most cases the VSD provides a wide 
enough shunt so that the lesion is not ductus-dependent. 
However, in the few cases in which the VSD is restrictive, 
the lesion becomes ductus-dependent and should 
be managed accordingly. In addition, the frequent association 
of impaired prenatal growth should further support 
the need for in utero transport to a tertiary referral 
center. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical corrective procedures aim at 
bypassing the hypoplastic right ventricle, creating a connection 
between the right atrium and the pulmonary 
trunk. The Fontan operation consists of a cavopulmonary 
shunt. This is obtained with the following steps: 
• The pulmonary trunk is disconnected from its valve 
and the two orifices are closed. 
• The superior vena cava is cut prior to its entrance in 
the right atrium. 
• The distal stump is then sutured to the upper wall of 
the right pulmonary artery, while the proximal stump 
is sutured to the inferior wall of the same artery. 
• An atrial septal defect is created and a synthetic 
Goretex or Dacron conduct is placed in the right 
atrium to connect the inferior vena cava to the superior 
vena cava so that the whole of the systemic return 
is directed into the pulmonary artery. 
• Alternatively, the pulmonary trunk can be connected 
directly to the roof of the right atrium. 
In general, the Fontan operation is performed at 18–30 
months of life; it cannot be done earlier due to the relatively 
high pulmonary pressures occurring in the neonate. 
As a result, if the neonate is severely hypoxic, or in case of 
contraindications to the Fontan operation (e.g. small pulmonary 
branches) the only chances of survival are related 
to a palliative systemic-to-pulmonary shunt, such as the 
Glenn operation (anastomosis between the superior vena 
cava and the right pulmonary artery). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. According to 
a number of authors, if candidates for the Fontan procedure 
are selected carefully, the 3-year survival rate 
is 80%, with most patients in New York Heart 
Association (NYHA) class I/II. The best results, in terms 
of survival and cardiac function, are obtained if surgery 
is performed at 4–7 years of age; survival decreases 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 147 
Figure 5.38 Tricuspid atresia (22 weeks’ gestation). (a) On the 
4-chamber view, the atresia of the right atrioventricular valve, the 
hypoplastic right ventricle, and the small inlet VSD (arrow) are evident; 
note also the ASD (ostium secundum), which is frequently 
associated with tricuspid atresia. (b) On color Doppler, the absence 
of the right inflow is confirmed. LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 

significantly if the correction is carried out later than 
7 years of age. According to other series, with longer 
follow-up, the survival curve also continues to decrease 
several years after the correction, with survival rates of 
70%, 65%, and 50% at 5, 10, and 15 years, respectively. 
This steady loss of patients is due to progressive 
deterioration of ventricular function. This makes the 
Fontan operation a good palliative procedure, but not a 
corrective operation. The operative mortality rates for 
palliative aortopulmonary shunting procedures are low, 
averaging 5%. If a successful Fontan operation cannot 
be performed, long-term survival is nonetheless reasonably 
good, with survival rates of 85% and 50% at 10 
and 20 years, respectively. 
148 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
PULMONARY STENOSIS 
Incidence. Very low in the fetus; up to 9% of all CHD in the neonate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the right outflow tract views, the pulmonary valve appears thickened and hyperechoic, 
with reduced systo-diastolic excursion. Post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary trunk and moderate late-onset right 
ventricular hypertrophy can be present. On color Doppler, there is high-velocity turbulent flow across the 
pulmonary valve. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Moderate. 
Outcome. Favorable. In syndromic cases (Noonan), the overall prognosis depends on the underlying condition. 
Definition. Pulmonary stenosis is a narrowing of the 
pulmonary outflow due to a dysplastic semilunar valve. 
The critical form of pulmonary stenosis will not be 
described here, but in the next section, together with 
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. 
Anatomy. Pulmonary stenosis is usually due to partial 
fusion of the pulmonary valve cusps, which causes 
incomplete opening and a doming appearance of the 
semilunar valve during systole. Less frequently, the 
stenosis can be due to dysplasia and nodularity of cusps 
that are not fused. The degree of obstruction is variable 
and usually progressive. This tendency to worsen with 
time is present both in prenatal and in postnatal life,15,27 
and also explains why pulmonary stenosis is frequently 
overlooked in utero. The right ventricle is usually unremarkable 
until late in gestation, when it may develop 
moderate myocardial hypertrophy. However, the classic 
tripartite aspect of the right ventricle is not lost (inlet, 
trabecular part, outlet). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the right outflow 
views (long/short axis of the right ventricle): the pulmonary 
valve is thickened, hyperechoic and hypomobile 
(Figure 5.39a). The valvular cusps remain visible in the 
lumen of the vessel throughout the cardiac cycle, while 
the normal valve disappears during systole as the cusps 
flatten along the arterial walls. Post-stenotic ectasia 
of the pulmonary trunk is often associated (Figure 
5.39a,b). On the 4-chamber view, moderate late-onset 
right myocardial wall thickening and hypertrophy may be 
seen in a few cases of moderately severe stenosis; however, 
the ejection function is almost never depressed (Figure 
5.39c). Color Doppler investigation of the right outflow 
tract demonstrates high-velocity flow across the pulmonary 
valve, with a color signal that shows laminar flow 
up to the annular level and turbulent flow with a mosaic 
pattern from the annulus onwards (Figure 5.39b). In some 
cases, the dysplasia of the valve can also cause regurgitation, 
which is never severe. Spectral Doppler sampling 
allows quantification of the transvalvular gradient: mild 
to moderate stenoses are characterized by peak velocities 
of 1.5–2 m/s, whereas moderately severe stenoses show 
peak velocities of 3–3.5 m/s. 4D echocardiography may 
be used to study the abnormal pulmonary valve. 
• Differential diagnosis. This is virtually absent. If the 
valvular anomaly is overlooked, the right ventricular 
hypertrophy may be mistaken for an indirect sign of 
aortic coarctation (see later in this chapter). 
• Prognostic indicators. A doming almost fixed valve 
recognized in the 2nd trimester is likely to seal and 
become atretic later in gestation. A concurrent moderate 
nuchal thickening or simple hygroma is one of the 
fetal findings, together with pulmonary stenosis, more 
commonly associated with Noonan syndrome. 
• Natural history. As already pointed out, pulmonary 
stenosis may actually appear only in the 3rd trimester 
or worsen signficantly after 28–30 weeks’ gestation, 
sometimes evolving into pulmonary atresia.15,27 

Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Occasionally, pulmonary stenosis may be associated 
with Down syndrome. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is moderate. 
The only risk is Noonan syndrome, which is not prospectively 
diagnosable in utero. Furthermore, when pulmonary 
stenosis occurs in the context of Noonan 
syndrome, it is usually of late onset. 
Obstetric management. Should pulmonary stenosis be 
detected in a fetus, the need for karyotyping is questionable 
and should be discussed with the parents. Obstetric 
and labor management are not changed and delivery can 
occur in a local hospital, unless the stenosis has evolved 
into pulmonary atresia at the last pre-partum follow-up 
scan. After birth, the neonate should be referred to a 
pediatric cardiology unit for confirmation of the diagnosis 
and follow-up. 
Postnatal therapy. Individuals with mild forms of pulmonary 
stenosis may remain asymptomatic and show no 
need for surgery. In those patients in which the stenosis 
worsens with time and for whom an intervention is 
deemed necessary, the procedure of choice is balloon 
valvuloplasty by interventional catheterization, which 
achieves good results in most cases. If the valve is difficult 
to dilate, surgical valvulotomy should be performed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
extremely good, with normal life expectancy and quality 
of life in most cases. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 149 
Incidence. Relatively low: 1–5% of all CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the right outflow tract views, the pulmonary valve is absent/imperforate and the 
pulmonary trunk/branches may be moderately small or severely hypoplastic. On the 4-chamber view, the right 
ventricle is hypoplastic if the tricuspid valve is atretic, and dilated if the tricuspid valve is insufficient. 
Risk of chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Moderate to good, despite the fact that surgery is only palliative in most cases. 
Figure 5.39 Moderate pulmonary stenosis (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) 2D imaging demonstrates a dysplastic (hyperechoic and thickened) 
pulmonary valve (arrows), which does not open completely during systole. Note the slight post-stenotic ectasia of the pulmonary trunk. 
(b) On color Doppler, the blood flow changes from laminar to turbulent, with aliasing and increased velocity when it passes through the 
stenotic valve. (c) Only in rare cases, and late in gestation, does moderate pulmonary stenosis cause hypertrophy of the free myocardial 
wall of the right ventricle (arrowheads) – evident on the 4-chamber view. Ao, ascending aorta; LV, left ventricle; RV, right ventricle; SVC, 
superior vena cava; Pa, pulmonary artery. 
PULMONARY ATRESIA WITH INTACT VENTRICULAR SEPTUM (PAIVS) 
Definition. Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum (PAIVS) is characterized by an absent right 
ventriculo-arterial connection, often associated with 
concurrent significant anomalies of the tricuspid valve 
and the right ventricle. 
Anatomy. In PAIVS, the whole right heart is abnormal, 
with a wide range of lesions. The primary lesion is atresia 
of the pulmonary valve: this can be completely absent or 
can be the consequence of a critical pulmonary stenosis 
in which the semilunar valve cusps have fused. In the 
a b c 

former instance, the pulmonary trunk and branches will 
be severely hypoplastic, even threadlike; if the atresia is 
the final stage of a former critical stenosis, the pulmonary 
vessels can be moderately small or normal in size. In most 
cases of PAIVS, the tricuspid valve is atretic or severely 
dysplastic, with the type of abnormality determining the 
appearance of the right ventricle. If the tricuspid valve 
is atretic, the whole complex becomes a hypoplastic 
right heart syndrome (tricuspid and pulmonary atresia, 
hypoplastic right ventricle), which is the mirror image of 
the hypoplastic left heart syndrome. On the contrary, if 
the tricuspid valve is dysplastic and severely insufficient, 
as in most cases, the right ventricle will be severely 
dilated. It should be underlined that in about one-third of 
cases of PAIVS, fistulas connecting the right ventricular 
chamber with coronary circulation are found: these are 
indeed sinusoids, the difference being that the fistulas are 
acquired lesions whereas the sinusoids are remnants of 
the embryonic circulation. When multiple, these sinusoids 
may cause severe coronary artery stenosis, and 
this in turn may be responsible for a dependency of the 
coronary circulation on the right ventricle. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of 
PAIVS is not suspected on the views of the outflow tracts 
but on the 4-chamber view, as for the left heart counterpart, 
represented by critical aortic stenosis (see the next 
section of this chapter). In fact, severe anomalies of the 
tricuspid valve and the right ventricle are associated in 
virtually all cases of PAIVS. Once the suspicion has been 
raised, direct evidence of pulmonary atresia is then 
sought on the right outflow tract views, where the 
absence/imperforation of the pulmonary valve together 
with the reduced size of the pulmonary trunk and 
branches are detected. The abnormalities found on the 
4-chamber view depend on the anatomy of the tricuspid 
valve: if the tricuspid valve is dysplastic, then severe right 
atrial enlargement and right ventricular dilatation are 
usually present, due to the conspicuous insufficiency of 
the atrioventricular valve (Figure 5.40a) if, on the contrary, 
it is atretic, the right ventricle will be extremely 
hypoplastic, the whole cluster of right heart anomalies 
featuring the hypoplastic right heart syndrome (Figure 
5.40c). Direct evidence of the primary lesion, namely the 
atresia of the pulmonary valve, is recognized on right outflow 
tract views: as already mentioned, if the valve is 
absent, the pulmonary trunk and branches will be barely 
visible (Figure 5.41a,b); if the atresia is the final stage of a 
critical stenosis, then the pulmonary vessels will be only 
moderately reduced in size or normal, while the valve will 
appear sealed and doming towards the pulmonary valve 
without opening (Figure 5.41c). Color Doppler investigation 
allows detection of the reverse flow at the level of the 
ductal arch on the 3-vessel view, which demonstrates the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation (Figure 
5.41b,c). On the 4-chamber view, color Doppler may 
allow detection of the coronary sinusoids, if present. 
Spectral Doppler can be used to quantify the regurgitation 
of the tricuspid valve. 4D echocardiography allows 
characterization of the tricuspid valvular abnormalities 
(Figure 5.40b). 
• Differential diagnosis. The main entity to be differentiated 
from PAIVS is pulmonary atresia with VSD 
(PAVSD), which represents a completely different 
defect, both embryologically and hemodynamically. 
However, this task is easily carried out by displaying 
the interventricular septum on the left outflow view: if 
the septum is intact, the diagnosis will be PAIVS, 
whereas if there is a malalignment VSD with aortic 
150 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.40 Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. The diagnosis is suspected on the 4-chamber view, where the aspect of 
the right ventricle depends on the functional status of the tricuspid valve: (a) if the tricuspid valve is dysplastic and insufficient, the right 
ventricle and atrium are dilated (33 weeks’ gestation); (b) if the tricuspid valve has an abnormal septal attachment (arrow), then there is 
an associated Ebstein’s anomaly (24 weeks’ gestation); (c) if the tricuspid valve is atretic, then the ventricle is hypoplastic (arrowheads) 
and the whole malformative complex mirrors the hypoplastic left heart syndrome (tricuspid atresia, hypoplastic right ventricle, pulmonary 
atresia – hypoplastic right heart; 21 weeks’ gestation). LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b c 

overriding, then the diagnosis will be PAVSD (see later 
in this chapter). In the case of Ebstein’s anomaly with 
severe tricuspid regurgitation and right atrial enlargement, 
it is sometimes hard to determine whether the 
pulmonary valve is patent and the forward flow is 
reduced due to the concurrent tricuspid insufficiency, 
which represents a low-pressure outflow for the blood 
in the right ventricle, or whether the pulmonary valve 
is indeed atretic. Careful evaluation of the pulmonary 
outflow with low-pulse repetition frequency color 
Doppler may help resolve the doubt. 
• Prognostic indicators. It has been demonstrated that 
PAIVS has a worse prognosis if the right ventricle 
is dilated, whereas survival is higher if the ventricle 
is either moderately diminutive or hypoplastic.27 
Another poor prognostic factor is the presence of 
coronary sinusoids and, above all, of a right ventricledependent 
coronary circulation, which cannot be 
diagnosed with certainty in the fetus. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Should PAIVS be detected in a 
fetus, karyotyping is not mandatory, and this option 
should be discussed with the parents. The mother should 
be referred to a tertiary center for delivery, due to the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation. In fact, 
prostaglandin E1 (PGE1) infusion in the early neonatal 
period is mandatory to prevent closure of the ductus 
arteriosus until surgery is scheduled. 
Postnatal therapy. The best approach to the neonate 
with PAIVS is still controversial, although most authors 
agree that, to attempt to rescue the right ventricle, 
prompt reopening of the right outflow is considered the 
top priority. This task can be carried out with a surgical 
valvulotomy, often associated with aortopulmonary 
shunting. This allows later reassessment of the functional 
recovery of the right ventricle, which is the key parameter 
to consider for the selection of the most appropriate 
surgical procedure. If the right ventricle is indeed functioning, 
then a biventricular repair can be perfomed (closure 
of the atrial septal defect and of the aortopulmonary 
shunt, associated with removal of the residual infundibular 
obstruction if needed). Alternatively, if doubts about 
the right ventricular function are still present, a one and 
a half ventricular repair can be selected (the same procedures 
as above, together with a cavopulmonary anastomosis). 
If the right ventricle remains hypoplastic or 
acontractile, then a univentricular Fontan-like repair is 
chosen. This multistep approach yields an early mortality 
rate of 15–35% and a late mortality rate of 20%, 
with a 30% rate of biventricular repair, a 60% rate 
of one and a half ventricular repair, and a 10% rate of 
univentricular repair. In recent years, perforation of the 
pulmonary valve with radiofrequency or laser via interventional 
catheterization, followed by balloon dilatation, 
has become the procedure of choice. In this 
protocol, if after 2–3 weeks of PGE1 infusion the right 
ventricle does not regain its contractility and, despite a 
successful decompression, is unable to provide at least a 
75% oxygen saturation at rest, an aortopulmonary 
shunt is additionally performed. This type of approach 
using interventional catheterization seems to yield better 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 151 
Figure 5.41 Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum. The diagnosis, suspected on the 4-chamber view (Figure 5.40) is confirmed 
on the right outflow tract view. (a) 2D-dimensional imaging demonstrating the severely hypoplastic pulmonary trunk and branches (arrowheads); 
in this case, it was a functional atresia, demonstrated by the apparently patent valve (31 weeks’ gestation; see text). (b) On the 3- 
vessel view, color Doppler demonstrates reverse flow across the ductus arteriosus and the hypoplastic pulmonary artery, due to the valve 
atresia (arrowhead) (this is the same case as in Figure 5.40(c): hypoplastic right heart). (c) If the atresia of the pulmonary valve is a late evolutionary 
event of a former moderate stenosis, then the size of the pulmonary artery is not affected, and the atresia is demonstrated by reverse 
flow across a normally sized pulmonary artery (34 weeks’ gestation) (arrow). Ao, aorta; D and DA, ductus arteriosus; HRH, hypoplastic 
right heart; PA, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b c 

results than those obtained with the above-mentioned 
multistep protocol: the early mortality rate is 0–20% 
and the rate of biventricular repair reaches 75%. 
However, if the hypoplasia of the right ventricle is severe 
(presence of the inlet part only) or in the case of right 
ventricle-dependent coronary circulation, the opening of 
the pulmonary valve is impossible or contraindicated, 
since this would often lead to severe left ventricular 
ischemia. Both circumstances require a Rashkind septostomy 
and an aortopulmonary shunt to warrant an 
adequate pulmonary blood flow. Later, these patients 
may require a Fontan operation or, as a last resort, 
cardiac transplantation. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. PAIVS can cause 
intrauterine demise, if the degree of tricuspid insufficiency 
is severe and heart failure ensues relatively early in 
gestation. These cases show a 40% intrauterine mortality 
rate, with an additional early neonatal mortality 
of 35–45%. On the contrary, if the tricuspid valve is 
atretic or only moderately dysplastic, the disease is well 
tolerated in utero and cardiac decompensation is rare. In 
fetal series, PAIVS is associated with an intrauterine 
mortality rate of 10% (excluding cases undergoing 
termination of pregnancy) and a survival rate beyond 
the 1st month of life of 63%.28 Post-natal prognosis 
depends, as already pointed out, on the following: 
• The size of the right ventricle and the anatomy of the 
tricuspid valve. In the case of moderate ventricular 
hypoplasia, the mortality rate is less than 5%, the life 
expectancy is almost normal, and additional surgical 
procedures are rarely necessary. In the case of severe 
ventricular hypoplasia, the mortality rate ranges from 
15% to 35% and both the life expectancy and the 
quality of life depend on the need for additional 
surgery. 
• The presence of severe coronary stenoses and/or of a 
right ventricle-dependent coronary circulation. These 
poor prognostic features are often found in cases with 
extremely hypoplastic right ventricles, in which the 
mortality rate can exceed 70%. 
152 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
HYPOPLASTIC LEFT HEART SYNDROME (HLHS) 
Incidence. HLHS occurs in approximately 1 in 10 000 live births. 
Diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view: complete absence of the left ventricle (mitral and aortic atresia) or a small 
globular left ventricle with endocardial fibroelastosis. Retrograde flow in the aortic arch and ascending aorta is 
present on color Doppler. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (up to 15%) in the fetus; 3–4% in postnatal life. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Poor, with high postnatal mortality and morbidity. 
Definition. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS) 
includes a spectrum of heterogeneous conditions characterized 
by severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle and 
left ventricular outflow tract. 
Anatomy. There are two forms of hypoplastic left heart 
syndrome: the first is characterized by mitral and aortic 
atresia, the second by aortic atresia and a hypoplastic 
but patent mitral valve.29 In the former type, there is no 
communication between the left atrium and the left ventricle 
due to mitral atresia or imperforation. As a result, 
the left ventricle is a virtual cavity, often recognizable 
only from the outside of the heart on the basis of the 
course of the anterior and posterior coronary branches 
(autopsy). In the other form of HLHS, the mitral valve is 
hypoplastic but patent; in this case, the left ventricle is 
hypoplastic but has a lumen that can be easily recognized. 
It should be stressed that other cardiac anomalies, 
characterized by severe hypoplasia of left cardiac 
sections, that are unable to support systemic circulation,
30 are included under the term HLHS. These are represented 
by some forms of critical aortic stenosis, by the 
Shone complex (which is characterized by anomalies of 
the mitral valve, coarctation of the aorta, and subaortic 
stenosis), and by unbalanced atrioventricular septal 
defect with right ventricular dominance. Aortic coarctation 
is associated in 70% of cases of HLHS. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, either a 
small globular ventricle with endocardial fibroelastosis 
(Figure 5.42a) or a slit-like ventricle (mitral and aortic 
atresia; Figure 5.42b,c) are detected on the left side of the 
heart. By definition, the hypoplastic left ventricle never 
reaches the apex of the heart (Figure 5.42). The mitral 
valve is atretic or with a hypoplastic annulus. On the 
long-axis view of the left ventricle, it is possible to 
observe with difficulty a threadlike ascending aorta and 
the extremely hypoplastic annulus of the aortic valve. 

On the 4-chamber view, color Doppler confirms the 
absence of filling of the left ventricle (Figure 5.42c) and 
demonstrates reverse (left-to-right) flow across the foramen 
ovale and mitral regurgitation, in those cases characterized 
by a patent and dysplastic mitral valve. On the 
3-vessel view, color Doppler demonstrates the retrograde 
flow in the hypoplastic aortic arch (Figure 5.42d). 
Lastly, it should be underlined that, due to the severity of 
the anomalies, HLHS is among the CHDs that may also 
be diagnosed at 13–16 weeks. Spectral Doppler and 4D 
echocardiography do not play a significant diagnostic 
role in this type of CHD. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
between critical aortic stenosis, severe coarctation, 
and hypoplastic left heart syndrome may be difficult 
at times. Failure to demonstrate forward blood flow 
across the mitral or aortic valve favors the diagnosis 
of HLHS. 
• Prognostic indicators. The cases in which the size 
of the ascending aorta is >2 mm at birth can be selected 
for Norwood correction. However, most of the cases 
detected in utero do not belong to this group, having 
severely hypoplastic threadlike ascending aorta. 
• Natural history. HLHS can occur as such from the 
beginning or can be the final evolved stage of critical 
aortic stenosis and, rarely, of aortic coarctation. In 
addition, there are anecdotal cases reported by centers 
of proven experience where a diagnosis of a normal 
heart at echocardiography performed at 20 weeks 
was followed by the recognition of HLHS in the 3rd 
trimester. 
• Association with other malformations. Cardiac 
anomalies (dextrocardia and tricuspid dysplasia) and 
extracardiac anomalies (vertebral, urinary, and gastrointestinal 
anomalies) are associated in 15–20% of 
cases. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(up to 15%) in the fetus, but lower in postnatal life 
(3–4%). The most frequent chromosomal anomaly is 
monosomy X (45X), followed by trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should HLHS be detected in the 
fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because of the high risk 
of aneuploidy. In the case of continuation of pregnancy, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, as 
the systemic circulation is ductus-dependent due to the 
aortic atresia. 
Postnatal therapy. HLHS represents a neonatal emergency 
and therefore should be managed by infusion of 
prostaglandin E1 to keep the ductus patent until surgery. 
Surgical solutions to HLHS are neonatal heart transplantation 
or a series of palliative operations aiming in 
the beginning at reconstructing the systemic ventricular 
outflow using the only residual ventricular pump represented 
by the right ventricle. However, as already underlined, 
a high proportion of fetal cases are excluded from 
any type of surgery, because of the extreme degree of 
aortic hypoplasia. The three-stage Norwood palliation 
converts the cardiac system into a univentricular heart 
with the systemic circulation supported by the reconstructed 
right ventricle, the Fontan circulation. The 
Norwood procedure is performed in three stages. Stage I, 
which is carried out soon after birth, consists of a complex 
prosthetic reconstruction of the entire ascending 
aorta, the arch, and the aortic isthmus, obtained by 
connecting the trunk of the pulmonary artery with the 
neo-aorta (after separation of the bifurcation of the pulmonary 
branches) and creating a pulmonary systemic 
shunt. Stage II is done at 3–6 months of age and consists 
of a direct terminolateral anastomosis between the superior 
vena cava and the right pulmonary artery: bidirectional 
cavopulmonary anastomosis. In stage III, the two 
circulations are completely separated, directing the 
blood coming from the inferior vena cava towards the 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 153 
Figure 5.42 Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. (a) At 22 weeks’ 
gestation, on the 4-chamber view, the severe hypoplasia of the left 
ventricle, transformed into a virtual cavity due to the mitral atresia 
(arrowhead) is evident. (b) At 32 weeks’ gestation, there is severe 
hypoplasia of the left ventricle, which is slit-like (arrowhead). (c) In 
the same case as in (a), color Doppler demonstrates the mitral atresia 
(absence of left ventricular filling). (d) On the 3-vessel view, the 
reverse flow across the hypoplastic aortic arch (in red, arrowhead) 
(associated tubular hypoplasia) confirms the aortic atresia. 
a b 
c d 

pulmonary arteries, usually through an extracardiac 
duct (total cavopulmonary). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Despite the recent 
brilliant achievements of pediatric cardiosurgery, HLHS 
continues to be the congenital cardiac defect with the 
highest mortality. Survival beyond the neonatal period, 
based on the data reported in fetal series, and excluding 
termination of pregnancy, varies from 4% to 25%. In 
the neonatal series, the survival rate after the Norwood 
operation (stages I and II) is, in the best centers, 65% and 
55% at 1 month and 1 year respectively. The discrepancy 
between these data is justified by the fact that the 
neonatal series include a selected population of ideal candidates 
for the Norwood procedure, and not all neonates 
born with HLHS. It should also be borne in mind that 
in a significant percentage of cases, a hypoxic cerebral 
deficit develops between the first and second operations. 
154 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
AORTIC STENOSIS 
Definition. Obstructions to left ventricular outflow can 
be classified on the basis of the site of the obstruction 
into valvular, subvalvular, and supravalvular stenosis. 
The single variant that is consistently detected in the 
fetus is the valvular one; in this case, the valvular ring is 
often of normal size and the stenosis is the result of the 
valvular dysplasia. 
Anatomy. In valvular stenosis, the anatomy of the valve 
may be completely distorted, with dysplastic cusps of 
mucoid appearance, or mostly preserved, with distinct 
valvular cusps that are fused along the commissures. The 
valve may have three cusps, be bicuspid or, exceptionally, 
be mono- or quadricuspid. When associated with other 
anomalies of the left heart, the annulus is frequently 
hypoplastic. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound picture of aortic 
valvular stenosis depends on the severity of the obstruction. 
On the 4-chamber view, in moderate to severe aortic 
stenosis, the left ventricle appears globose and hypertrophic, 
with a good systolic function. In critical aortic 
stenosis, the picture depends on the function of the mitral 
valve: if the mitral valve is damaged, either concurrently 
or secondary to the aortic valve lesion, then severe atrioventricular 
insufficiency is present, and this leads to severe 
left atrial enlargement (Figure 5.43a); if, on the contrary, 
the mitral valve is hypoplastic, then the valve is almost 
closed and only a reduced regurgitation is present (Figure 
5.43b). The left ventricle is usually globose and dilated, 
and its contractility is severely impaired. In these cases, the 
ventricular endocardium and, to a lesser extent, the papillary 
muscles of the mitral valve are brightly hyperechoic 
because of secondary ischemia-induced fibroelastosis 
(Figure 5.43c). On the long-axis view of the left ventricle, 
the aortic valvular cusps appear thickened and almost 
immobile (Figure 5.43d). Occasionally, a post-stenotic 
ectasia of the ascending aorta is seen, although, in the 
most severe forms, this vessel is frequently hypoplastic. In 
critical aortic stenosis, color Doppler can be used to assess 
mitral regurgitation (Figure 5.43b) and to reveal inversion 
of the interatrial shunt on the 4-chamber view. It also 
allows demonstration of retrograde flow in the aortic arch 
on the 3-vessel view. In moderate to severe aortic stenosis, 
color Doppler demonstrates, on the long-axis view of the 
left ventricle, the turbulent flow across the stenotic aortic 
valve. Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the pressure 
gradient in moderate to severe aortic stenosis. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to demonstrate the 
impaired contractility and the severe dilatation of the left 
ventricle in the most severe cases (Figure 5.44). 
• Differential diagnosis. Isolated mitral dysplasia is 
extremely rare. Mitral regurgitation might suggest the 
presence of cardiomyopathy, but in this case the cardiac 
anatomy is unremarkable. 
• Prognostic indicators. Poor prognostic signs are the 
presence of endocardial fibroelastosis and the association 
with other anomalies of the left heart (Shone 
complex). 
Incidence. About 3% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. On the long-axis view of the left ventricle, the aortic valvular cusps appear thickened and hypomobile; 
occasionally, a hypoplastic annulus and/or post-stenotic dilation are present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low in the valvular form. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low in the valvular form. 
Outcome. Unfavorable in the critical forms already evident in the 2nd trimester. 

• Association with other malformations. In about 
30–40% of cases, aortic valvular stenosis is associated 
with mitral anomalies, subvalvular aortic stenosis, 
and aortic coarctation. Association with extracardiac 
anomalies is exceedingly rare. 
• Natural history. Aortic stenosis tends to progress during 
fetal life: the degree of obstruction can worsen or 
it can evolve into a hypoplastic left heart.31,32 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in the 
valvular form. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low in the 
valvular form. 
Obstetric management. The evolving nature of critical 
aortic stenosis should be considered during prenatal 
counseling, especially with regard to the possibility 
of achieving a biventricular repair. In critical aortic 
stenosis, karyotyping is not mandatory and should 
be discussed with the parents. In the case of continuation 
of pregnancy, delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center, in order to ensure adequate neonatal 
management. In fact, critical aortic stenosis is often 
ductus-dependent. 
Postnatal treatment. After birth, the key point, after 
removal of the valvular obstruction, is to evaluate 
whether or not the left ventricle will be able to maintain 
the systemic circulation. In fact, the surgical approach 
and the ultimate prognosis will depend on this parameter. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In aortic stenosis, 
the prognosis depends on the severity and the gestational 
age at which the diagnosis is made. In fact, analysis of 
major prenatal case series reveals a truly ill-fated prognosis 
for cases of critical aortic stenosis recognized in the 
2nd trimester, with a significant risk of fetal death and 
low survival beyond the neonatal period.31,32 After birth, 
the prognosis depends on the capability of the left ventricle 
to support the systemic circulation after removal of 
the obstruction of the left outflow. In the more favorable 
forms, the midterm mortality rate is as low as 10%. The 
marked difference in terms of mortality and morbidity 
among prenatal and postnatal cases is related to the 
greater severity of the lesions disclosed during the 2nd 
trimester of pregnancy. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 155 
Figure 5.43 Critical aortic stenosis: 4-chamber view. (a) Variant 
associated with severe mitral dysplasia and insufficiency: the mitral 
valve apparatus is abnormal and hyperechoic, and the insufficiency 
determines the atriomegaly. (b) Color Doppler demonstrates 
the insufficiency of the mitral valve. (c) Variant associated 
with severe mitral stenosis: the extremely high intraventricular 
pressure, due to simultaneous obstruction of the mitral and aortic 
valves, leads to endocardial fibroelastosis (hyperechoic rim of the 
left ventricle) and dilatation of the ventricle. (d) Direct evidence of 
severe annular stenosis is obtained from the left outflow view, 
which shows a moderately hypoplastic ascending aorta (a) and 
severe narrowing of the annulus (arrow). LA, left atrium; LV, left 
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
Figure 5.44 Critical aortic stenosis. 3D inversion-mode image 
demonstrating severe dilatation of the left ventricle (arrows). Ao, 
descending thoracic aorta; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium. 
a b 
c d 

Definition. Coarctation of the aorta refers to an area of 
narrowing of the thoracic aorta in the region of insertion 
of the arterial duct, most commonly between the left 
subclavian artery and the ductus arteriosus (isthmus). 
Commonly, coarctation of the aorta encompasses a 
spectrum of lesions, ranging from segmental narrowing 
to severe tubular hypoplasia of the whole transverse 
arch. In particular, tubular hypoplasia refers to a uniform 
narrowing of the transverse arch, whereas segmental 
coarctation is usually determined by a localized 
shelf-like lesion, often with a degree of proximal tapering 
of the aortic arch towards the lesion; the two lesions 
are often associated.33 
Anatomy. From the anatomic standpoint, discrete coarctation 
is characterized by a posterior eccentric fold (posterior 
shelf) inside the isthmus, opposite to the orifice of 
the arterial duct. When this closes at birth or soon afterwards, 
it causes further narrowing of the aortic lumen. 
In 30–40% of cases, coarctation is an isolated heart 
defect (above all in infant and child forms), but in the 
remaining 60–70% of cases, which account for the great 
majority of symptomatic patients in the first month of 
life, other cardiac anomalies (VSD, aortic and mitral 
valve anomalies, transposition of the great arteries, and 
double-outlet right ventricle) are associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Even with good visualization of 
the fetal aortic arch, prenatal diagnosis of discrete coarctation 
is very difficult, if not impossible. However, when 
associated with tubular hypoplasia of the entire arch, the 
ultrasound diagnosis is less difficult and can be reasonably 
made during the prenatal period. Sonographic findings 
possibly suggesting the presence of coarctation 
include direct and indirect signs, the latter being burdened 
with a significant percentage of false positives. 
Indirect signs include a significant prevalence of the right 
cardiac sections over the left ones on the 4-chamber view 
(Figure 5.45a) and of the pulmonary artery over the 
ascending aorta on the outflow views and on the 3-vessel 
view (Figure 5.45b). Direct evidence of coarctation, 
when possible, can be gathered by assessing the 3-vessel 
and trachea view: on this plane, the ductal arch appears 
significantly larger than the aortic arch (Figure 5.45c). 
The transverse part of the aortic arch is severely reduced 
in size, especially if tubular hypoplasia of the whole arch 
is present (Figure 5.45c). On color Doppler, a complete 
or partial inversion of the flow in the distal part of the 
156 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
COARCTATION OF THE AORTA 
Incidence. About 4–5% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. Indirect signs: significant prevalence of right cardiac sections over left ones and a prevalence of the 
pulmonary artery with respect to the ascending aorta. Direct signs: reduced size of the transverse aortic arch in 
comparison with the ductal arch. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely high: 29%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Good in isolated cases, especially if the transverse part of the arch is not involved. 
Figure 5.45 Coarctation of the aorta. (a) On the 4-chamber view, the ventricular disproportion, which is an indirect sign of coarctation, 
is evident (the right ventricle is larger than the left). (b) The 3-vessel view demonstrates the severe narrowing of the aorta (A), between the 
pulmonary artery (P) and the superior vena cava (C). (c) In this case, the coarctation was severe (tubular hypoplasia): the extreme discrepancy 
between the size of the ductal arch (DA) and that of the hypoplastic transverse part of the arch (AO) is evident. 
a b c 

arch and/or in the ascending aorta (Figure 5.42d) and a 
left-to-right interatrial shunt can be seen. However, it 
should be recalled here that prenatal diagnosis of coarctation 
of the aorta remains challenging,14,15,34 with a high 
rate of false-positive and false-negative diagnoses. 
Spectral Doppler is of little use in coarctation. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to assess the discrepancy 
in the size of the aortic and ductal arches. 
• Artefacts. Particular attention should be paid in the 
evaluation of the aortic arch on longitudinal views 
not to mistake, in the case of severe coarctation, the 
prevalent and dilated ductal arch for a normal aortic 
arch. This is why the 3-vessel and trachea view is currently 
the preferred option for the comparative assessment 
of the ductal and aortic arches. 
• Differential diagnosis. The marked prevalence of the 
right heart sections over the left on the 4-chamber 
view, present in the critical form of coarctation, should 
be differentiated from hypoplastic left heart syndrome 
and from total anomalous pulmonary venous connection 
(TAPVC: see earlier in this chapter). However, 
the former is characterized by a sealed or atretic mitral 
valve, which is mainly normal in coarctation. As far as 
TAPVC is concerned, the recognition of a single pulmonary 
vein entering the left atrium on color Doppler 
rules out this diagnosis. On the aortic arch views 
(transverse and longitudinal), coarctation should be 
differentiated from interruption of the aortic arch: in 
the latter case, a malalignment VSD is almost always 
associated. 
• Prognostic indicators. Unfavorable prognostic indicators 
include presence of other anomalies of the left 
heart as well as association with extracardiac anomalies 
and low birthweight.35 
• Associations with other malformations. Coarctation is 
often associated with other malformations of the left 
heart and with VSD.14,15,34,35 In the presence of mitral 
valve anomalies and subaortic stenosis, it can be part 
of Shone syndrome. Extracardiac malformations are 
frequently associated with coarctation (25–30% of 
cases): these include urinary, gastrointestinal, central 
nervous system, and facial anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, reaching 
29%34,35 – mainly monosomy X, but also trisomies 
21 and 18 and 22q11 microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. A detailed anatomic scan should 
be performed by an expert to exclude the presence 
of extracardiac anomalies. Karyotyping is indicated 
because of the high risk of chromosomal disorders. If 
there is a suspicion of any anomaly of the aortic arch, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, in 
order to allow early transfer of the newborn to the pediatric 
cardiology unit for final diagnosis and correct 
neonatal management; in fact, critical coarctation of the 
aorta is a ductus-dependent defect. 
Postnatal treatment. The surgical techniques commonly 
used are resection of the coarcted tract with terminoterminal 
and terminolateral anastomoses, a subclavian flap, 
and widened aortoplasty. Long-term follow-up studies 
(> 5 years) have reported a 20% recoarctation rate. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
depends on the severity of the lesion, on the presence 
of associated cardiac and extracardiac lesions that 
can significantly influence operative mortality and the 
life expectancy, and on correct perinatal management. 
The overall mortality rate is less than 5% for isolated 
coarctation. In symptomatic neonatal cases with associated 
cardiac lesions, the mortality rate is about 20%, 
ranging from 2% in cases associated with VSD to 40% 
in cases associated with complex cardiac anomalies or 
when the preoperative clinical condition is poor. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 157 
Incidence. About 1% of CHD. 
Diagnosis. Indirect signs: discrepancy in ventricular and great artery size is present in IAA type A and C 
(prevalence of right ventricle over left and of the pulmonary artery over the ascending aorta), whereas in type B, 
only a discrepancy in great vessel size is observed (prevalence of pulmonary artery over the ascending aorta) 
Direct sign: visualization of lack of continuity of the aortic arch on upper mediastinal views. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Preoperative death occurs in 5% of cases and the survival rate at 4 years after repair is 63%. 
INTERRUPTION OF THE AORTIC ARCH 

Definition. Interruption of the aortic arch (IAA) is a rare, 
severe form of CHD characterized by complete anatomic 
discontinuity between two adjacent segments of the 
aortic arch. 
Anatomy. IAA can be subdivided into three groups 
according to the site of interruption: 
• Type A: the interruption is distal to the left subclavian 
artery. 
• Type B: the interruption is between the left carotid 
and left subclavian arteries. 
• Type C: the interruption is between the innominate 
artery and the left carotid artery. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Prenatal diagnosis of IAA and of 
its subtypes depends on the observation of some reliable 
anatomic indicators that point to the correct differential 
diagnosis.36 Since a significant number of cases of IAA 
type A and C have a left/right ventricular discrepancy, 
easily visualized on the 4-chamber view, this sign should 
be considered as a hint to check the great vessels. In 
fact, angling towards the outflow tracts to image the 
great vessels reveals a significant discrepancy in the size 
of the great arteries and, in most cases, a VSD. In particular, 
the ascending aorta is significantly smaller than the 
main pulmonary artery. It should be noted that if the 
VSD is large and malaligned as in IAA type B, only a 
significant discrepancy in great vessel size is observed. 
As for coarctation of the aortic arch, care must be taken 
on the longitudinal view not to mistake the prevalent 
ductal arch for a normal aortic arch. Again, the 3-vessel 
and trachea view is the reference plane for detecting 
aortic arch anomalies. 
With regard to ultrasound differentiation of the various 
subtypes, type B can be difficult to distinguish from 
type A. In type B, the ascending aorta has a straighter 
course to the innominate and left carotid arteries, the 
typical ‘V’ shape (Figure 5.46b), whereas in type A there 
is a slight curvature after the origin of the innominate 
artery (Figure 5.46c), related to the persistence of the 
aortic arch segment between the origin of the left 
carotid and subclavian arteries.36 A conal malalignment 
VSD with a leftward and posterior displacement of the 
conal septum is typically found in most cases of IAA, 
especially type B. In addition as already reported, discrepancy 
in ventricular and great artery size is usually 
present in the setting of IAA type A and C, whereas in 
type B only a discrepancy in great vessel size is 
observed. The use of color Doppler may facilitate 
assessment of the continuity (or absence thereof) of the 
ascending aorta with the descending part; it also facilitates 
assessment of the course of the ascending aorta 
and neck vessels (Figure 5.47). Spectral Doppler is of 
limited use, while 4D echocardiography has been 
demonstrated to facilitate the assessment of aortic arch 
anomalies, especially with B-flow and inversion-mode 
renderings.37 
158 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.46 Interruped aortic arch (IAA). Prenatal echocardiography and schematic representation of the normal aortic arch and interruption 
of the aortic arch (IAA). (a) long-axis view of the normal aortic arch and its three branches. (b) IAA type B; the ascending aorta 
fails to curve, but courses straight cranially, to divide into the innominate artery and the left carotid artery (the typical V shape). (c) IAA 
type A; note the slight curvature after the origin of the innominate artery and the location of the interruption after the left subclavian artery. 
A, ascending aorta; I, innominate artery; C, left carotid artery; S, subclavian artery. Modified from36. 
a b c 

• Differential diagnosis. It is possible to distinguish 
between IAA and coarctation of the aorta on ultrasound. 
In IAA, the ascending aorta runs with a 
straight course to its branches, unlike coarctation, 
where the aortic curvature is normal and there is continuity 
with the descending aorta. 
• Association with other malformations. VSD is almost 
always present. A right aortic arch and anomalies of 
the left ventricular outflow are frequently associated 
in type B. Association with extracardiac anomalies 
(central nervous system, urinary, gastrointestinal and 
facial) is more frequent in type B. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Type B IAA is associated 
with the 22q11 microdeletion in about half of cases, 
both prenatally and postnatally.36,38,39 In fact, type B 
is usually syndromic, being the most common cardiac 
defect occurring in DiGeorge syndrome, a developmental 
disease characterized by thymic and parathyroid 
gland hypo/aplasia associated with conotruncal malformations 
and due to the 22q11 microdeletion (see 
Chapter 10). The other subtypes of IAA are rarely associated 
with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should IAA be detected in a 
fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be carried out 
by an expert to detect possible additional anomalies, 
such as thymus hypoplasia, which increase the risk of 
22q11 microdeletion even more.39 Fetal karyotyping 
with FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is indicated 
in type B IAA. Timing and mode of delivery are 
unchanged, but the delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center in order to reach a definite diagnosis 
and to adequately manage the situation in the 
neonatal period. 
Postnatal treatment. The surgical management of IAA is 
controversial. Primary anastomosis and patch aortoplasties 
combined with end-to-end anastomosis have significant 
complications, including recurrence and aneurysm 
formation. Pulmonary autograft patch aortoplasty 
together with end-to-side anastomosis is an alternative 
approach to surgical management, and does not require 
cardiopulmonary bypass. In a large case series,40 preoperative 
death occurred in 5% of cases and the survival 
rate at 4 years after repair was 63%. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Risk factors for 
postinterventional death are low birth weight and major 
associated cardiac anomalies. The discrepancies among 
the clinical features and, above all, the remarkable difference 
with regard to association with the 22q11 
microdeletion suggest that type A and type B IAA could 
be two separate pathogenetic entities, with the latter type 
carrying a worse prognosis. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 159 
Figure 5.47 Interruption of the aortic arch (IAA). Color 
Doppler shows the course of the ascending aorta and neck vessels. 
(a) In type B IAA, the ascending aorta has a straighter course to 
the innominate and the left carotid arteries (the typical ‘V’ shape) 
(arrow). (b) In type A, there is a slight curvature after the origin of 
the innominate artery related to the persistence of the aortic arch 
segment between the origin of the left carotid and subclavian 
arteries (arrow). i, innominate artery; c, left common carotid 
artery; s, left subclavian artery Modified from reference 36. 
AORTIC ARCH ANOMALIES (RIGHT AORTIC ARCH, 
DOUBLE AORTIC ARCH, AND VASCULAR RING) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Diagnosis. On the 3-vessel and trachea view: right aortic arch: aortic arch on the right of the trachea; double arch: 
‘N’ shape with bifurcation of the aortic arch in front of the trachea; vascular ring: abnormal retrotracheal vessel. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high for the right aortic arch (22q11 microdeletion). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Excellent in the case of isolated anomalies; if associated with major CHD, final outcome will depend on 
the severity of these. 
a b 

Definition. Aortic arch anomalies comprise a variety 
of congenital abnormalities of the position or branching 
pattern, or both, of the aortic arch. They result 
from aberrant development of one or more components 
of the embryonic pharyngeal arch system. These 
anomalies can be divided into those causing a vascular 
ring around the trachea and esophagus, usually determining 
compression of both structures, and those that 
do not. 
Anatomy. The left or right position of the aortic arch is 
defined in relation to the mainstem bronchus, which is 
crossed by the descending thoracic aorta, and does not 
refer to the side of the midline on which the aorta 
descends. In left aortic arch, the descending thoracic 
aorta crosses over the left mainstem bronchus and 
descends left to the midline along the spine. Three vessels 
arise from the aortic arch: first, the innominate 
artery branching into the right carotid and right subclavian 
arteries; second, the left carotid artery; and third, 
the left subclavian artery. Usually, the first aortic arch 
vessel gives rise to the carotid artery, which is opposite 
to the side of the aortic arch (i.e., the right carotid 
artery in left aortic arch and the left carotid artery in 
right aortic arch). The ductus arteriosus joints the aorta 
distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery. 
Normally, the ductus arteriosus is left-sided, but it can 
be bilateral or right-sided. The most common types of 
right aortic arch (RAA) branching are: 
• mirror-image branching (left innominate artery, right 
carotid artery, right subclavian artery) 
• retroesophageal left (aberrant) subclavian artery with 
a normal caliber 
• retroesophageal diverticulum of Kommerell 
• right aortic arch with left descending aorta. 
The presence or absence of a vascular ring in the setting 
of a right aortic arch depends on the branching of the 
brachiocephalic vessels and the location of the ductus 
arteriosus. The most frequently encountered forms of 
vascular ring are (in decreasing order of frequency) double 
aortic arch, right descending right arch with aberrant 
origin of the left subclavian artery from a retroesophageal 
diverticulum (Kommerel), and left descending right arch 
(retroesophageal). 
In the case of a double aortic arch, both right and 
left aortic arches are present: i.e., the ascending 
aorta splits into two limbs encircling the trachea 
and esophagus, with the two limbs joining to form a 
single descending aorta. There are several forms, 
including widely open right and left arches or hypoplasia/
atresia of one arch (usually the left). This anomaly 
is commonly associated with a patent ductus 
arteriosus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As previously described, the 
aortic arch can be examinated on the 3-vessel and trachea 
view. A RAA is diagnosed when the ductus and 
aorta form a U-shaped configuration, the trachea 
located between them (Figure 5.8d, 5.48a and b, and 
5.49).37,41 In addition, any branch coursing behind the 
trachea (e.g. a left aberrant subclavian artery) should 
be considered as an abnormal aberrant branch (Figure 
5.48b). Color Doppler is extremely useful to trace the 
course of the abnormal vessels in the upper mediastinum 
(Figure 5.48b). Spectral Doppler may be used 
to differentiate the innominate vein from arterial 
160 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.48 Aortic arch anomalies: 3-vessel and trachea view. (a) In the normal spatial relationships, the trachea (arrow) is located on 
the right of the aortic arch. (b) In right aortic arch, the trachea (arrow) is located between the aortic and ductal arches. Sometimes, as 
in this case, a retrotracheal vessel (sling) can be identified. (c) In double aortic arch, the arches feature an upside-down ‘N’, with the 
oblique bar of the ‘N’ representing the second arch. The trachea (arrow) in this case is located between the two aortic arches, although 
several spatial arrangements are possible. (d) In some cases, the aortic arch is normally positioned on the left of the trachea (arrow), but 
the neck vessels can have an abnormal origin and course. In this case, there was an aberrant retrotracheal right subclavian artery 
(arrowhead). See the text for details. 
a b c d 

vessels. In this group of anomalies, 4D echocardiography 
plays a central diagnostic and prognostic role, 
being able to demonstrate anomalies that were hard or 
impossible to identify until recently by 2D ultrasound 
(e.g. aberrant subclavian arteries).6,37 In addition, it 
permits a much easier diagnosis of all aortic arch 
anomalies. Inversion-mode and B-flow are the renderings 
of choice (Figure 5.49). 
• Association with other malformations. RAA with 
mirror-image branching is often associated with other 
complex cardiac anomalies (tetralogy of Fallot and 
common arterial trunks). VSD is the cardiac anomaly 
most commonly associated with vascular ring. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high. 
Vascular ring and isolated RAA can be associated with 
the 22q11 microdeletion.40,41 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low in 
cases of vascular ring. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping with a FISH 
analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is indicated in the 
case of RAA. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Vascular rings 
encircle the trachea and the esophagus, often causing 
symptomatic compression of both structures. 
Compression of the trachea causes upper airway 
obstruction that impairs inspiratory and, to a lesser 
degree, expiratory airflow. The extent of respiratory 
impairment depends upon the severity of compression, 
which can vary considerably. In addition to the airway 
symptoms, patients may experience swallowing problems 
related to the esophageal compression. The 
prognosis of patients with RAA and vascular rings 
depends on several factors, including the severity of 
tracheal/esophageal compression and the association 
with other cardiac and extracardiac anomalies. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 161 
Figure 5.49 Right aortic arch (RAA): 3D inversion-mode rendering. 
The image shows, from above, an RAA with the asterisk (*) 
indicating the position of the trachea, between the RAA and the 
ductal arch (DA). The arrowheads indicate the neck vessels. The 
left ventricle (LV) is evident on the upper part of the image. 
TETRALOGY OF FALLOT (TOF) 
Definition. Tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is a cardiac malformation 
characterized by: 
• subaortic VSD caused by malalignment between the 
infundibular and the trabecular septum 
• an aorta overriding the VSD 
• obstruction of varying severity of the right outflow 
tract 
• consequent hypertrophy of the right ventricle (after 
birth). 
Incidence. Accounts for about 7–9% of CHD in infants. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle: an anterior malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding 
aorta. Sweeping further cephalad from this view, a small pulmonary artery should be detected. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Good/extremely good in isolated cases. Poor if chromosomal and/or extracardiac anomalies are 
associated or in the case of unfavorable cardiac anatomy. 

Its incidence reaches 9–11% after birth, but due to the 
prevalence of complex cardiac anomalies, its incidence 
in utero is reduced to about 3%. 
Anatomy. The extent of the anatomic obstruction to the 
right outflow tract is determined by the degree of deviation 
of the infundibular septum, the hypertrophy of the 
septum and anterior wall of the right ventricle, and the 
association of pulmonary valvular stenosis. In the fetus, 
because of the frequent absence of pulmonary stenosis 
and the presence of physiologic shunts, the tetralogy often 
becomes a di- or trilogy, with the right ventricular hypertrophy 
being absent and the pulmonary stenosis present 
only in the more important cases and/or developing late in 
gestation. Although the TOF spectrum comprises numerous 
variants and subtypes, TOF with absent pulmonary 
valve, which is characterized by severe dilatation of the 
pulmonary trunk and branches due to severe stenosis and 
insufficiency of the functionally absent pulmonary valve, 
certainly represents a well-known entity with an unfavorable 
prognosis, which needs to be addressed separately 
(see the following section). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As for most conotruncal anomalies, 
the 4-chamber view is unremarkable, unless anomalies of 
the atrioventricular plane are associated. Only in TOF 
with absent pulmonary valve can the 4-chamber view be 
abnormal due to the presence of cardiomegaly.42 Classic 
TOF is diagnosed on the long-axis views. On the long axis 
of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with an overriding 
aorta can be seen (Figure 5.50a). Sweeping further 
cephalad from this view, on the right outflow tract view, 
the smaller pulmonary artery can be detected (Figure 
5.50b). The pulmonary artery may have a diameter within 
the normal range, but the aorta/pulmonary artery diameter 
ratio will be abnormal. As mentioned above, the hypertrophy 
of the right ventricle is absent, whereas the infundibular 
stenosis is not a constant finding in the 2nd trimester. 
Color Doppler can be used to demonstrate flow through 
the VSD toward the aorta (Figure 5.29 and 5.50c) from 
both left and right ventricles and flow through the smaller 
pulmonary outflow tract and arterial duct. In utero, it is 
unusual to detect any significant acceleration of blood 
across the right outflow tract, even in the presence of an 
obvious reduction of the vessel size. Moreover, stenosis is 
frequently absent at the time of diagnosis in the 2nd 
trimester, to become evident later on in gestation; in a few 
cases, a narrow pulmonary outflow may progress to atresia.
43 This is why serial ultrasound monitoring is important 
in order to demonstrate antegrade flow through the pulmonary 
artery late in gestation to exclude the potential 
need for prostaglandin therapy after birth. Spectral 
Doppler is of limited value, as is 4D echocardiography. 
The latter may be of help if anomalies of the aortic arch are 
associated. 
• Differential diagnosis. As already mentioned, in utero 
TOF cannot be differentiated from an isolated 
malalignment VSD if evident pulmonary stenosis is 
absent. Therefore, in the absence of pulmonary outflow 
obstruction, it is always necessary to consider 
the possible evolution from malalignment VSD in 
TOF. Another important concept is that the degree of 
aortic overriding is variable, and cannot be fully 
appreciated in utero. Therefore, when the aorta 
emerges about 50% from the right ventricle, differentiation 
of TOF from a Fallot-like double-outlet right 
ventricle can be difficult, the two being distinguished 
only by the degree of aortic overriding. With regard to 
the differential diagnosis with other conotruncal 
anomalies, it should be considered that common arterial 
trunk (CAT) and pulmonary atreria with VSD 
(PAVSD) share with TOF the presence of a malalignment 
VSD. Hence, if aortic overriding is found, the 
right outflow tract should be evaluated: if a small pulmonary 
artery is connected to the right ventricle, the 
diagnosis is TOF; if this is atretic, it is PAVSD; if the 
pulmonary artery originates from the single emerging 
vessel, it is CAT (Figure 5.11). 
• Prognostic indicators. Unfavorable prognostic 
elements are the presence of extracardiac anomalies 
(including chromosomal anomalies), severe 
162 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.50 Tetralogy of Fallot. (TOF): the typical signs of TOF are shown. (a) The left outflow tract view shows a malalignment VSD 
with an overriding aorta. (b) The right outflow tract view shows the narrowing of the pulmonary trunk, consistent with an infundibular 
stenosis. (c) On the left outflow tract, color Doppler demonstrates the overriding aorta draining from both ventricles. Ao, aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b c 

pulmonary artery stenosis, and the absent pulmonary 
valve variant (see below). 
• Association with other malformations. Association 
with extracardiac anomalies is frequent, in particular 
gastrointestinal and thoracic ones (esophageal and 
duodenal atresia, and diaphragmatic hernia), even 
independently of chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (up to 20% in 
fetal case series), with equal distribution between trisomies 
21 and 18.14,15,44 There is a minor association with 
microdeletion 22q11, except in the variant with absence of 
the pulmonary valve, where the association is about 25%.42 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. 
Obstetric management. Should TOF be detected in a 
fetus, a detailed fetal anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert to exclude the presence of extracardiac 
anomalies, bearing in mind the relatively high association 
rate. Fetal karyotyping including FISH analysis for 22q11 
microdeletion is indicated, especially if additional anomalies 
of the aortic arch are associated. Although the shunt 
is significant in classic TOF, it is better to plan the delivery 
in tertiary referral centers in order to warrant optimal 
multidisciplinary management of possible associated malformations. 
In addition, if the pulmonary outflow is significantly 
obstructed, a need for early shunting may arise. 
Postnatal treatment. The treatment of this defect is surgical 
in all cases. However, the type of approach will 
depend on different anatomic features that may be 
ascertained only after birth. These include the degree of 
pulmonary trunk and branch stenosis, the presence of 
multiple VSDs, and the presence of coronary anomalies. 
All of these feature have an impact on the type of treatment. 
In most cases, definitive surgical correction will be 
performed at 3–6 months of age, depending on the orientation 
of the reference cardiosurgical center, with a 
surgical mortality rate of less than 2.5%. The surgical 
approach includes removal of the outflow obstruction 
(infundibolectomy), together with closure of the VSD 
with a patch and, if necessary, pulmonary valvulotomy. 
However, if pulmonary outflow obstruction is significant, 
an early intervention is needed in order to ensure 
an adequate blood flow to the lungs and, consequently, 
an acceptable oxygen saturation. This is obtained with a 
palliative aorto-pulmonary shunting procedure, the 
modified Blalock–Taussig operation. This consists of the 
interposition of a GoreTex conduct between the left subclavian 
artery and the left pulmonary artery. 
Prognosis, treatment, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
will depend on several factors, including karyotype, 
associated extracardiac malformations, and cardiac 
anatomy. This last factor is extremely important as no two 
cases of TOF are identical, as Lev and Eckner45 pointed 
out over 40 years ago. Prenatal counseling should therefore 
take into consideration all of these aspects in addition 
to the well-established fact that the pulmonary outflow 
obstruction may evolve during pregnancy.43 With regard 
to survival, case series of patients with isolated TOF report 
long-term survival rates as high as 80–90%. The variant 
with an absent pulmonary valve has significantly lower 
survival rates and will be discussed below. In conclusion, if 
no unfavorable prognostic factors are found in utero, and, 
above all, after birth, TOF is an easily correctable heart 
defect, with excellent survival and good quality of life. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 163 
ABSENT PULMONARY VALVE SYNDROME (APVS) 
Definition. Absent pulmonary valve syndrome (APVS) is 
a rare cardiac abnormality characterized by the existence 
of a dysplastic or rudimentary pulmonary valve, associated 
in most instances with severe dilatation of the 
pulmonary trunk and branches due to the concurrent 
occurrence of valve stenosis and regurgitation. In most 
cases, this condition is associated with TOF and absence 
of the arterial duct, although cases with a patent ductus 
arteriosus and/or occurring as an isolated anomaly have 
been reported.42,46 
Anatomy. Two variants of APVS have been recognized 
in the fetus: the more frequent is characterized by an 
absent pulmonary valve with severely dilated pulmonary 
Incidence. It accounts for about 6–9% of tetralogy Fallot cases, and less than 1% of CHD in fetuses. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle: an anterior malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding 
aorta. Very large pulmonary trunk and branches, sometimes seen also on the 4-chamber view, due to severe dilatation. 
Pulmonary valve functionally absent. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (25%). Mainly but not only microdeletion 22q 11. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Poor, if chromosomal and/or extra-cardiac anomalies are associated and for the risk of life-threatening 
tracheomalacia. Discrete/good in the other cases. 

trunk and branches associated with a malalignment 
VSD, overriding aorta (TOF) and ductal agenesis; 
the rarer variant is defined by the presence of an intact 
ventricular septum and a lower degree of pulmonary 
artery dilatation, and is associated in most instances with 
a patent ductus arteriosus. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the left outflow view, a 
malalignment VSD with an overriding aorta can be seen. 
Sweeping further cephalad from this view, severe dilatation 
of the pulmonary trunk and branches can be seen 
(Figure 5.51a): the ultrasound aspect is so typical that, 
seen once, it will never be forgotten! Unlike most 
conotruncal malformations, APVS can be suspected on 
the 4-chamber view: evident cardiomegaly and an abnormal 
cardiac axis are the two key features; on some occasions, 
the pulmonary trunk may be so dilated to become 
visible also on this view (Figure 5.51b). Color Doppler 
allows detection of the severe stenosis and insufficiency of 
the functionally absent pulmonary valve (Figure 5.51c). 
Spectral Doppler can be use to quantify the steno-insufficiency 
of the rudimentary pulmonary valve. 4D echocardiography 
effectively demonstrates the degree of 
pulmonary artery dilatation (Figure 5.51a) and can also 
be used to characterize the severely dysplastic pulmonary 
valve. The differential diagnosis is non-existent, due to 
the very typical ultrasound aspect of APVS. 
• Association with other malformations. The association 
with extracardiac (central nervous system and 
gastrointestinal) malformations is frequent – often in 
the context of a chromosomal aberration. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely high 
for APVS–TOF. There is a 20–25% association rate with 
22q11 microdeletion; other severe aneuploidies may also 
be associated (trisomy 13 and triploidy).42,46 On the contrary, 
the variant with an intact ventricular septum is 
rarely associated with aneuploidies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping including 
FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion is warranted 
in all cases of APVS–TOF. In this variant, a 
thorough search for associated extracardiac anomalies 
should also be carried out by an expert. Serial ultrasound 
monitoring should be provided, in order to 
detect the possible prenatal onset of heart failure, 
which is due to the severe pulmonary insufficiency. 
The delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center in order to ensure adequate neonatal management, 
which may require resuscitation and, in some 
cases, tracheotomy. 
Prognosis, treatment, and quality of life. The outcome of 
the cases detected prenatally is poor due to the severity 
of the defect and the frequent association with genetic 
and extracardiac anomalies. The overall prognosis is 
guarded, regardless of the surgical correction of the 
defect, due to the common occurrence of bronchomalacia. 
This life-threatening lesion is virtually ubiquitous if 
severe cardiomegaly and marked branch pulmonary 
dilatation are present. 
Figure 5.51 Fallot with absent Pulmonary valve. (a) Cardio-STIC. The marked dilated branch pulmonary arteries (small arrows) are 
shown in top left panel and better demonstrated in rendered image. The big arrows indicate the restrictive pulmonary annulus. (b) 4-chamber 
view showing cardiomegaly and the severely dilated pulmonary trunk (arrow). (c) Color Doppler showing the antegrade and retrograde 
flow due to the pulmonary insufficiency, the arrow indicates the restricitve annulus. RV, right ventricle; LPA left pulmonary artery; 
RPA, right pulmonary artery; Ao, ascending aorta. 
164 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
a b c 

Definition. Double-outlet right ventricle (DORV) 
encloses a spectrum of lesions characterized by a double 
ventriculo-arterial connection originating from the right 
ventricle, a VSD, and a variable spatial relationship of 
the great arteries. 
Anatomy. DORV is not a single defect but rather 
includes a wide range of lesions that may have completely 
different hemodynamic characteristics. The basic 
feature of DORV is the fact that both great vessels arise 
for more than 50% from the same ventricle. The spatial 
relationship of the two arteries is variable: they can show 
a normal relationship, with the aorta posterior and the 
pulmonary artery anterior and to the left, or they can be 
malposed, with the aorta arising behind the sternum and 
the pulmonary trunk posterior and above the VSD. The 
position and the commitment of the VSD is similarly 
variable: the defect can be sub-pulmonary, subaortic, 
doubly committed, or far from the two outlets for the 
interposition of the muscular septum (non-committed). 
In addition, the pulmonary outflow or (much less 
frequently) the aortic outflow may be obstructed, due to 
pulmonary stenosis/atresia or aortic coarctation. The 
result of this significant anatomic variability is that 
DORV comprises cases that are hemodynamically similar 
to tetralogy of Fallot and cases that share several features 
with transposition of the great arteries. The most 
frequent variants, in decreasing order of frequency, are 
the Fallot type (subaortic VSD, great vessels in normal 
spatial relationship, and pulmonary artery obstruction), 
the Taussig–Bing type (subpulmonary VSD and malposed 
great arteries), and the type with subaortic VSD 
but without pulmonary stenosis. In a significant number 
of cases, other major cardiac defects are associated: ventricular 
hypoplasia (almost always due to straddling and 
overriding of one of the two atrioventricular valves), 
aortic coarctation, AVSD, and cardiosplenic syndromes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. It should be noted that, as for all 
conotruncal anomalies, the 4-chamber view is unremarkable, 
unless severe anomalies of the atrioventricular 
junction are associated. DORV is recognized on the 
outflow tract views: the crossover is lacking and the 
great vessels have a parallel course and arise from the 
anterior ventricle (Figure 5.52). As already pointed out, 
the spatial relationship of the two vessels should be evaluated, 
as these may be in normal relationship or malposed 
(Figure 5.52a,b). The assignment of the great 
vessels is based on the following features: 
• The pulmonary artery has an acute-angle bifurcation 
not far from the semilunar valve. 
• The aorta is characterized by the first neck vessel 
branching off at almost 90° at a certain distance 
from the semilunar valve (Figure 5.52b). Note that if 
one of the vessels is hypoplastic, it may be difficult to 
identify it. 
Color Doppler may contribute to ascertaining the 
spatial relationship of the great vessels (Figure 5.52c) 
and the site of the VSD. However, it should be underlined 
that in the case of moderate pulmonary outflow 
tract obstruction, no transvalvular acceleration is seen 
on color Doppler. The diagnosis of outflow obstruction 
in DORV is based on comparison of the vessel 
size (Figure 5.52a,b) rather than on increased transvalvular 
velocity. The definition of the spatial relationship 
of the great vessels is of the utmost importance, 
since it identifies the type of surgical approach 
required, and this in turn affects the prognosis. Also, 
DORV may change through the course of pregnancy: 
in the 3rd trimester, the degree of pulmonary outflow 
obstruction can worsen significantly and, at the same 
time, ventricular hypoplasia can develop, especially if 
the atrioventricular valves show straddling or overriding. 
Spectral Doppler has a limited diagnostic role. 4D 
echocardiography may be used to confirm the absence 
of crossover and to ascertain possible associated 
anomalies of the aortic arch (Figure 5.53). 
• Differential diagnosis. The most difficult issue is the 
differentiation from the other conotruncal anomalies: 
in some cases, the distinction between DORV and TOF 
or a transposition of the great arteries may be challenging 
(Figure 5.53). However, it should be pointed out 
Incidence. 3–6% of CHD in the fetus; 2% in post-natal life. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Double ventriculo-arterial connection from the right ventricle. VSD constantly associated. 
Variable spatial relationships of the great vessels. Pulmonary atresia and other major cardiac defects commonly 
associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very high: 12–45%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Extremely variable, depending on the cardiac anatomy and associated cardiac and extra-cardiac lesions. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 165 
DOUBLE-OUTLET RIGHT VENTRICLE (DORV) 

that the surgical approach and prognosis are similar for 
the DORV variants and the conotruncal lesions with 
similar hemodynamics. The differences lie in the rate of 
associated chromosomal and extracardiac anomalies. 
• Prognostic indicators. If DORV is not associated 
with extracardiac or chromosomal anomalies, a poor 
prognostic feature is the not infrequent association 
with other cardiac defects (AVSD, cardiosplenic syndromes, 
aortic coarctation, and straddling/overriding 
of the atrioventricular valves with consequent hypoplasia 
of the underlying ventricle). If DORV is associated 
with chromosomal anomalies or syndromic 
conditions, the prognosis is very poor, and is dictated 
by the associated abnormalities. 
• Association with other malformations. There is a 
high risk of association with extracardiac (mainly 
gastrointestinal and central nervous system) anomalies, 
regardless of the association with chromosomal 
aberrations. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high. 
The rate is 12–45%, with a prevalence of trisomies 18, 
13, and, to a lesser extent, 22q11 microdeletion and 
trisomy 21.14,15,44 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of chromosomal anomalies. In addition, a 
thorough search for associated cardiac and extracardiac 
anomalies should be performed. The changing nature of 
DORV during the course of pregnancy should be addressed 
in the prenatal counseling session. The delivery should be 
organized in a tertiary referral center, so that the neonate 
can be transferred to a pediatric cardiology unit for confirmation 
of the diagnosis and adequate management. 
Postnatal therapy. The cardiologic management depends 
on the type of DORV: if the VSD is subaortic and there 
166 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.53 Differential diagnosis between DORV and TGA, 
which share an absence of crossover. Use of the inversion mode 
may assist in the assessment of the ventriculo-arterial connections. 
(a) In this case of DORV, the anterior vessel is the malposed aorta, 
while the posterior one, arising in part over a VSD, is the pulmonary 
artery. (b) In the case of TGA, each vessel is seen to be 
connected with a different ventricle. Ao, aorta; LV, left ventricle; 
Pa, pulmonary artery; RV, right ventricle. 
a b 
Figure 5.52 Double-outlet right ventricle (DORV). This comprises 
a spectrum of anomalies of the great vessels, which may 
have different sizes due to left or right outflow obstruction, in different 
spatial relationships (see text). (a) DORV with an anterior 
malposed aorta and a posterior moderately stenotic pulmonary 
artery (arrow); this is one of the most common arrangements seen 
in the fetus. (b) DORV with an anterior malposed aorta, which is 
also reduced in size due to a concurrent interruption of the aortic 
arch; note the straighter course of the aorta and the ‘V’ shape of 
the first neck vessels (arrowheads). (c) Color Doppler can be used 
to confirm the connection of the great vessels with the anterior 
ventricle, if there is any remaining doubt regarding the differential 
diagnosis with transposition of the great arteries. 
a
b
c 

is no outflow obstruction, the lesion is not ductus-dependent; 
on the contrary, if aortic coarctation or pulmonary 
atresia are associated, the DORV becomes a neonatal 
emergency. In the former case, the neonate will become 
symptomatic when the pulmonary resistances decrease. 
Early correction (closure of the VSD with a patch) avoids 
the need for pulmonary banding, which is done only if 
the neonate fails to thrive or develops unresponsive cardiac 
failure. In DORV with subaortic VSD and pulmonary 
outflow obstruction, the management is similar 
to that of tetralogy of Fallot (see earlier in this chapter). 
In DORV with a subpulmonary VSD, the arterial switch 
operation or the REV (reparation a l’etage ventriculaire) 
is performed. In DORV with subpulmonary VSD and pulmonary 
outflow obstruction, most surgeons currently 
adopt the REV procedure modified by Rastelli. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall 
survival of DORV detected prenatally is 46–50% (if terminations 
of pregnancy are excluded), due to the strong 
association with aneuploidy and extracardiac anomalies. 
If postnatal series are considered, the overall surgical 
mortality rate for biventricular repair is as low as 
13%, while the 10-year survival rate is about 86%. The 
mortality is much higher if other major cardiac lesions 
are associated, which is not infrequent. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 167 
Figure 5.54 Common arterial trunk (CAT), type I (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) The main pulmonary artery with the two hypoplastic 
branches (arrowheads) is seen branching off the truncus (Ta) just above the truncal valve. (b) On the left ouflow tract view, color Doppler 
demonstrates the truncus overriding a malalignment VSD and the common stenosis of the truncal valve (aliasing and turbulence), due to 
the frequently abnormal truncal valve. (c) The 3-vessel view, shows the pulmonary artery (arrowheads) branching off from the truncus 
(arrow). 
a b c 
COMMON ARTERIAL TRUNK (CAT) 
Incidence. Accounts for about 1% of CHD in utero and at birth. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with overriding aorta and a dysplastic 
truncal valve can be seen; the pulmonary arteries are visualized arising from the main trunk. 
Risk of chromosomal syndromes. High: 15–28%. Trisomes 13, 18 and 22q11. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. Prognosis depends on the association with extracardiac anomalies and on unfavorable cardiac anatomy, 
if present. 
Definition. Common arterial trunk (CAT) is characterized 
by a single great artery arising from the base of 
the heart, which supplies the systemic, coronary, and 
pulmonary blood flow, and by a VSD. 
Anatomy. CAT results from a septation failure during 
development of the ventricular outlets and the proximal 
arterial segment of the heart tube. According to the 
Collett and Edwards classification47 CAT can be divided 
into different anatomical subtypes with respect to the 
origin of the pulmonary arteries: 
• Type I: the main pulmonary trunk arises from the 
truncal artery just distal to the truncal valve. 
• Types II and III: the pulmonary trunk is absent and 
the two pulmonary branches arise from the posterior 
aspect of the truncus but close to each other (type II) 
or more lateral and widely separated (type III). 

The former type IV of the original classification now 
corresponds to pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal 
defect (PAVSD – see the following section). CAT 
accounts for 1% of cardiac lesions detected in fetal life. 
The frequency is similar to that reported in infancy, even 
though the type of lesion is not easily detected if obstetric 
ultrasound screening is limited to the 4-chamber view. 
The intrauterine incidence of this type of congenital heart 
disease is probably higher than in postnatal life, but there 
is an increased rate of natural fetal wastage. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In CAT, the 4-chamber view is 
usually normal. The constant malalignment VSD is best 
displayed on the long axis view of the left ventricle 
(Figure 5.54). Although the truncal valve is commonly 
connected to both ventricles, it may sometimes straddle 
one ventricle preferentially, especially if there is dominance 
of one ventricle.48 Visualization of the pulmonary 
arteries is essential to distinguish CAT from PAVSD and 
to identify the CAT subtype. In fact, when the pulmonary 
arteries are visualized arising from the main trunk, the 
diagnosis of CAT is straightforward (Figure 5.54a,c). In 
the case of PAVSD, the hypoplastic pulmonary arteries 
are supplied by the ductus arteriosus and/or by the major 
aorto-pulmonary collateral arteries (MAPCAs). As 
already noted, in type I CAT, the main pulmonary trunk 
arises from the posterolateral aspect of the common 
trunk and bifurcates into two pulmonary arteries (Figure 
5.54a). In types II and III, the pulmonary arteries arise 
separately. The truncal valve is often dysplastic, and may 
be regurgitant or stenotic (Figure 5.54b). Color Doppler 
may be used to evaluate the steno-insufficiency of the 
truncal valve and to trace the course and connection of 
the pulmonary trunk/arteries. Spectral Doppler may help 
to quantify the degree of truncal valve stenosis and insufficiency. 
The use of 4D echocardiography has proved 
significantly helpful in the identification of the small 
pulmonary branches in type II/III CAT and in the 
characterization of the pulmonary trunk anatomy in 
PAVSD (especially with inversion mode and B-flow) 
(Figure 5.55). 
• Differential diagnosis. Differentiation of CAT from 
PAVSD is often difficult. In fact, this differential 
diagnosis represents the most challenging task to be 
faced when diagnosing CAT in the fetus: types II 
and III CAT and PAVSD share reduced dimensions 
of the pulmonary branches and the prevalence of 
the aortic vessel. When doubts arise, the following 
anatomic details should be sought to make the final 
diagnosis: the aortic/truncal valve, the atretic pulmonary 
valve, and the direction of flow within the 
arterial duct. The semilunar valve is always dysplastic 
(from two to five cusps) and typically stenotic 
and/or insufficient in CAT, whereas it is frequently 
unremarkable or only mildly abnormal in PAVSD. 
The atretic pulmonary valve is difficult to detect in 
PAVSD, but if it is demonstrated (in those infrequent 
cases in which the pulmonary trunk is not 
extremely hypoplastic), then CAT can be excluded. 
Finally, accurate color Doppler mapping of the great 
vessels may help to detect reversed flow in the arterial 
duct and main pulmonary artery as well as aortopulmonary 
collaterals in PAVSD, or the branching 
point of the pulmonary arteries in the truncal vessel 
in types II and III CAT.48 
• Association with other malformations. When CAT 
is diagnosed in a fetus, care should be taken to identify 
possible additional heart and great vessel anomalies, 
which occur in 20–30% of cases. Associated 
cardiac defects include absence of ductus arteriosus 
(50% of cases), IAA, RAA, and atrioventricular 
valve atresia.48 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. There is a 
high rate of association with the 22q11 microdeletion 
(20–30% of cases) and, to a lesser extent, with trisomies 
18 and 13.48 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high. 
Obstetric management. A detailed fetal anatomic 
scan should be performed by an expert to exclude the 
presence of extracardiac and cardiac anomalies. Fetal 
karyotyping is warranted because of the high risk of 
chromosomal anomalies, and should include FISH 
168 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.55 Common arterial trunk (CAT), type III: pulmonary 
branches arising directly and separately from the truncus, without 
a main pulmonary artery (22 weeks’ gestation). In some cases, the 
use of the inversion mode may allow detection of the small pulmonary 
arteries, which are not easy to detect on 2D images. This 
image shows the two pulmonary arteries (arrowheads) arising on 
different sides of the truncus (T), which overrides a malaligment 
VSD (and is connected with both right and left ventricles, RV and 
LV). The neck vessels are indicated by arrows. 

analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion. Delivery should 
take place in a tertiary referral center to ensure confirmation 
of the diagnosis and and adequate neonatal management. 
In fact, in CAT there may be significant 
reduction of the pulmonary blood flow due to stenosis of 
the pulmonary branches, or aortic arch anomalies (IAA) 
may lead to early surgical correction, which is otherwise 
scheduled after 1–2 months of life. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical repair should be done in the 
first 2–3 months of life. Operative repair consists of 
detachment of the pulmonary arteries from the truncus 
and attachment to the right ventricle with a conduit, 
closure of the VSD, and repair of the truncal valve, 
if necessary. In recent series, the overall operative mortality 
rate is as low as 5%, if no severe truncal valve 
abnormalities are present. The association of IAA may 
lead to a need for earlier surgical correction. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Prognosis depends 
on the presence of extracardiac and chromosomal anomalies 
and of unfavorable cardiac anatomy (e.g. severe 
truncal valve regurgitation, IAA, and straddling with ventricular 
hypoplasia). 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 169 
PULMONARY ATRESIA WITH VENTRICULAR SEPTAL DEFECT (PAVSD) 
Incidence. PAVSD accounts for about 1% of CHD in the fetus. 
Diagnosis. On the long axis of the left ventricle, a malalignment VSD with overriding aorta can be seen. Sweeping 
further cephalad from this view, an atretic pulmonary artery can be detected with difficulty. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: 13–20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. Prognosis is favorable in isolated PAVSD, if confluent pulmonary branches supplied by the ductus 
arteriosus are present. 
Definition. Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal 
defect (PAVSD) is characterized by absence of the right 
ventriculo-arterial connection. The pulmonary trunk is 
usually severely abnormal and can be completely absent 
in some cases, with the pulmonary branches dependent 
on the arterial duct or MAPCAs. 
Anatomy. PAVSD, which can be considered as an extreme 
form of TOF, comprises an heterogeneous group of 
lesions sharing absence of the right ventriculo-arterial connection. 
There is a malalignment VSD with an overriding 
aorta, while the right ventricular outflow tract is, in most 
cases, similar to that of TOF, with the muscular outlet 
septum being anteriorly displaced. In most cases, the 
muscular outlet septum fuses directly with the parietal 
musculature of the right ventricle, obliterating the ventriculopulmonary 
junction. The anatomy of the hypoplastic 
pulmonary vessels is variable. In the most frequent 
arrangement, the right and left pulmonary arteries may be 
confluent (communicating with each other) and supplied 
by the ductus arteriosus. Alternatively, the central pulmonary 
arteries may be confluent and coexist with 
MAPCAs. The third pattern of arterial supply is complete 
absence of the central pulmonary arteries, the lungs being 
directly supplied by multiple MAPCAs.49 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The 4-chamber view is usually 
normal; in some cases, minor leftward rotation of the 
cardiac axis and/or cardiomegaly can be appreciated.7 
The malalignment VSD is best visualized on the longaxis 
view of the left ventricle (Figure 5.56A). When the 
right and left pulmonary arteries are present, they are 
commonly smaller than normal and confluent, with the 
characteristic appearance of a ‘flying seagull’ (Figure 
5.56b), and their size is usually dependent on the source 
of arterial supply.49,50 The pulmonary vascular bed may 
be supplied with blood flow from a ductus arteriosus, 
from MAPCAs (Figure 5.56c), or from a combination of 
both. Color Doppler contributes to demonstrating the 
overriding of the aorta, and demonstrates the retrograde 
blood flow across the ductus arteriosus, confirming the 
ductus dependence of the pulmonary circulation. The 
use of color Doppler is also important to demonstrate 
the presence of MAPCAs branching off the descending 
thoracic aorta (Figure 5.56c). Spectral Doppler has a 
limited diagnostic role to play in PAVSD. 4D echocardiography 
has recently been demonstrated to be very 
helpful in the definition of the vascularization pattern of 
the pulmonary arteries.7 In particular, the use of B-flow 
imaging and/or the inversion mode can demonstrate the 
confluent pulmonary arteries and the MAPCAs better 
than 2D ultrasound can (Figure 5.56d and 5.57). 
• Differential diagnosis. Differentiation of PAVSD from 
CAT can be very difficult. Types II and III CAT 
and PAVSD share the reduced dimensions of the 
pulmonary branches and the prevalence of the aortic 
vessel. When doubts arise, the following anatomic 

details should be sought to make the final diagnosis: 
the aortic/truncal valve, the atretic pulmonary valve, 
and the direction of flow within the arterial duct. The 
semilunar valve is always dysplastic (from two to five 
cusps) and typically stenotic and/or insufficient in 
CAT, whereas it is frequently unremarkable or only 
mildly abnormal in PAVSD. The atretic pulmonary 
valve is difficult to detect in PAVSD, but if demonstrated 
(in those infrequent cases in which the pulmonary 
trunk is not extremely hypoplastic), CAT can 
be excluded. Finally, accurate color Doppler mapping 
of the great vessels may help to detect reversed flow in 
the arterial duct and main pulmonary artery as well as 
aortopulmonary collaterals in PAVSD, or the branching 
point of the pulmonary arteries in the truncal vessel 
in types II and III CAT.48 
• Association with other malformations. Associated cardiac 
defects include absence of the ductus arteriosus 
(in about half of the cases), IAA, and right-sided aortic 
arch. Extracardiac malformations can also be associated, 
including CNS and gastro intestinal anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. PAVSD is frequently 
associated with 22q11 microdeletion (20% of cases). 
Association with trisomies 13 and 18 has also been 
reported. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. 
Obstetric management. A detailed fetal anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert to exclude the presence 
of extracardiac anomalies. Fetal karyotyping, 
including FISH analysis for the 22q11 microdeletion, is 
indicated. Delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center to allow proper neonatal management. 
170 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.56 Pulmonary atresia with ventricular 
septal defect (PAVSD). (a) on the left outflow tract 
view, the malalignment VSD with the overriding 
aorta is seen. (b) 3-vessels view; the ascending aorta 
(Ao) and the severely hypoplastic and confluent pulmonary 
branches are visible (arrows). (c) Color 
Doppler demonstrates a major aortopulmonary collateral 
artery (MAPCA) (arrow) departing from the 
descending aorta. (d) With B-flow rendering two 
MAPCA (arrow) departing directly from the 
descending aorta are clearly seen. Modified from7. 
Figure 5.57 Pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect 
(PAVSD) B-flow imaging and STIC. With B-flow, the abnormal 
arrangement of the vascular distribution to the lungs is demonstrated: 
the rendered image shows 2 MAPCA departing from ventral 
aspect of descending aorta. In systole, the 2 MAPCA are more 
evident (arrows). 
a b 
c d 
c 

Postnatal therapy. The ultimate goal of surgical therapy 
is to construct completely separated, in series pulmonary 
and systemic circulations.49 This may be achieved as a 
single or staged procedure, depending on the complexity 
of the central pulmonary arteries and pulmonary blood 
supply, as well as institutional preference. The reported 
surgical mortality rate has been relatively low and good 
functional results have been achieved, especially when 
left and right pulmonary arteries are confluent and are 
supplied by the ductus arterious, but data obtained from 
pediatric series are likely to differ from fetal series, as 
usual, and therefore the above-mentioned results cannot 
be simply extended to the prenatally recognized cases. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Along with 
the presence of extracardiac and genetic anomalies, 
the prognosis of PAVSD is greatly influenced by the 
anatomy of the pulmonary arteries and by the sources of 
the pulmonary blood supply, appreciation of which helps 
to provide a fully informative prenatal counseling. 
Isolated PAVSD presents a difficult management plan, 
since variations in blood supply to the pulmonary arterial 
tree may be complex and create significant variations in 
the development of the pulmonary arteries. The presence 
of central pulmonary arteries of appropriate size and the 
relationship of the two branches are of surgical relevance. 
The central pulmonary arteries are considered ‘confluent’ 
when they maintain free communication with each other. 
The most favorable arrangement, from a surgical point of 
view, is that in which the two pulmonary branches are 
confluent and are supplied by the arterial duct. On the 
contrary, the complete absence of the central pulmonary 
arteries, with the lungs being directly supplied by multiple 
MAPCAs, represents the worst scenario, being associated 
with a significantly worse prognosis; also, it is the most 
difficult to treat postnatally. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 171 
COMPLETE TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES (TGA) 
Definition. Complete transposition of the great arteries 
(TGA) is defined by the presence of a discordant 
ventriculo-arterial connection, with the pulmonary 
artery arising posteriorly from the left ventricle and the 
aorta connected anteriorly to the right ventricle. 
Anatomy. The basic anomaly is the ventriculo-arterial 
discordance. TGA can be isolated (simple TGA) or can be 
associated with VSDs, pulmonary outflow obstruction, 
or aortic arch anomalies (coarctation or interruption). 
Much more rarely, atrioventricular valve abnormalities, 
including straddling and overriding, may be present. In 
two-third of the cases, significant anomalies of the coronary 
pattern, not diagnosable in utero, are associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The 4-chamber view is unremarkable, 
as for all conotruncal anomalies, unless major 
anomalies of the atrioventricular junction are associated. 
The diagnosis is made on the outflow tract views: there 
is no crossover, and the two arteries follow a parallel 
course. The aorta arises from the anterior right ventricle, 
whereas the pulmonary artery is connected posteriorly 
with the left ventricle (Figure 5.58a,b). If present, the 
VSD can also be displayed on the left outflow tract view 
(Figure 5.58c). The sizes of the vessels should be compared 
in order to detect possible obstructions, consisting 
mainly of valvular anomalies for the pulmonary artery 
and arch coarctation/interruption for the aorta. On 
longitudinal views, the aortic arch has a wider angle of 
curvature because of the anteriorized connection of the 
ascending aorta (a ‘hockey club’ aspect, in comparison 
with the ‘umbrella handle’ aspect of the normal arch). 
Finally, particular attention should be paid in the case of 
TGA with an intact ventricular septum to signs indicative 
of a restrictive foramen ovale (bulging or thickening: 
Figure 5.58d).50 Color Doppler may help in the characterization 
of the ventriculo-arterial connection (Figure 
5.58b), in the recognition of small VSDs (Figure 5.58c), 
and in the detection of pulmonary/aortic outflow obstruction. 
Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the transvalvular 
gradient. 4D echocardiography can effectively 
demonstrate the absence of crossover and the parallel 
course of the great vessels (Figure 5.53b). 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all CHDs sharing 
an absent crossover, namely corrected TGA (cTGA: 
Incidence. Relatively frequent, accounting for 2–5% of CHD in the fetus and the neonate. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ventriculo-arterial discordance, with the right ventricle connected to the aorta and the left 
connected to the pulmonary artery. VSDs, pulmonary stenosis and arch abnormalities may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Extremely good in classic forms; good in the case of less favorable cardiac anatomy. 

see the next section) and DORV. cTGA can be differentiated 
from TGA thanks to the atrioventricular discordance 
(absent in TGA), which can be detected on 
the 4-chamber view. As far as the differentiation from 
DORV is concerned, as already mentioned, doubts 
may arise when distingushing TGA-like DORV, but 
in this case the outcome of the lesion is the same as for 
classic TGA. The differentiation from the other forms 
of DORV is based on the recognition, on 2D ultrasound, 
color Doppler, or 4D echocardiography, of 
the different connection of the two vessels in DORV 
(Figures 5.52,5.53, and 5.58a,b). 
• Prognostic indicators. The occurrence of significant 
right outflow obstruction is a relatively bad prognostic 
indicator, being a contraindication to the classic 
arterial switch operation. 
• Association with other malformations. None is 
known. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Like cTGA and 
cardiosplenic syndromes, TGA seems to protect from 
aneuploidy. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not definitely 
indicated, as the risk of chromosomal anomalies is very 
low. Similarly, the risk of associated extracardiac anomalies 
is trivial. Care should be take in differentiating 
TGA from cTGA, considering the significantly different 
management of the two lesions. Serial follow-up scans 
are warranted, especially in the case of TGA 
with intact ventricular septum, in order to recognize a 
restrictive foramen ovale if present. This diagnosis 
should prompt immediate transfer of the neonate to the 
interventional catheterization room in order to perform 
a life-saving Rashkind atrioseptostomy. According 
to some authors, the delivery of a fetus diagnosed with 
TGA and a restrictive foramen ovale should be organized 
with a cardiac hemodynamist in the delivery room 
because of the high risk of immediate neonatal decompensation.
50,51 In case of TGA with VSD or non-restrictive 
foramen ovale, the neonate may be transferred to 
the pediatric cardiology unit in the first hours of life in 
order to ensure assessment of oxygen saturation and 
proper planning of the Rashkind atrioseptostomy. 
Postnatal therapy. In the case of TGA with an intact ventricular 
septum, the Rashkind procedure is always necessary, 
to provide adequate oxygenation and proper 
planning of corrective surgery. Prostaglandin E1 infusion 
is always necessary to avoid closure of the arterial duct 
and increase oxygen saturation. The option of choice for 
surgical correction of TGA is the arterial switch operation, 
which consists of the following: (1) transection of 
the aorta and pulmonary artery from the ventricular outflows 
above the semilunar valves; (2) excision of the 
coronary arteries from the aortic root, with a cuff of 
aortic wall; (3) connection of the ascending aorta to the 
pulmonary root and of the coronary arteries to the repositioned 
aorta; (4) closure using a patch of the parietal 
defects of the aortic root from which the coronary arteries 
had been detached; (5) connection of the pulmonary 
artery to the aortic root, with the interposition of a synthetic 
conduit, if necessary. The arterial switch operation 
is performed during the first days of life in the case of 
TGA with intact ventricular septum, and in the first 
weeks in the case of TGA with VSD. In particular cases 
only, the palliative atrial switch (Senning or Mustard procedure) 
operation is performed, usually at 3–6 months of 
life. This type of surgery aims at redirecting the pulmonary 
venous blood flow towards the right ventricle, which 
becomes the systemic one, and, vice versa, diverting the 
172 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.58 Transposition of the great arteries (TGA) (24 weeks’ 
gestation). (a) On the left outflow tract view, the ventriculoarterial 
discordance and the absence of crossover (two parallel vessels) 
are demonstrated, with the pulmonary artery arising from the 
left ventricle and the anterior aorta arising from the right ventricle. 
(b) Color Doppler helps in defining the ventriculo-arterial connection 
and the parallel course of the vessels. (c) It may also be used to 
detect small VSDs (arrows), which may not be visible on grayscale 
ultrasound. (d) In the case of TGA with an intact ventricular septum, 
a restrictive foramen ovale (arrowheads) indicates the need for 
immediate postpartum Rashkind atrioseptostomy (see text). 
a b 
c d 

caval blood flow towards the left ventricle. In case of 
TGA with DIV plus severe pulmonary stenosis, an 
aortopulmonary shunt is performed. If the pulmonary 
outflow obstruction is moderately severe, the final intervention 
(reparation a l’etage ventriculaire, REV) will be 
performed at about 12 months of life. This surgical 
procedure consists of the following steps: resection of 
the infundibular septum; creation of a tunnel connecting 
the left ventricle with the aorta; and direct anastomosis 
of the right ventricle and the pulmonary artery. Alternatively, 
the Rastelli procedure consists of connection of 
the right ventricle with the pulmonary artery through a 
prothetic conduit; widening of the VSD; and interposition 
of a patch connecting the aorta with the left ventricle. As 
for all procedures in which prothetic conduits are used, 
the patients will need one or more replacements of the 
conduit during their lives. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. TGA represents a 
keystone in the validation of prenatal screening of CHD, 
as it represents the ideal model of CHD to be screened: it 
has a high early neonatal mortality risk, which disappears 
if early neonatal management is properly planned; 
and, once corrected, this CHD has a greater than 90% 
long-term survival rate in good functional conditions. 
Bonnet et al51 have demonstrated that prenatal diagnosis 
does indeed make a difference, being responsible for a 
20% reduction in surgical mortality, in comparison with 
cases detected postnatally. Once corrected, patients with 
TGA experience a 15-year survival rate of 86%. In comparison, 
patients undergoing palliative surgical procedures 
(Mustard or Senning) have a 15-year survival rate 
of 80%, with an increased risk of major postoperative 
complications and sequelae (rhythm abnormalities, right 
ventricular dysfunction, and sudden death). 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 173 
CORRECTED TRANSPOSITION OF THE GREAT ARTERIES (cTGA) 
Definition. Corrected transposition of the great arteries 
(cTGA) features atrio-ventricular and ventriculo-arterial 
discordance. The double discordance functionally corrects 
the circulation. 
Anatomy. The key anomaly is the double atrioventricular 
and ventriculo-arterial discordance, with the left 
atrium connected via a tricuspid valve to a morphologically 
right ventricle from which the aorta emerges; conversely, 
the right atrium is connected via the mitral valve 
to a morphologically left ventricle from which the pulmonary 
artery emerges. The discordance between cardiac 
situs and position is frequently associated, with 
dextrocardia in situs solitus and levocardia in situs 
inversus. Other major cardiac lesions, involving VSD, 
Ebstein-like attachment of the left-sided tricuspid valve, 
pulmonary outflow obstruction and rhythm disturbances, 
are frequently associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Unlike the other conotruncal 
anomalies, the key plane for the diagnosis of cTGA is 
the 4-chamber view, in which the atrioventricular discordance 
is diagnosed (Figure 5.59a,b). In particular, 
the atrioventricular discordance is diagnosed when the 
morphologically right ventricle, with the moderator 
band and a trabecular wall, is connected to the left 
atrium, and conversely, the left ventricle, forming 
the apex of the heart, is connected to the right atrium. 
Additional features that may increase the confidence of 
the diagnosis are the different attachments of the chordae 
tendinae of the two atrioventricular valves: the leftsided 
tricuspid valve papillary muscles attach to the 
ventricular apex, whereas the right-sided mitral valve 
papillary muscles attach to the lateral free wall (Figure 
5.59b). Assessment of the outflow views demonstrates 
the pulmonary artery arising from the right-sided left 
ventricle (Figure 5.59d) and the aorta connected with 
the left-sided right ventricle (Figure 5.59e). Recognition 
of dextrocardia in situs solitus should always prompt 
assessment of central connections to exclude the presence 
of cTGA. Anomalies of the tricuspid valve, VSDs 
(Figure 5.59c), pulmonary and aortic outflow obstruction, 
and complete heart block are frequently and variously 
associated (Figure 5.59f). The heart block 
is progressive, frequently appearing only in the 3rd 
trimester or after birth, and is due to the abnormal 
Incidence. Very low, <1% of CHD. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4 chamber view: double atrioventricular and ventriculo-arterial discordance. 
Frequent association with other CHDs, including VSD, outflow obstruction, and ventricular hypoplasia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Good short-term outcome. Poor in the long-term because of the development of unresponsive heart 
failure. 

position of the conduction tissue.52 Color Doppler 
may be helpful in the assessment of the spatial relationship 
of the great arteries and in the detection of the 
VSD. Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the 
transvalvular gradient in the case of pulmonary stenosis. 
4D echocardiography can effectively demonstrate 
the inverted position of the ventricle by inversion-mode 
renderings. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes principally TGA, 
from which cTGA is easily distinguished by the double 
discordance. The abnormal arrangement of the 
great vessels may sometimes need to be differentiated 
from a DORV. 
• Prognostic indicators. Severe anomalies of the 
atrioventricular valves, responsible for ventricular 
hypoplasia, represent ominous prognostic signs. 
• Association with other malformations. Renal 
anomalies are the extracardiac malformations most 
frequently associated with cTGA.52 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Also cTGA, like TGA and cardiosplenic syndromes, 
seems to protect from aneuploidy.52 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is virtually 
absent. 
Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is not indicated, 
owing to the extremely low risk of chromosomal 
anomalies. Delivery should take place in a tertiary referral 
center if there is evident outflow obstruction, major 
atrioventricular anomalies or congenital heart block 
with low cardiac output. 
Postnatal therapy. If it is not associated with other major 
anomalies, cTGA does not need to be operated upon. The 
optimal management of cTGA is controversial. There are 
pros and cons regarding the submission of patients with 
cTGA to the double (atrial and arterial) switch operation. 
The early results of this complex surgical procedure seem 
promising, but a longer follow-up is needed to draw any 
conclusions. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall prognosis 
of cTGA is one of the most controversial and 
debated issues in pediatric cardiology. The frequency 
and severity of the associated cardiac lesions represent 
the most important determinants of survival and mortality. 
In particular, severe insufficiency of the left-sided tricuspid 
valve and impaired systolic function of the right 
(systemic) ventricle are the main indicators of a poor 
prognosis: by 45 years of age, 67% of individuals with 
associated lesions showed heart failure, in comparison 
with 25% of individuals with isolated cTGA.53 
174 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.59 Corrected transposition of the great arteries (cTGA) (31 weeks’ gestation). (a) On the 4-chamber view, the morphologic right 
ventricle (mRV) is connected with the left atrium, and, vice versa, the morphologic left ventricle is connected with the right atrium. Note 
the moderator band in the mRV and the Ebstein-like appearance of the left-sided tricuspid valve. (b) On the transverse 4-chamber view, the 
differential insertion of the papillary muscles is evident: the tricuspid ones attach to the apex of the ventricle, whereas the mitral one 
attaches to the lateral free ventricular wall. (c) Color Doppler is used to demonstrate a small VSD not visible on grayscale ultrasound 
(arrow). (d) The right outflow tract view demonstrates the pulmonary artery (with the bifurcation) arising from the right-sided left ventricle. 
(e) The left outflow tract view demonstrates the aorta arising from the left-sided mRV. (f) A complete heart block can sometimes 
appear in the 3rd trimester. Note the dissociation between the atrial (A) and ventricular (V) frequencies. 
a b c 
d e f 

Definition. Situs anomalies are often considered confusing, 
in part because of the overlapping features of some 
anomalies, such as situs ambiguous with polysplenia and 
situs ambiguous with asplenia. The literature also contributes 
to this confusion, because some authors use the 
terms ‘situs inversus’ and ‘situs ambiguous’ interchangeably. 
Greater understanding can be achieved by defining 
the terms commonly used to describe situs anomalies. 
The term situs refers to the position of the heart and viscera 
relative to midline. The normal anatomic configuration 
of the viscera (liver, vena cava, trilobed lung on the 
right; spleen, abdominal aorta, bilobed lung on the left) 
and of the atria (atrium morphologically right located on 
the right, atrium morphologically left located on the left) 
is called situs solitus. In situs inversus there is usually 
a mirror-like position of the organs. A position of the 
organs different from situs solitus and situs inversus is 
called situs ambiguous or heterotaxy. Situs ambiguous 
or heterotaxy is not characterized by a single set of 
abnormalities but by a spectrum of abnormalities. The 
two major subcategories of situs ambiguous are situs 
ambiguous with polysplenia and situs ambiguous with 
asplenia. 
Anatomy. Situs ambiguous with polysplenia (also 
known as bilateral left-sidedness or left atrial isomerism) 
is associated with paired left-sided viscera while rightsided 
viscera may be absent. Bilateral morphological left 
atrial appendages, multiple cardiac anomalies, congenital 
heart block, bilateral morphologic left (bilobed) 
lungs, multiple splenules, a malpositioned stomach, a 
midline liver, and an interruption of the inferior vena 
cava with azygos continuation are all associated with left 
isomerism. In contrast, situs ambiguous with asplenia 
(bilateral right-sidedness or right atrial isomerism) features 
paired right-sided viscera while left-sided viscera 
may be absent. Typical findings are bilateral morphologic 
right atrial appendages, multiple cardiac anomalies, 
bilateral morphologic right (trilobed) lungs, an 
absent spleen, and a midline liver. A malpositioned 
inferior vena cava and aorta, are frequently seen. 
Cardiac malformations are more complex in right isomerism 
postnatally. 
The most common cardiac and/or venous anomalies 
associated with right atrial isomerism24 are abnormal 
axis and heart position, often opposite to the stomach, 
common atrium, unbalanced AVSD, abnormal ventriculoarterial 
connection (mainly DORV or TGA), TAPVC, 
stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary artery, and inferior 
vena cava and abdominal aorta located either on the 
same side of the spine or centrally (vena cava is always 
anterior to the aorta). The most common cardiac and/or 
venous anomalies associated with the left atrial isomerism24 
are shift of the cardiac axis or abnormal position 
of the heart, unbalanced AVSD, ASD, absence of 
the intrahepatic tract of the inferior vena cava with azygos 
continuation, bilateral superior vena cava, hepatic 
veins draining directly into the right atrium, and complete 
heart block. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound markers for 
immediate evaluation of this syndrome are as follows: 
Left atrial isomerism 
• Contralateral and not homolateral position of the 
heart with respect to the stomach (heart on the right – 
stomach on the left, and vice versa) 
• Interruption of the intrahepatic tract of the inferior 
vena cava with azygos continuation (Figure 5.60b) 
• Unbalanced AVSD (Figure 5.33, 5.61a) 
• Early fetal heart block. 
When interruption of the inferior vena cava with 
azygos continuation is present, on the axial view of the 
abdomen, the azygos is close and lateral to the abdominal 
aorta (and not anterior as with the inferior vena 
cava) (Figure 5.60b). This latter anomaly is also evident 
on the 4-chamber view: behind the left atrium, two 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 175 
HETEROTAXY SYNDROMES 
Incidence. These account for about 4% of CHD at birth. 
Diagnosis. Any arrangement of internal organs other than situs solitus or situs inversus: heart and stomach on 
opposite sides; abnormal relationship of abdominal aorta and inferior vena cava; midline liver. Almost always 
associated with major CHD. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Virtually absent. 
Outcome. Depends on type and severity of associated cardiac malformations. Right atrial isomerism: increased 
mortality in the case of obstructed pulmonary veins with presence of a right outflow tract obstruction. Left atrial 
isomerism: increased mortality when complete heart block is present. 

vessels (rather than one) of similar size but different 
pulsatility are identified (Figure 5.61a, b). The azygos 
continuation usually drains into the superior vena cava 
in the upper mediastinum. 
Right atrial isomerism 
• Contralateral rather than ipsilateral position of 
the heart with respect to the stomach (heart on the 
right – stomach on the left, and vice versa) 
• Anomalous position of the abdominal aorta and the 
inferior vena cava, both positioned centrally or on the 
same side of the spine (Figure 5.60c) 
• Unbalanced AVSD (Figure 5.33) or other structural 
heart disease 
Color Doppler can be used to characterize the major cardiac 
anomalies and to trace the course of the abnormal 
pulmonary or systemic venous returns (Figure 5.24b) 
and to detect atrioventricular insufficiency or ductus 
dependence. Spectral Doppler may be used to support 
the identification of abnormally located pulmonary 
venous returns (Figure 5.24c). 4D echocardiography has 
been employed in the location of the azygos continuation,
54 and can be of help in locating the normal/abnormal 
pulmonary veins.10 
• Differential diagnosis. Isomerisms must be differentiated 
from situs inversus, where all the organs have 
a mirror image with respect to the norm, and from 
isolated dextrocardia, where the other organs are 
arranged normally and associated cardiac malformations 
may be absent. 
• Prognostic indicators. The worst prognostic indicator 
is association of complete heart block with AVSD, 
which often leads to intrauterine demise. As already 
mentioned, the prognosis is also unfavorable in a significant 
percentage of cases characterized by obstructed 
TAPVC and stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary artery. 
• Association with other malformations. Intestinal 
malrotation is frequent in both types of isomerism, 
occasionally with signs of occlusion. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Only one case of 
association with the 22q11 microdeletion has been 
reported. Otherwise, the cardiosplenic syndromes are 
not associated with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. There are sporadic 
cases of syndromes described featuring isomerism-like 
visceral arrangement. In addition, a recessive autosomal 
inheritance pattern with reduced penetrance has been 
reported in a few cases of isomeric syndromes. 
Obstetric management. Among fetuses with structural 
cardiac anomalies, abnormal visceral situs is strongly 
predictive of a normal karyotype. Delivery must take 
place in any case in a tertiary referral center, in order 
to transfer the newborn to a pediatric cardiology/ 
cardiosurgery unit for final diagnosis and adequate 
neonatal management. 
176 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.60 (a) Situs solitus: the abdomen is seen in cross-section at the level of the stomach (S). The normal relationship of the aorta 
(A) and inferior vena cava (C) in the upper abdomen is seen. (b) In left atrial isomerism, interruption of the intrahepatic tract of the inferior 
vena cava with azygos continuation: axial view of the abdomen. The azygos vein (AZ) is close and lateral to the abdominal aorta (AO) 
(and not anterior, as with the inferior vena cava). (c) In right atrial isomerism, anomalous position of the abdominal aorta (A) and the inferior 
vena cava, both of which are positioned on the same side of the spine. S, stomach. 
Figure 5.61 Left atrial isomerism. (a) Unbalanced atrioventricular 
septal defect. Note the azygos continuation (arrowhead) close 
to the descending aorta. CA, common atrium; RV, right ventricle. 
(b) On the 4-chamber view, behind the left atrium two (rather than 
one) vessels (arrowheads) of equal size are identified. (H, heart). 
a 
a b 
b c 

Postnatal treatment. In some cases of left atrial 
isomerism, there is no need for any treatment, because 
the associated anomalies may be of limited clinical significance. 
Surgery is needed for those newborns with 
complex lesions – which account, unfortunately, for the 
majority of cases. The main indication for early correction 
is in those cases where a TAPVC is present, typically 
right isomerism, and often burdened by obstructive 
problems. The percentage of success increases in cases 
of biventricular correction whereas it is significantly 
lower for univentricular correction mainly submitted to 
a Fontan-type treatment. In these cases, the presence of a 
double superior vena cava in the absence of a communicating 
vein requires a Glenn operation, which leads to an 
increase in morbidity. 
In addition, the visceral anomalies may adversely affect 
the long-term outcome of patients with heterotaxy. 
Varying degrees of malrotation and malfixation of the 
bowel and gastric volvulus are common in both left and 
right isomerism, with a predominance in left isomerism. 
Children with right isomerism and asplenia who survive 
cardiac palliation are at great risk of dying from sepsis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
certainly unfavorable in the case of right isomerism 
with TAPVC and stenosis/atresia of the pulmonary 
artery. In cases of right isomerism, Hashmi et al55 have 
reported a 75% mortality rate in patients operated in 
the neonatal period and a 51% mortality rate in those 
requiring operation later. The prognosis is relatively 
better in children subjected to biventricular correction 
in comparison with those needing univentricular correction 
complicated by an anomaly of the venoatrial 
connection. In cases of left isomerism, occasionally 
there may be no complex heart defects requiring 
surgery in the neonatal period. During the postnatal 
period, the complexity and severity of cardiac anomalies 
is greater in right isomerism. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 177 
CARDIAC TUMORS 
Incidence. Very low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, the tumors appear as single or multiple, usually hyperechoic, 
nodules attached to the cardiac walls and/or septum. Tachyarrhythmias or hydrops can be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (rhabdomyomas with tuberous sclerosis). 
Outcome. Good, unless the tumors cause valve obstruction with consequent heart failure and death. The 
prognosis is variable in the case of association with tuberous sclerosis. 
Definition. Cardiac tumors are mesenchymal or amartomatous 
nodules arising from the cardiac layers and 
located in the heart or the pericardium. 
Anatomy. Rhabdomyomas are the most common tumors, 
accounting for two-thirds of the cardiac masses detected 
in the fetus and neonate.56 These tumors are encapsulated 
and are often multiple. Characteristically, they are of late 
onset and often shrink significantly in the neonatal 
period.57 Teratomas are the second most common histotype, 
accounting for about 15% of cardiac tumors. They 
are usually single and encapsulated, and tend to grow 
within the pericardial cavity, fairly frequently leading to 
large pericardial effusions. Other tumors – fibromas, 
hemangiomas, and myxomas – have occasionally been 
described in the fetus.58 They are usually single tumors. 
Myxomas are located in the atrium and have a stalk that 
allows free movement during the cardiac cycle. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Rhabdomyomas are usually 
detected on the 4-chamber view: they are hyperechoic, 
well-defined and round or oval (Figure 5.62a,b). These 
tumors may arise anywhere in the myocardium, and in a 
few cases may completely replace some areas of the 
myocardium, appearing as hyperechoic regional myocardial 
thickening; however, in these rare cases, classic nodules 
are always associated and lead to the diagnosis. 
Fibromas (Figure 5.63) have sonographic characteristics 
similar to those of the rhabdomyoma, but are almost 
always single. A cardiac myxoma has been described only 
once in the fetus, with an appearance consistent with that 
reported after birth: a moderately hyperechoic stalked 
tumor floating freely during the cardiac cycle.58 It should 
be underlined that all of these tumors evolve during the 
course of pregnancy: they appear in the late 2nd trimester, 
growing steadily until 32–35 weeks, when they reach a 
plateau. After birth, rhabdomyomas can shrink significantly 
or disappear macroscopically. It has been speculated 
that this biphasic behavior may be related to the 
maternal hormonal milieu, which may stimulate tumor 
growth in the 3rd trimester. After birth, the neonate is no 
longer in contact with maternal estrogens, and this allows 

the tumor to shrink, as the mitotic hormonal stimulus 
is withdrawn. Color Doppler assessment may help in 
detecting dynamic outflow obstruction if the tumor is 
located in the ventricular outflow (Figure 5.62c,d), and/or 
in checking the patency of an atrioventricular valve if the 
nodule is located just below the atrioventricular plane. 
Spectral Doppler may be used to quantify the outflow 
obstruction. 4D echocardiography is of little use in case of 
cardiac tumors. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes hyperechogenic 
foci and the rare dystrophic calcifications. The differentiation 
from hyperechogenic foci is simple, since 
these do not have any continuity with the myocardium, 
being located on the chordae tendinae of the atrioventricular 
valves, and are very small. As far as the rare 
form of diffuse rhabdomyomatosis is concerned, this 
can rarely be mistaken for a cardiomyopathy, since 
other well defined tumors are usually associated and 
lead to the final diagnosis. 
• Prognostic indicators. The tumor volume is the 
main prognostic factor: it is much more common for 
large tumors to obstruct the atrioventricular inlets 
or the outflows. The occurrence of tachyarrhyhmias, 
which have been related to mechanical stimulation 
of the atrioventricular conduction system by tumors 
located at that level, and the possibly associated 
hydrops from cardiac failure are also poor prognostic 
factors. 
• Association with other malformations. No association 
has been reported, with the significant exception 
of tuberous sclerosis tumoral lesions if this congenital 
disorder is associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high for multiple rhabdomyomas, which account 
for 90% of all cases, but is absent for the other histotypes. 
Tuberous sclerosis (OMIM 191100) is a dominantly 
inherited disorder showing genetic heterogeneity 
and high penetrance. It is characterized by the presence 
of hamartomas in multiple organ systems. Clinically, 
epilepsy, learning difficulties, behavioral problems, and 
skin lesions are the most commonly encountered problems. 
Renal angiomyolipomas may cause renal compression 
and hemorrhage. In utero, cerebral calcifications and 
subependymal nodules, possibly responsible in the 
neonate for epilepsy, seizures, and hydrocephalus, have 
occasionally been described on magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) and ultrasound in fetuses with rhabdomyomas. 
Mental retardation of variable degree complicates 
20–30% of cases. Tuberous sclerosis can be diagnosed at 
birth, with recognition of the typical café-au-lait spots, 
but in other cases the disease may also appear late in 
infancy (up to 18 months of life). Ninety percent of 
fetuses diagnosed with multiple rhabdomyomas will 
eventually develop tuberous sclerosis after birth. 
178 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.62 Rhabdomyomas. (a) Three tumors (R) are seen on 
the left outflow tract view. (b) More cranially, another large tumor 
is seen, partially obstructing the left outflow. (c) and (d) Recording 
of the Doppler velocity waveform at the level of the ascending aorta 
demonstrates moderate dynamic stenosis, with moderately elevated 
peak velocity (150 cm/s). Ao, aorta; RV, right ventricle; LV; left 
ventricle; CCA, common carotid artery. 
Figure 5.63 Cardiac fibroma at 22 weeks’ (a,b) and 30 weeks’ 
(c,d) gestation. (a) Sagittal view, showing the relationships between 
the homogeneously hyperechoic tumor mass, the liver, the 
diaphragm, and the cardiac chambers. (b) Axial view of the base of 
the heart. The round shape of the tumor is evident. (c) At 30 weeks’ 
gestation, the sagittal view shows the increased size of the tumor. 
(d) The axial view confirms the increased volume of the tumor. 
a a b 
c d 
b 
c d 

Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not mandatory, 
as the risk of chromosomal anomalies is low. Obstetric 
management is based on follow-up of the tumors: if 
these show active growth and threaten to cause complete 
valve obstruction, then early delivery may be 
a valid option. If tachyarrhythmia is associated, transplacental 
antiarrhythmic therapy with digoxin should 
be attempted, although rhythm disturbances secondary 
to cardiac tumors are often unresponsive. Delivery 
should be organized in a tertiary referral center, in 
order to provide cardiologic and respiratory assistance 
if needed. 
Postnatal therapy. Cardiac tumors do not require any 
medical/surgical treatment in 85% of cases, due to the 
significant regression of the lesions that occurs postnatally. 
In the case of multiple rhabdomyomas, examination 
including cerebral MRI, electroencephalography, 
renal ultrasound, and ocular fundus examination should 
be scheduled and serially repeated in order to disclose or 
confirm the presence of tuberous sclerosis. The remaining 
15% of cases are symptomatic at birth, and as such may 
need medical and/or surgical intervention. In particular, 
in the case of tumors causing severe pleuropericardial 
effusions, responsible for cardiac tamponade and low 
cardiac output, an emergency pericardiocentesis should 
be performed, followed by surgical resection of the pericardial 
tumor. In case of tumor-induced tachyarrhythmias, 
medical antiarrhythmic treatment is indicated 
(digoxin, flecainide, or sotalol), and, if the rhythm disturbance 
is unresponsive, surgical removal of the tumor(s) 
is carried out. In the limited number of cases in which the 
tumors (rhabdomyomas) cause hemodynamically significant 
valve obstruction, surgical resection of the mass is 
always indicated. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The surgical mortality 
rate for cardiac tumors is extremely low. Survival 
rates are high, and deaths (due to refractory cardiac failure 
and tachyarrhythmias) are usually confined to the 
first months of life. The long-term prognosis is guarded 
in the case of tuberous sclerosis, because of the 30% risk 
of mental retardation and the other possible sequelae 
possibly requiring repeated surgery. 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 179 
CARDIOMYOPATHIES (CMP) 
Incidence. Extremely low. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On the 4-chamber view, concentric, biventricular thickening of the myocardial walls with 
variable impairment of cardiac function. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Variable (Noonan syndrome). 
Outcome. Extremely variable. Depends on the degree of compromise of cardiac function and on possible 
underlying genetic disorders. 
Definition. The term cardiomyopathy (CMP) identifies a 
primary or secondary disorder of the myocardium that 
causes impairment of cardiac function of variable severity. 
Most CMPs have neonatal onset, but in a few cases 
they may arise in the late 3rd trimester. 
Anatomy. Primary CMPs are due to an architectural 
anomaly of the myocytes. The final consequence is compromise 
of cardiac diastolic and/or systolic function of 
variable degree. In the fetus, a detailed diagnosis of the 
type of CMP is not possible, and only an initial assessment 
of these disorders, mainly based on the sonographic 
appearance of the myocardium, is feasible. The 
primary forms that have been described in the fetus are 
familial hypertrophic CMP, dilatative CMP, and spongious 
CMP (or myocardial dysplasia). Among the secondary 
forms, those most frequently seen in utero are 
high-output CMP of the recipient twin in monochorionic 
pregnancies complicated by twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome and the CMP that is frequently observed 
in severe renal malformations (autosomal recessive polycystic 
renal disease, bilateral renal agenesis, etc.). Rarely, 
CMPs secondary to storage diseases are detected in the 
late 3rd trimester. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is made on the 
transverse 4-chamber view, since the thickness of free 
myocardial walls is best appreciated if displayed at 90° 
to the insonating beam. CMPs are easy to detect when 
severe, since in these cases cardiac function is highly 
depressed. What is extremely difficult is early recognition 
of a CMP when myocardial function is still apparently 
normal: it is the authors’ personal experience that 
in a small number of cases that have later developed 

frank CMP, in the 2nd trimester scan the myocardium 
appeared very bright, although of normal thickness 
and contractility (Figure 5.64a); then, in the early 3rd 
trimester, the myocardial walls thickened and acquired 
the classic aspect of CMP (Figure 5.64b). Color Doppler 
may help to detect small VSDs, which are sometimes 
associated with CMPs, and to evaluate the outflows to 
exclude dynamic subaortic stenosis due to the thickened 
myocardium, which may obstruct the aortic outflow 
during systole. In CMP, the degree of cardiac function 
impairment benefits from the use of 4D echocardiography, 
which, especially with the inversion mode, is able to 
show in detail the degree of diastolic underfilling or systolic 
compromise (Figure 5.64c). In the few cases in 
which a storage disease shows prenatal onset, the cardiac 
findings are unmistakable (Figure 5.65a). The socalled 
spongious CMP, which has also been referred to 
as non-compaction of the ventricle or myocardial dysplasia, 
can also have a fetal onset (Figure 5.65b). 
• Differential diagnosis. CMP should be differentiated 
from the mild hypertrophy of the right ventricle that 
is sometimes detected in the fetus late in gestation and 
that regresses shortly after birth. However, the key 
feature of most CMPs is that the myocardial thickening 
involves both ventricles. Also, in the case of CHD 
characterized by severe pressure/volume overload, 
myocardial thickening is typically unilateral, whereas 
the contraction of the contralateral ventricle is generally 
unremarkable. 
• Prognostic indicators. The degree of impairment 
of systolic function is the most important prognostic 
factor: cases associated with severe pump failure and 
that are often complicated by hydrops have a very 
high perinatal mortality rate. The association of tachyarrhythmias, 
due to compression/involvement of the 
conduction system, is also an ominous finding. 
• Association with other malformations. No significant 
association with extracardiac anomalies has been 
described, unless the CMP is in a syndromic context. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low, if the extremely rare cases in which storage disease 
have a prenatal onset are excluded. The only conditions 
that can present with CMP are Noonan syndrome, and 
the extremely rare Toriello–Carey syndrome and 
Leopard syndrome: 
• Noonan syndrome:12 Look for . CMP + pulmonary 
outflow obstruction + nuchal edema. 
• Toriello–Carey syndrome:12,59 Look for . CMP + 
corpus callosum agenesis + positive family history. 
180 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 5.64 Familial hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: 4-chamber view. (a) At 23 weeks’ gestation, the only abnormal finding was a mildly 
bright aspect of the myocardium (not easily detected on the image). (b) At 35 weeks’ gestation, the severe hypertrophy involving the free 
walls and the septum is evident (arrows). (c) 3D inversion mode image demonstrating significant impairment of ventricular relaxation, 
evidenced by the extremely reduced amount of blood in the ventricles (arrows). 
Figure 5.65 Cardiomyopathies. (a) Storage disease cardiomyopathy 
at 38 weeks’ gestation. Note the severe thickening of 
the myocardial walls and septum. (b) Spongious cardiomyopathy 
(or myocardial dysplasia, non-compaction of the myocardium) at 
36 weeks’ gestation. Note the presence of several myocardial 
recesses (arrows) highlighted by the power Doppler. LA, left 
atrium; LV, left ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle; R 
and arrows, myocardial recesses. 
a b c 
a b 

Obstetric management. Fetal karyotyping is not indicated, 
because of the extremely low risk of chromosomal 
anomalies and the usual late onset of CMPs. Early delivery 
may be considered in selected cases showing initial 
heart failure when pulmonary maturation is virtually 
guaranteed. A cesarean section at 34–26 weeks’ gestation 
may allow neonatal cardiac assistance and resuscitation 
with improved survival. In the case of arrhythmias, 
transplacental therapy should be attempted, although 
rhythm disturbances associated with CMP are usually 
refractory to antiarrhythmic drugs. Delivery should be 
organized in a tertiary referral center where the abovedescribed 
neonatal procedures are available. 
Postnatal therapy. Aortopulmonary shunting is necessary 
only if severe dynamic subaortic stenosis is detected 
after birth. If cardiac decompensation is refractory to all 
remedies, cardiac transplantation may represent the only 
option to save the infant’s life. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival rates 
and overall prognosis are extremely variable, and 
depend mainly upon the degree of impairment of cardiac 
function and the etiology of the myocardial lesion. 
Storage diseases are almost invariably lethal in a few 
years; familial hypertrophic CMP has a variable phenotypic 
expression even within the same family, with 
cases requiring early cardiac transplantation and cases 
who manage to reach adulthood in acceptably good 
conditions and in NYHA functional class I–II. Of note, 
in familial hypertrophic CMP, significant clinical 
improvements and, in selected cases, complete regression 
of the hypertrophy, have been obtained with the 
ß-blocker propanolol.60 
CONGENITAL HEART DISEASE 181 
REFERENCES 
1. Carvalho JS, Ho SY, Shinebourne EA. Sequential segmental analysis 
in complex fetal cardiac abnormalities: a logical approach to 
diagnosis. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 105–11. 
2. Yoo SJ, Lee YH, Cho KS, Kim DY. Sequential segmental 
approach to fetal congenital heart disease. Cardiol Young 1999; 
9: 430–44. 
3. ISUOG Education Committee. Fetal Echo Task Force cardiac 
screening examination of the fetus: guidelines for performing the 
‘basic’ and ‘extended basic’ cardiac scan. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 107–13. 
4. Gonçalves LF, Lee W, Chaiworapongsa T, et al. Four-dimensional 
ultrasonography of the fetal heart with spatio-temporal 
image correlation. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 189: 1792–802. 
5. Chaoui R, Hoffmann J, Heling KH. Three-dimensional (3D) and 
4D color Doppler fetal echocardiography using spatio-temporal 
image correlation (STIC). Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 23: 
535–45. 
6. Paladini D, Vassallo M, Sglavo G, Lapadula C, Martinelli P. The 
role of spatio-temporal image correlation (STIC) with tomographic 
ultrasound imaging (TUI) in the sequential analysis of 
fetal congenital heart disease. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006: 
27: 555–61. 
7. Volpe P, Campobasso G, Stanziano A, et al. A novel approach to 
enhance the assessment of sources of pulmonary blood flow and 
the identification of the anatomy of pulmonary arteries in fetuses 
with pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect: 4D-US 
with B-flow imaging and spatiotemporal image correlation. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; in press. 
8. Darling RC, Rothney WB, Craig JM. Total pulmonary venous 
drainage into the right side of the heart. Report of 17 autopsied 
cases not associated with other major cardiovascular anomalies. 
Lab Invest 1957; 7: 44–64. 
9. Valsangiacomo ER, Hornberger LK, Barrea C, et al. Partial and 
total anomalous pulmonary venous connection in the fetus: twodimensional 
and Doppler echocardiographic findings. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 257–63. 
10. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
11. Vassallo M, Pascotto M, Pisacane C, et al. Right superior vena 
cava draining into the left atrium: prenatal diagnosis and 
postnatal management. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 
445–8. 
12. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s. Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia: WB Saunders, 2006. 
13. Ferencz C, Rubin DJ, Loffredo AC, Magee AC, eds. Epidemiology 
of Congenital Heart Disease. The Baltimore–Washington Infant 
Study 1981–1989. Perspectives in Pediatric Cardiology, Vol 4. 
New York: Mount Kisco Futura, 1993. 
14. Allan LD, Sharland GK, Milburn A, et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of 1006 consecutive cases of congenital heart disease in 
the fetus. J Am Coll Cardiol 1994; 23: 1452–8. 
15. Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of 
congenital heart disease in the Naples area during the years 
1994–1999 – the experience of a joint fetal–pediatric cardiology 
unit. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 545–52. 
16. Paladini D, Palmieri S, Lamberti A, et al. Characterization and 
natural history of ventricular septal defects in the fetus. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 118–22. 
17. Axt-Fliedner R, Schwarze A, Smrcek J, et al. Isolated ventricular 
septal defects detected by color Doppler imaging: evolution during 
fetal and first year of postnatal life. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2006; 27: 266–73. 
18. Paladini D, Russo MG, Vassallo M, Tartaglione A. The 
‘in-plane’ view of the interventricular septum. A new approach 
to the characterization of ventricular septal defects in the fetus. 
Prenat Diagn 2003; 23: 1052–5. 
19. Yagel S, Valsky DV, Messing B. Detailed assessment of fetal ventricular 
septal defect with 4D color Doppler ultrasound using 
spatio-temporal image correlation technology. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 97–8. 
20. Hoffman JIE, Rudolph AM. The natural history of ventricular 
septal defects in infancy. Am J Cardiol 1965; 16: 634–53. 
21. Kirklin JW, Barratt-Boyes BG. Cardiac Surgery, 2nd edn. 
New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1993. 
22. Huggon IC, Cook AC, Smeeton NC, Magee AG, Sharland GK. 
Atrioventricular septal defects diagnosed in fetal life: associated 
cardiac and extra-cardiac abnormalities and outcome. J Am Coll 
Cardiol 2000; 36: 593–601. 

23. Allan LD. Atrioventricular septal defect in the fetus. Am J Obstet 
Gynecol 1999; 181: 1250–3. 
24. Berg C, Geipel A, Smrcek J, et al. Prenatal diagnosis of cardiosplenic 
syndromes: a 10-year experience. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 22: 451–9. 
25. Paladini D, Marasini M, Volpe P. Severe ductal constriction in 
the third-trimester fetus following maternal self-medication with 
nimesulide. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 357–61. 
26. Faiola S, Tsoi E, Huggon C, Allan LD, Nicolaides KH. Likelihood 
ratio for trisomy 21 in fetuses with tricuspid regurgitation at the 11 
to 13 + 6-week scan. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 22–7. 
27. Todros T, Paladini D, Chiappa E, et al. Pulmonary stenosis and 
atresia with intact ventricular septum during prenatal life. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 228–33. 
28. Daubeney PEF, Sharland GK, Cook AC, et al, for the UK and 
Eire Collaborative Study of Pulmonary Atresia with Intact 
Ventricular Septum. Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular 
septum. Impact of fetal echocardiography on incidence at birth 
and postnatal outcome. Circulation 1998; 98: 562–6. 
29. Simpson JM. Hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 15: 271–8. 
30. Allan LD, Sharland G, Tynan MJ. The natural history of the 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome. Int J Cardiol 1989; 25: 341–3. 
31. Simpson JM, Sharland GK. Natural history and outcome of 
aortic stenosis diagnosed prenatally. Heart 1997; 77: 205–10. 
32. McCaffrey FM, Sherman FS. Prenatal diagnosis of severe aortic 
stenosis. Pediatr Cardiol 1997; 18: 276–81. 
33. Brierley J, Redington AN. Aortic coarctation and interrupted 
aortic arch. In: Anderson RH, Macartney FJ, Shinebourne EA, 
Tynan M, eds. Paediatric Cardiology. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone, 2001: 1523–58. 
34. Sharland GK, Chan KY, Allan LD. Coarctation of the aorta: 
difficulties in prenatal diagnosis. Br Heart J 1994; 7: 70–5. 
35. Paladini D, Volpe P, Russo MG, et al. Aortic coarctation: prognostic 
indicators of survival in the fetus. Heart 2004; 90: 
1348–9. 
36. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis 
of interruption of the aortic arch and its association with 
deletion of chromosome 22q11. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2002; 20: 327–31. 
37. Chaoui R, Schneider MBE, Kalache KD. Right aortic arch with 
vascular ring and aberrant left subclavian artery: prenatal diagnosis 
assisted by three-dimensional power Doppler ultrasound. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 661–3. 
38. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. 22q11 deletions in fetuses 
with malformations of the outflow tracts or interruption of the 
aortic arch: impact of additional ultrasound signs. Prenat Diagn 
2003; 23: 752–7. 
39. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in fetal 
cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 546–52. 
40. Achiron R, Rotstein Z, Heggesh J, et al. Anomalies of the fetal 
aortic arch: a novel sonographic approach to in-utero diagnosis. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 553–7. 
41. Yoo SJ, Min JY, Lee YH, et al. Fetal sonographic diagnosis of 
aortic arch anomalies. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 
535–46. 
42. Volpe P, Paladini D, Marasini M, et al. Characteristics, associations 
and outcome of absent pulmonary valve syndrome in the 
fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 623–8. 
43. Hornberger LK, Sanders SP, Sahn DJ, et al. In utero pulmonary 
artery and aortic growth and potential for progression of pulmonary 
outflow tract obstruction in tetralogy of Fallot. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 1995; 25: 739–45. 
44. Paladini D, Rustico MA, Todros T, et al. Conotruncal anomalies 
in prenatal life. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 8: 241–6. 
45. Lev M, Eckner FA. The pathologic anatomy of tetralogy of 
Fallot and its variants. Disease Chest 1964; 45: 251–61. 
46. Razavi RS, Sharland GK, Simpson JM. Prenatal diagnosis by 
echocardiogram and outcome of absent pulmonary valve syndrome. 
Am J Cardiol 2003; 91: 429–32. 
47. Collet RW, Edwards JE. Persistent truncus arteriosus: a classification 
according to anatomic types. Surg Clin North Am 1949; 
29: 1245–70. 
48. Volpe P, Paladini D, Marasini M, et al. Common arterial trunk 
in the fetus: characteristics, associations, and outcome in a multicentre 
series of 23 cases. Heart 2003; 89: 1437–41. 
49. Baker EJ. Tetralogy of Fallot with pulmonary atresia. In: 
Anderson RH, Macartney FJ, Shinebourne EA, Tynan M, eds. 
Paediatric Cardiology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, 2001; 
1251–79. 
50. Jouannic JM, Gavard L, Fermont L, et al. Sensitivity and specificity 
of prenatal features of physiological shunts to predict 
neonatal clinical status in transposition of the great arteries. 
Circulation 2004; 110: 1743–6. 
51. Bonnet D, Coltri A, Butera G, et al. Detection of transposition of 
the great arteries reduces neonatal morbidity and mortality. 
Circulation 1999; 99: 916–18. 
52. Paladini D, Volpe P, Marasini M, et al. Diagnosis, characterization 
and outcome of congenitally-corrected transposition of the 
great arteries in the fetus. A multicenter series of 30 cases. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 281–5. 
53. Graham TP, Bernard YD, Mellen BG, et al. Long-term outcome 
in congenitally corrected transposition of the great arteries. J Am 
Coll Cardiol 2000; 36: 255–61. 
54. Espinoza J, Goncalves LF, Lee W, Mazor M, Romero R. A novel 
method to improve prenatal diagnosis of abnormal systemic 
venous connections using three-and four-dimensional ultrasonography 
and ‘inversion mode’. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2005; 25: 428–34. 
55. Hashmi A, Abu-Sulaiman R, McCrindle BW, et al. Management 
and outcomes of right atrial isomerism: a 26-year experience. 
J Am Coll Cardiol 1998; 31: 1120–6. 
56. Groves AM, Fagg NL, Cook AC, Allan LD. Cardiac tumours in 
intrauterine life. Arch Dis Chil 1992; 67: 1189–92. 
57. Paladini D, Palmieri S, Russo GM, Pacileo G. Cardiac multiple 
rhabdomyomatosis: prenatal diagnosis and natural history. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1996; 7: 84–5. 
58. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Vassallo M, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
ultrasonographic findings of a cardiac myxoma. Obstet Gynecol 
2003; 102: 1174–6. 
59. Paladini D, Russo MG, Tartaglione A, Loffredo A, Mastinelli P. 
Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Toriello-Carey syndrome. 
Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 1185–7. 
60. Dimitrow PP, Kizanowski M, Nizankowski R, Szczeklik A, 
Dubiel JS. Comparison of the effect of verapamil and propranolol 
on response of coronary vasomotion to cold pressor test in 
symptomatic patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Cardiovasc Drug Ther 2000; 14: 643–50. 
182 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

The thorax has a conotruncal shape. Its upper borders 
are represented by the clavicles and the neck; it is limited 
inferiorly by the diaphragm, laterally by the ribs, and 
anteriorly by the sternum. Posteriorly, the shoulder 
blades can be seen in strict relationship with the ribs and 
the clavicles. In the thorax, the following regions/organs 
can be identified: the lungs, which extend from the 
diaphragm to the upper border, just below the clavicles; 
the heart, which is located in the lower mediastinum and 
lies on the surface of the diaphragm; and the mediastinum, 
with the great vessels and the thymus, larger in 
the fetus than in the neonate. The bony outline, represented 
by the rib cage, and the overlying soft tissues 
complete the thoracic area. In this chapter, normal and 
abnormal anatomy of thoracic viscera are described. The 
heart and the great vessels are described in Chapter 5. 
Timing of examination. Ultrasound assessment of the 
thorax can be carried out easily until 25–26 weeks of gestation. 
After this period, the increased mineralization of 
the ribs leads to significant acoustic shadowing, which 
limits the display of intrathoracic organs, especially if 
coronal or sagittal views are sought (see below). Besides, 
it has to be underlined that a good number of thoracic 
anomalies evolve, i.e. they can appear only in the 3rd 
trimester, or, on the contrary, they can regress before 
birth. Therefore, if an initial assessment of the thorax and 
the heart can be performed as early as 12–14 weeks of 
gestation, it should be noted that, in order to follow up 
abnormal cases, late 3rd trimester scans may be needed. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). The 
regular shape of the thorax lends itself easily to a standardized 
ultrasound approach. However, it should be 
underlined that the key view for the assessment of 
intrathoracic anatomy is the classic 4-chamber view of the 
fetal heart. In fact, in this plane, most thoracic viscera can 
be displayed, including the ribs, the sternum, and the cutaneous 
outline. This is why numerous scientific societies 
refer to the 4-chamber view as the key view to assess 
intrathoracic anatomy. However, if the results from this 
view are abnormal, and a thoracic lesion is found, this 
should be explored further using coronal and sagittal 
views, as reported below. The midsagittal and parasagittal 
views allow display of the diaphragm as a hypoechoic 
layer below the basal aspects of the lungs and the heart, 
and above the liver and the stomach. The diaphragm 
shows a curved outline, convex towards the thorax. With 
regard to the other anatomic districts, since the anatomic 
scan is usually carried out (in most countries), at 18–22 
weeks of gestation, all normal planes shown in the figures 
in this chapter refer to 2nd trimester fetuses. 
Axial 4-chamber view (Figure 6.1). As already mentioned, 
this represents the fundamental plane where heart 
and lung anatomy is assessed. On this view, the following 
structures can and should be checked, in addition to the 
Chapter 6 
Thoracic anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE THORAX: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 6.1 Axial view of the thorax: 4-chamber view. In this view, 
the two lung fields (L), the heart, and the descending thoracic aorta 
(arrow) behind the left atrium are visible. Laterally, two complete ribs 
are evident (arrowheads); posteriorly, one thoracic vertebra can be 
seen. The cutaneous outline, outside the ribcage, is also evident. 
183 

cardiac anatomy described in Chapter 5: the thoracic 
outline, consisting of the two displayed ribs and the overlying 
soft tissues and skin; the two lungs, shown in crosssection; 
the thoracic aorta, lying in the prevertebral area 
just to the left of the midline and behind the left atrium (if 
the situs is solitus); and one thoracic vertebra, on the midline, 
posteriorly. The sternum begins to show mineralization 
in the late 2nd trimester. A useful hint to get a 
perfectly axial 4-chamber view is to look at the two displayed 
ribs, considering that in the fetus, unlike the adult, 
the ribs are perfectly horizontal: if the whole length of 
the ribs is visible, then the orientation of the transducer 
is correct. If, on the contrary, more than one rib 
is displayed, then the plane is malaligned either in the 
anteroposterior axis (a few segments of different ribs: 
Figure 6.2a) or in the laterolateral one (a few almost complete 
and parallel ribs: Figure 6.2b). On the correct axial 
plane, the two lungs appear as solid, homogeneous, 
weakly hyperechoic structures that almost completely 
surround the heart. Since the heart is mainly located in 
the left hemithorax, the right lung will appear larger than 
the left one (Figure 6.1). In the normal fetus, the pleural 
cavity is virtual, and does not show up; on the contrary, a 
film of fluid is often seen within the pericardium, especially 
if insonated with high-frequency transducers. 
Axial view of the mediastinum (3-vessel view) (Figure 6.3). 
This plane is parallel to the 4-chamber view, but more 
cranial. It is routinely sought in fetal echocardiography 
in order to demostrate the aortic and pulmonary arches 
and the corresponding flows on color Doppler, for the 
detection of ductus dependence (Chapter 5). A description 
of this view is included in this chapter since it allows one to 
visualize the thymus and study its relationship with the 
great vessels. The thymus, which is easier to recognize from 
the late 2nd trimester onwards when it starts to undergo 
significant hypertrophy, appears as a well-defined roundish 
solid structure interposed between the great vessels, in the 
prevertebral region, and the sternum. It is weakly hypoechoic 
in comparison with the surrounding lungs, although 
it should be underlined that the different echogenicity is 
not easy to pick up, especially if high-frequency (> 5 MHz) 
transducers are not employed. However, there is an additional 
feature that makes identification of the thymus easier: 
the thymus is located on top of the heart and, therefore, 
unlike the lungs, it shows movements synchronous with 
the cardiac cycle. Behind the thymus and in front of the 
vertebra, the great vessels, the trachea, and, with some 
difficulties, the esophagus can be seen (Figure 6.3b). 
Right parasagittal view (Figure 6.4). The midsagittal 
view does not give significant information regarding 
184 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.3 Axial view of the upper mediastinum. (a) The thymus 
(arrow), which is weakly hypoechoic in comparison with the lungs, can 
be seen in the middle of the thorax. (b) On a parallel plane, just caudal 
to the former one, the great vessels with the pulmonary artery (Pa) on 
the left, the aorta (Ao) in the middle, and the superior vena cava on the 
right can be seen, all behind the thymus (THY). 
Figure 6.4 Right parasagittal thoracic view. This view allows 
detection of the hypoechoic muscular layer represented by the 
diaphragm (arrowheads), just below the right lung (RL). 
Figure 6.2 4-chamber view: abnormal alignment. The ribs represent 
a good marker to assess the adequacy of the scanning plane. (a) If the 
axial alignment is unbalanced in the anteroposterior plane, then several 
indented rib segments will be visible (arrows 1, 2, 3). (b) If the axial 
alignment is unbalanced in the laterolateral plane, several whole ribs 
will appear (arrows). 
a b a b 

the lungs, since it is occupied mainly by the heart. On 
the contrary, on the right parasagittal view, the whole 
of the right lung comes into view. The heart is not visible, 
being in the left hemithorax. On this view, the 
diaphragmatic hypoechoic layer can be seen below the 
right lung. Care should be taken to consider the identification 
of the diaphragmatic plane in this view as a 
demonstration of an intact diaphragm: if the hernia is 
located on the other side, as in the Bochdalek type (see 
below), the contour of the right hemidiaphragm is normal. 
Also, it is important to note that this view can 
advantageously be employed to disclose the severe thoracic 
hypoplasia typical of lethal skeletal dysplasias 
(Chapter 9). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 185 
ULTRASOUND DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF THORACIC ANOMALIES 
Following the practical approach typical of this book – 
from ultrasound finding to diagnosis – and noting that 
the reference view for the diagnosis of thoracic anomalies 
is the 4-chamber view – we believe that a classification of 
the various thoracic lesions according to their ultrasound 
appearance on this view may help in differential diagnosis. 
Hence, we have distinguished them according to their 
position and echogenicity: lateral versus central (median); 
hypo- or anechoic versus hyperechoic; bilateral versus 
unilateral. The final assessment regards those cases in 
which there is clear disproportion between the thorax 
and the heart; in such circumstances, the operator should 
always consider whether it is the heart that is enlarged 
(cardiomegaly and cardiomyopathies) or the rib cage that 
is too small (thoracic/pulmonary hypoplasia). 
• Unilateral, anechoic lesions 
– Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), leftsided 
(Figure 6.5c). Only in left posterolateral hernia, 
Bochdalek type, can the stomach migrate into 
the left hemithorax, especially if there are no ileal 
loops in the thorax at the same time. The heart will 
be displaced contralaterally, or in the center of the 
thorax. The stomach appears as a round or oval, 
anechoic, well-defined area. 
– Adenomatoid cystic malformation of the lung 
(ACML) type I, macrocystic variant (Figure 6.5b). 
In this case, the anechoic cystic structure can be single 
or multiple, but is located in one hemithorax 
only – ACML is almost always unilateral. The 
heart is displaced contralaterally. 
– Unilateral hydrothorax (pleural effusion) (Figure 
6.5d). A unilateral pleural effusion can appear as 
an anechoic moon-shaped area of variable size, 
according to the severity of the hydrothorax. 
Characteristically, in the middle of the anechoic 
area, the ipsilateral lung, showing movements synchronous 
with the heartbeats, can be identified. 
Rarely, the amount of fluid within the pleural space 
is so large as to severely increase the intrathoracic 
pressure; in such rare cases, all viscera, including 
the ipsilateral compressed lung, are pushed into the 
other hemithorax. After birth, most of these hypertensive 
unilateral pleural effusions turn out to be 
chylothoraces. 
• Unilateral hyperechoic lesions 
– ACML type III, solid (Figure 6.5g,h). The solid 
subtype of ACML appears as a homogeneously 
highly hyperechoic pulmonary mass. Although, by 
definition, ACML almost always involves one lobe 
only, the volume of the mass does not allow the 
remaining intact lobe(s) to be displayed on ultrasound. 
If the volume of the lesion is large enough, 
the mediastinum shifts towards the contralateral 
hemithorax. 
– Pulmonary sequestration (Figure 6.5g,h). This 
shares with ACML type III the same highly hyperechoic 
ultrasound aspect. Differential diagnosis 
relies on the identification, with power or color 
Doppler, of the feeding vessels originating from the 
descending aorta in the pulmonary sequestration. 
As with ACML, pulmonary sequestration is virtually 
always unilateral (prevalently on the left side). 
– CDH, right-sided (Figure 6.5i). In right-sided hernias, 
as well as in eventration, which is an upward 
displacement of the abdominal contents secondary to 
a congenitally thin hypoplastic diaphragm, the right 
lobe of the liver is displaced upwards, in the right 
hemithorax, and pushes the heart and the mediastinum 
into the left hemithorax. Identification of the 
gallbladder, and/or of the hepatic colonic flexure, in 
the right hemithorax leads to the diagnosis. Also, in a 
minority of cases of left posterolateral hernias in 
which the stomach does not migrate into the thorax, 
the appearance of the ileus and the spleen in the thorax 
may be that of an inhomogeneously hyperechoic 
mass in the left hemithorax. 
– Tumors. The same tumors that usually arise in the 
mediastinum can, very rarely, arise from the lateral 
walls of the thorax. 
• Bilateral hyperechoic lesions 
– CHAOS (laryngeal atresia) (Figure 6.5j). There is 
virtually only one entity that can appear as a bilateral 
hyperechoic lesion, namely laryngeal atresia. 
Obstruction of the high airways causes hyperplasia 
of the alveolar units, which are filled with fluid. 
Severely increased lung volume results from this 
hyperplasia together with the entrapment of a significant 
amount of fluid within the lungs. The severely 
enlarged lungs deform the thorax, which becomes 

bell-shaped as the diaphragmatic convexity is 
reversed and the lower more mobile ribs are displaced 
laterally; the heart is squeezed into the middle 
of the thorax and the cardiac angle is reduced (sometimes 
to zero) by high intrathoracic pressure. Ascites 
is constantly associated. 
• Bilateral anechoic lesions 
– Bilateral hydrothorax (pleural effusion) (Figure 
6.5e). If pleural effusion is bilateral, two moonshaped 
anechoic areas surrounding the mediastinum 
are evident. 
• Median anechoic lesions 
– Diaphragmatic hernia CDH (Figure 6.5c). In the 
left posterolateral subtype (Bochdalek type) of 
CDH, the stomach, appearing as a round welldefined 
anechoic structure, is frequently displaced 
into the center of the thorax; the heart is consequently 
pushed into the right hemithorax. 
– Absent pulmonary valve syndrome. In this rare 
anomaly, usually associated with tetralogy of Fallot, 
the anechoic mediastinal structure is represented 
by an extremely dilated pulmonary trunk and 
186 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Dx 
Dx Sn 
Sn Dx 
Sn 
Figure 6.5 Summary of the different 
types of thoracic abnormalities, classified 
according to their laterality (unilateral vs 
bilateral) and echogenicity (fluid vs solid): 
(a) normal thorax; (b) Adenomatoid 
cystic malformation of the lung (ACML), 
macrocystic type; (c) congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia (CDH), left-sided; 
(d) hydrothorax, unilateral; (e) hydrothorax, 
bilateral; (f) thoracic hypoplasia; 
(g, h) pulmonary sequestration/ACML 
microcystic type; (i) CDH, right-sided; 
(j) laryngeal atresia; (k) cardiomegaly. 
a
b
c
d
e
f 
k
j
i
h
g 

branches – results of the severe pulmonary valve 
insufficiency (Chapter 5). 
• Median hyperechoic lesions 
– Mediastinal tumors. A large mediastinal hyperechoic 
mass, located in the upper mediastinum, is 
often consistent with a mesenchymal tumor, such 
as a teratoma or a hemangioma. 
• Increased cardiothoracic ratio: enlarged heart 
– Isolated cardiomegaly (Figure 6.5k). If the cardiomegaly 
is not associated with congenital heart 
disease, it can be related to incipient heart failure 
from arterovenous fistulas (placental chorioangioma, 
twin-to-twin transfusion syndrome, sacrococcygeal 
teratoma, etc.), or increased intraventricular pressure, 
as in ductus arteriosus constriction/closure. 
– Atrioventricular valve insufficiency. Cardiac 
enlargement can also be determined by congenital 
heart diseases associated with severe atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency: the consequent severe atriomegaly 
is responsible for the cardiomegaly 
(Chapter 5). Cardiomyopathies characterized by 
severe pump failure may also be associated with 
cardiomegaly, both because of the dilatation of the 
ventricular chambers and because of the severe 
myocardial hypertrophy. 
• Increased cardiothoracic ratio: hypoplastic thorax 
– Skeletal dysplasia featuring thoracic hypoplasia 
(Figure 6.5f). Severe hypoplasia of the rib cage 
(sternum, ribs, and spine) can be associated with 
some lethal skeletal dysplasias (thoracic asphyxiating 
dysplasia (Jeune syndrome), thanatophoric dysplasia, 
achondrogenesis, short-rib–polydactyly 
syndrome, and the FADS group: Chapters 9 and 
10). In the presence of severe thoracic hypoplasia, 
the midsagittal scan of the fetus at low magnification 
often shows a dip at the junction between the 
thorax and the abdomen. 
– Primary lung hypoplasia. This is a very rare anomaly 
of the thorax, due to a severe arrest of lung 
development; if it affects both lungs, it is lethal. In 
the case of bilateral lung hypoplasia, the thorax is 
virtually occupied by the heart only. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 187 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Definition. The term congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
(CDH) encompasses a range of closure defects of the 
diaphragm. Since the intra-abdominal pressure is higher 
than the intrathoracic pressure, in the presence of a 
diaphragmatic defect the abdominal viscera located near 
the defect migrate into the thorax. CDHs are classified 
according to the site of the defect: 75–85% of cases involve 
the left posterolateral area (Bochdalek type: Figure 6.6), 
10–15% of cases involve the right hemidiaphragm, and 
3–4% of cases are bilateral hernias. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Embryologically, CDHs 
originate if normal closure of primary pleuroperitoneal 
channels does not occur. At 12 weeks of gestation, 
when the physiologic umbilical hernia disappears, the 
intra-abdominal pressure increases and may force the 
abdominal viscera through the hernia, if this is present. 
From a prognostic standpoint, the main problem of a 
CDH is not the defect itself, but rather the occurrence 
and degree of pulmonary damage. This consists of severe 
alveolar hypoplasia induced by the long-term compression 
of the lungs exerted by the migrated abdominal 
viscera. After birth, the onset of pulmonary hypertension 
can further complicate the situation. The association of 
pulmonary hypoplasia with pulmonary hypertension 
represents the main determinant of death in neonates 
with non-syndromic CDH. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of CDH 
is, in most instances, indirect: what is detected is the 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Stomach in the thorax (left-sided hernias); right liver lobe in the thorax (right-sided hernias). 
Heart displaced in right hemithorax or hyper-rotated in the left hemithorax, respectively. Sometimes, ileal loops 
and/or the spleen in the thorax as well. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high (5–15%): trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High (25–30%): Fryns, Pallister–Killian, Beckwith–Wiedemann. 
Outcome. Extremely poor in syndromic cases. Overall survival rate of 40–60% in non-syndromic cases. 
CONGENITAL DIAPHRAGMATIC HERNIA 

abnormal intrathoracic position of the stomach and/or 
the other migrated viscera and the displacement of the 
heart and the mediastinum. These findings indirectly 
demonstrate the existence of the diaphragmatic hernia. 
The intrathoracic migration of the abdominal viscera is 
recognized on the 4-chamber view. 
Left posterolateral CDH (Figures 6.7–6.9). On the 
4-chamber view, the stomach is found either in the left 
hemithorax or in the mediastinal area (Figure 6.7). 
In most instances, a few ileal loops can be found near 
the stomach, while the heart and the mediastinum 
are displaced contralaterally. Much more rarely, the 
spleen and/or the left liver lobe may migrate as well 
(Figure 6.8a). In left-sided hernias, the stomach is found 
in the thorax in most cases (about 90%). In a minority 
of cases, only some ileal loops and/or the left hepatic 
lobe migrate into the thorax (Figure 6.8b and c). If 
this is the case, only the dextrocardia and the unusual 
dyshomogeneous appearance of the left hemithorax may 
lead to the diagnosis (Figure 6.8c). It should be underlined 
that even though the diaphragmatic defect occurs at 
12 weeks of gestation, the moment at which the viscera 
herniate is extremely variable and ranges from the early 
2nd trimester to the first hours of life; in the latter 
instance, it is the first breaths that determine the migration 
of the viscera. Hence, CDH can be considered as an 
‘evolving’ lesion and this has obvious medicolegal 
implications. This process is responsible for the fact 
that only 50–60% of CDHs are diagnosed prenatally.
1,2 The longitudinal views (ventral approach) 
allow one to detect additional signs that may confirm the 
existence of the hernia: a tortuous aspect of the inferior 
vena cava and the absence of the hypoechoic contour of 
the diaphragm (Figure 6.9). However, care should be 
taken not to diagnose a CDH only on the grounds of the 
longitudinal views; the evidence of intrathoracic viscera 
on the 4-chamber view is the basic requirement, in our 
opinion, for a correct diagnosis of CDH. 
Right-sided CDH (Figure 6.10). These represent about 
10% of all CDHs at birth. In the case of right-sided 
hernia, the ultrasound diagnosis is more challenging since 
the main finding leading to the final diagnosis of CDH in 
most instances, the intrathoracic stomach, is absent, 
being the defect on the other side of the diaphragm. 
Nonetheless, there are some features that allow one to 
recognize a right-sided hernia in utero. The first is represented 
by an extreme leftward rotation of the heart, with 
a consequent abnormal increase in the cardiac axis: the 
heart appears squeezed towards the lateral wall of the 
thorax; the second hint for diagnosis of a right CDH is 
188 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.6 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH), Bochdalek type 
(left posterior). This specimen shows herniation into the left hemithorax 
of ileal loops (il), which hide the stomach. The heart (H) is displaced into 
the right hemithorax, where it compresses the right lung (rl). The liver is 
visible below. 
Figure 6.7 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. In this 
variant of CDH, the stomach (S) is visible in the middle of the thorax, 
or in the left hemithorax, while the mediastinum, with the heart, is 
shifted contralaterally. RA, right atrium; LV, left ventricle. 

the upward displacement of the right hepatic lobe: this is 
pushed upward by the absence of the counterpressure 
represented by the diaphragm and can be detected in the 
right hemithorax. However, the latter finding is sometimes 
difficult to identify, because the echogenicity of the 
lung and the liver are quite similar: high-frequency transducers 
and the use of power or color Doppler to identify 
the suprahepatic veins ‘in the thorax’, once a suspicion of 
right CDH has been raised, help identify the intrathoracic 
position of the right hepatic lobe. 
Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound. The assessment of 
the thorax and, in particular, of the lungs, may benefit 
from a 3D ultrasound approach. In particular, the 
diaphragmatic defect itself is effectively studied with 
tomographic ultrasound imaging (TUI). This imaging 
modality allows one to display on a single panel a variable 
number of reconstructed 2D sections, as in a computed 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) scan: using this approach, the reconstructed 
coronal plane is used to display the extent and the site 
of the diaphragmatic defect (Figure 6.11). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 189 
Figure 6.9 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. The 
right parasagittal thoracic view can contribute to direct detection of 
the defect in the diaphragm (‘???’). However, this sign should not be 
considered as a primary finding; the most important clues to the diagnosis 
of CDH are the intrathoracic location of abdominal viscera and 
dextrocardia. Figure 6.10 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, right-sided (34 weeks 
of gestation). In 10% of cases, the diaphragmatic defect involves the 
right hemidiaphragm. In this case, the right hepatic lobe (and the gallbladder, 
as well) may migrate into the thorax. The detection, on 
grayscale or color Doppler ultrasound, of the suprahepatic veins 
(arrows) and, in the 3rd trimester, of the hepatic flexure of the colon 
(C) may contribute to the diagnosis. H, heart; Rt, right side. 
Figure 6.8 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. (a) In rarer cases, in addition to the stomach (St), the spleen, ileal loops (IL), and/or 
the left hepatic lobe (liver) can also migrate into the thorax. Lt, left; Rt, right. (b) In some cases, the first sign, in the 2nd trimester, of a CDH may 
be a dextrocardia, possibly associated with fluid collection, as in this case. (c) After 3 weeks, the hernia has become evident, although only some 
bowel loops (arrows) and not the stomach have herniated into the left hemithorax. 
a b c 

• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). For left-sided 
CDH, the differential diagnosis includes the macrocystic 
subtype of ACML, since the stomach might, at 
least theoretically, resemble the dominant cyst in 
a macrocystic ACML. Right-sided CDH should be 
differentiated from the solid, microcystic variant 
of ACML and pulmonary sequestration: the echogenicity 
of the intrathoracic liver/intestine should be 
differentiated from the highly hyperechoic ACML, 
although the difference in ‘brightness’ is usually 
significant. 
• Prognostic indicators. The most important prognostic 
factor for fetuses with CDH is the possible association 
with chromosomal anomalies and/or syndromes. 
In the case of isolated CDH, several ultrasound 
features have been assessed over the years for 
190 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.11 Congenital diaphragmatic hernia, Bochdalek type. The use of three-dimensional ultrasound with the tomographic approach (TUI) 
may be of help in the evaluation of the diaphragmatic defect. In particular, by displaying the coronal plane of the thorax and abdomen, it is possible 
to assess the size and the site of the defect: the diaphragm (arrowheads) appears present in all the windows on the left and the middle rows, 
whereas its contour is lost in all of the right row images. b, bladder; H, heart; LL, left lung. 

their capacity to predict the neonatal occurrence of 
lethal pulmonary hypoplasia and of pulmonary 
hypertension: early gestational age at diagnosis, 
presence of a mediastinal shift, intrathoracic position 
of the liver, and lung-to-head ratio. Of these, only the 
latter two have proved acceptably reproducible and of 
sufficient, although not exceptional, prognostic value. 
The lung-to-head ratio (LHR), which can be applied 
to left-sided hernias only, is calculated by multiplying 
the two orthogonal diameters of the right lung, which 
is located between the rib cage and the heart in the 
right hemithorax (Figure 6.12), and dividing the result 
by the head circumference. The first report3 was a retrospective 
evaluation of 55 fetuses with left-sided 
CDH: the three identified cut-offs for the LHR, 
namely, <0.6, 0.6–1.35, and >1.35, apparently identified 
subgroups of fetuses with neonatal survival rates 
of 0%, 61%, and 100%, respectively. Other prospective 
reports followed this initial one with controversial 
results. Lipshultz et al,4 in a prospective study of 
15 fetuses, found similar results, although with different 
cut-offs: all fetuses with LHR <1.0 died, while 
those with LHR >1.4 survived; those with an intermediate 
LHR (1.1–1.39) showed a 38% survival rate. 
However, other authors have found the LHR to be of 
no prognostic significance.5 Recently, a multicenter 
investigation has reconfirmed the good prognostic 
value of this parameter.6 The other ultrasound prognostic 
indicator able to identify fetuses with very poor 
prognosis is the intrathoracic position of the liver, 
namely the liver-up sign. According to authors who 
have reported on this sign, in the case of liver-up, the 
survival rate halves, dropping from 93% to 43%; and 
the need for extracorporeal membrane oxygenation 
(ECMO: see below) doubles.7 Other attempts at 
identifying in utero the occurrence of pulmonary 
hypoplasia have considered Doppler velocimetric 
assessment of pulmonary arteries8 and volumetric 
evaluation of lung volume by MRI and 3D ultrasound.
9,10 To date, none of the several above mentioned 
methods has proved a clear superiority in the 
identification of lung hypoplasia in utero: the most 
widely used remains, however, the LHR. 
• Association with other malformations. In addition 
to the cases associated with syndromes, CDH can 
be associated with congenital heart disease, and 
gastrointestinal and central nervous system (CNS) 
anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high 
(5–15%). CDH is mainly associated with trisomies 21 
and 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high 
(25–30%). The syndromes detectable in utero that can 
be associated with CDH are as follows: 
 Fryns syndrome:11 look for . CDH + unilateral cleft 
lip/palate, CNS anomalies. 
 Pallister–Killian syndrome:12 look for . CDH + 
abnormal profile (‘small’ nose and thin upper lip) and 
mesomelic hypoplasia. 
 Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:11 look for . CDH 
+ macroglossia, somatic hemi-hypertrophy, polycystic 
kidneys and exomphalos (Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Should CDH be diagnosed in 
a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory becasue of the relatively 
high risk of aneuploidy. In addition, a thorough 
anatomic scan should be performed by an expert, in 
order to detect major and/or minor signs possibly leading 
to the diagnosis of one of the above-mentioned syndromes. 
As to the timing and mode of delivery, in the 
past, it had been apparently shown that delivery by 
cesarean section was associated with a better outcome. 
However, none of the more recent studies has confirmed 
this apparent advantage of the operative delivery. As a 
result, currently there is no recommendation to deliver 
fetuses with CDH by cesarean section.1 There are also 
some interesting data (which need be confirmed by 
larger trials) regarding the timing of delivery: in a recent 
study, survival was significantly higher for deliveries 
occurring later than 40 weeks of gestation than for those 
occurring at 38–40 weeks.13 
Postnatal therapy. Prior to addressing the postnatal treatment 
issue, it should be underlined that CDH is one of 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 191 
Figure 6.12 Calculation of the lung-to-head ratio (LHR) is performed 
by multiplying the two orthogonal diameters (D1 and D2) of 
the right lung, which is located behind the heart, in a left-sided hernia. 
This value is then divided by the head circumference (CC) (see text). 

the few anomalies for which fetal surgery has been 
attempted. In particular, the US West coast group of 
Harrison was the first to try to devise an intrauterine surgical 
approach to CDH with poor prognostic indicators 
(LHR < 1.0 and/or liver-up). The original technique consisted 
of direct closure of the diaphragmatic defect by 
suture or patch, after hysterotomy and exposure of the 
fetal chest; on completion of the hernia repair, the fetus 
was repositioned in utero, and the amniotic membranes 
and the hysterotomy were sutured. However, this 
approach showed mortality and prematurity rates that 
were not significantly different from those seen with 
conventional postnatal surgery, and the costs were 
extremely high. As a result, this approach was abandoned 
even by those who had first proposed it. More recently, 
another less invasive procedure for the treatment of CDH 
with poor prognostic signs was devised. The original idea 
came from the observation that fetuses with laryngeal 
atresia had significantly enlarged lungs with histologic 
signs of alveolar hyperplasia. The new approach consists 
of the creation of an iatrogenic obstruction of the high 
airways achieved with the insertion of a balloon catheter 
in the fetal trachea; the balloon is left in place for several 
weeks, during which it stimulates alveolar growth, and 
is eventually removed just prior to delivery. The procedure, 
which was originally performed with a surgical 
approach, is currently done under fetoscopic guidance, 
which reduces invasiveness, risks, and costs. The name of 
the procedure, Fetendo, underlines the limited invasiveness 
of the endoscopic approach. The initial results were 
considered promising, with a 60% survival rate, which 
compared favorably with the 0–30% rate expected for 
fetuses with CDH and a LHR< 1.0 or with liver-up.14 
However, a recent randomized clinical trial comparing 
this approach with conventional postnatal surgery did 
not find any statistical difference in survival at 90 days, 
which was the primary endpoint of the study. Interim 
analysis by the US National Institutes of Health (NIH) 
resulted in early termination of trial enrollment, because 
the 90-day survival rate in the control group was better 
than in the tracheal occlusion group (77% vs 73%).15 It 
has also been demonstrated that the abnormal histologic 
features typical of lung hypoplasia (low radial alveolar 
counts and increased alveolar size) were not prevented by 
tracheal occlusion.16 The bottom line is that, so far, no 
type of prenatal approach has yet been proved to be superior 
to the conventional postnatal approach. 
In the conventional perinatal management of neonates 
with CDH, a very important role is played by in utero 
transport to referral centers and by resuscitation and stabilization 
protocols. After delivery, immediate resuscitation 
should proceed with respiratory support, including 
intubation, and circulatory support as needed. In this 
regard, although there is no single study demonstrating 
higher survival for severe cases if ECMO is employed, it 
is advised that ECMO be available in all neonatal intensive 
care units. Briefly, this technique employs a 
heart–lung machine to oxygenate the blood in those 
cases in which the alveolar units are severely damaged or 
hypoplastic. However, regardless of the technique used, 
currently the most crucial issue in the early neonatal 
management seems to be gentle ventilation, i.e, ventilation 
allowing mild hypercapnea; this has proven more 
advantageous than the aggressive ventilation used until 
1995.1 Once the neonate has been stabilized, surgery is 
performed. The timing of the surgical intervention 
depends on the severity of the desaturation (O2) and on 
the presence of pulmonary hypertension. The surgical 
approach usually involves the use of a synthetic patch 
when the diaphragmatic defect is too large to be closed 
by primary tissue approximation. Occasionally, rotational 
muscle flaps can be used to repair the defect. 
Unfortunately, since prosthetic patches do not grow 
with the neonate, re-herniation will occur in a significant 
number of survivors. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If CHD is associated 
with aneuploidy or non-chromosomal syndromes, 
survival is very poor, because of the high lethality of the 
above-described syndromic conditions. In the case of isolated 
non-syndromic CDH, the major determinant of 
death is the degree of pulmonary hypoplasia and the 
occurrence of severe pulmonary hypertension, considering 
that moderate pulmonary hypertension is ubiquitous 
in neonates with CDH. For left-sided CDH, survival 
rates range between 30% and 80%, with a median of 
50–60%. Quality of life is generally good, especially 
when primary closure of the defect has been achieved. 
However, long-term sequelae have been reported in a 
significant number of cases. First of all, some authors 
have reported signs of cortical and basal ganglia damage 
on MRI scans in neonates with repaired CDH discharged 
from hospital in apparently good condition.17 
Even though it is still unclear whether these worrying 
signs of cerebral damage on MRI are indeed responsible 
for functional neurologic deficits, this finding should 
warrant further investigation and long-term followup: 
if the occurrence of long-term damage should be 
confirmed in other series, this possibility should be 
mentioned during prenatal counseling. Other fairly frequent 
but less important long-term sequelae include 
growth retardation (18%), gastro-esophageal reflux 
(27%), chronic lung disease (22%), and, rarely, oxygen 
requirement (2%).18 
192 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

Definition. CAML is a developmental anomaly of the 
lung characterized by a mass of disordered pulmonary 
parenchyma with proliferation of terminal respiratory 
bronchioles and a lack of normal alveoli, thought to represent 
a hamartomatous lesion. It is unilateral in 97% of 
cases. Histologically, the original Stocker classification19 
recognizes three subtypes differentiated according to the 
dimensions of the cysts: type I, with large cysts (2–10 
cm); type II, with small cysts (0.5–2 cm); and type III, 
solid or microcystic (< 0.5 cm). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of CAML is 
unknown. As already mentioned, this lesion represents a 
developmental anomaly. Histologically, it involves one 
lobe only, although on ultrasound it appears to extend 
to the whole lung, due to its usually large dimensions. It 
is interesting to note that, on histology slides following 
surgical removal of the mass, CAML is found to be associated 
with pulmonary sequestration or segmentary 
bronchial atresia in a not insignificant percentage of 
cases. On the basis of these findings, it has been hypothesized 
that a common pathogenetic mechanism may be 
responsible for the three different anomalies. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is performed on the classic 
4-chamber view. Since the histologic Stocker classification 
cannot be applied to the ultrasound appearance, a simpler 
ultrasound-based classification was developed by Wilson 
et al,20 which recognizes a cystic and a solid variant. The 
ultrasound appearance is completely different for the two 
types of lesion: the cystic variant appears as a multilocular 
lesion with cysts of various size from a few millimeters to 
more than 10 mm, which show bright contours due to the 
posterior wall ultrasound enhancement (Figures 6.13 and 
6.14). On the contrary, the solid, microcystic variant 
appears as a well-defined homogeneously hyperechogenic 
mass (Figure 6.15). Both types are unilateral by definition 
(only 3% of CAML cases involve both lungs), and usually 
of large volume, which causes a contralateral shift of the 
mediastinum and the heart. In the case of right-sided 
CAML, there is an abnormally increased cardiac axis, due 
to the extreme levorotation (Figure 6.13a). 3D ultrasound 
may be used to better evaluate the volume of the mass 
and, possibly, to assess the net volume of the cystic component, 
as shown in Figure 6.16. 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). The differential 
diagnosis should consider, for the cystic variant, 
CDH, as already mentioned: the intrathoracic stomach 
may, to some extent, resemble a single cyst in an 
CAML. With regard to the solid variant, the most difficult 
diagnosis to differentiate CAML from is pulmonary 
sequestration. The only ultrasound feature 
that may allow discrimination between the two 
lesions, which share a highly hyperechoic and homogeneous 
appearance and mainly unilateral involvement, 
is the feeding artery, which is ubiquitous 
in pulmonary sequestration. This is detectable in 
most cases of pulmonary sequestration using power 
Doppler or color Doppler with a low pulse repetition 
frequency in order to visualize low-velocity vessels: 
the artery feeding the sequestration is commonly seen 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 193 
Incidence. Relatively rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Unilateral uni/multilocular cystic lung mass; unilateral, homogeneously hyperechoic lung 
mass. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely low. 
Outcome. Good/very good, with spontaneous complete regression or surgical removal after birth. 
CYSTIC ADENOMATOID MALFORMATION OF THE LUNG (CAML) 
Figure 6.13 Cystic adenomatoid malformation 
of the lung (CAML), macrocystic 
type (22 weeks of gestation). The macrocystic 
type is characterized by several communicating 
cysts of various sizes. In this case, the 
lesion was so large as to: (a) compress the 
heart (H) against the left thoracic wall and 
(b) distend the diaphragm (arrows). 
a b 

branching off the descending aorta. Theoretically, 
also, a right-sided hernia with liver-up should be differentiated 
from the solid, microcystic variant of 
CAML; however, in this case, the weak echogenicity 
of the liver is significantly different from the bright 
appearance of the CAML. 
• Prognostic indicators. CAML is not usually associated 
with syndromes, and therefore the risk of more 
severe underlying conditions of prognostic significance 
is not an issue. The only significant prognostic 
factor, which allows identification of cases at high 
risk of perinatal demise, is the occurrence of hydrops 
(ascites and/or hydrothorax) at the time of diagnosis 
or during follow-up. It has been hypothesized that the 
development of hydrops is a consequence of central 
venous compression, but direct caval obstruction is 
not found in all cases with hydrops. Fortunately, this 
poor prognostic sign is found in less than 10% of the 
cases at diagnosis,21 although it can develop in 
another 30% of cases during follow-up.22 If hydrops 
is present, the chances of survival are very low, with 
perinatal demise being by far the most frequent 
outcome.23 Recently, another promising prognostic 
index, derived from 3D assessment of CAML. has 
been investigated: the CAM volume ratio (CVR).22 
This parameter is calculated by dividing the volume 
of the CAML lesion by the circumference of the head, 
similarly to LHR in CDH. In a prospective study,22 
the incidence of hydrops was 75% for CVR > 1.6 and 
17% CVR < 1.7; the latter value dropped to 2.3% if 
cases with a dominant cyst were excluded. Hence, it 
seems that for the cystic subtype of CAML, regardless 
of the volume of the mass, hydrops is more likely to 
occur if there is a dominant cyst.22 
194 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.14 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
macrocystic type (22 weeks of gestation). In this case, the lesion corresponds 
to type II of the Stocker classification (in between the macrocystic 
and solid, microcystic types). It is homogeneously hyperechoic, 
but shows very small rare cysts, and involves only one lung field, determining 
only a minor mediastinal shift. H, heart. 
Figure 6.15 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
microcystic type (26 weeks of gestation). If the cysts are barely or not visible, 
the CAML, which has a homogeneously hyperechoic aspect, should 
be differentiated from pulmonary sequestration, which has similar sonographic 
features (see Figure 6.17). LT, left side; H, heart. 
Figure 6.16 Cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung (CAML), 
macrocystic type (22 weeks of gestation). Three-dimensional ultrasound, 
with the VOCAL technique, has been used to calculate the volume of the 
CAML, which seems to be related to the risk of developing hydrops. A 
different approach may be to assess the volume of the cysts displayed 
with the inversion mode. This is the same case as in Figure 6.13. 

• Association with other malformations. There is a 
strict histologic and pathogenetic relationship with 
pulmonary sequestration, with the two lesions often 
being found at histology in the same gross pulmonary 
lesion. CAML may also be associated with other 
pulmonary or thoracic anomalies, such as CDH, duplication 
cysts, tracheo-esophageal fistulas, and 
pulmonary artery branching abnormalities. 
• Natural history. It is important to underscore that 
CAML represents an evolving lesion with peculiar features. 
First of all, the growth of the mass shows a predictable 
course, with rapid growth occurring between 
20 and 26 weeks of gestation. After that period, the 
volume of the mass plateaus and, in a significant percentage 
of cases, tends to regress or sonographically 
disappear during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
Therefore, since the volume of the mass is not 
expected to grow further after 26 weeks, if there is no 
hydrops by that gestational age, then it is highly 
unlikely that this will develop afterwards. In addition, 
it has to be underlined that, in a significant proportion 
of apparently disappeared lesions, the mass is still present 
and can be detected by MRI: it has only become 
invisible on ultrasound since it has become isoechogenic 
with adjacent normal lung parenchyma.22 
Overall, 10–20% of cases really do regress almost 
completely during the 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely 
low (anecdotal reports only). In all reports in which 
a slight increase in the risk of chromosomal anomalies 
was detected, extrapulmonary malformations were 
constantly associated. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Should an CAML be detected in a 
fetus, it is of the utmost importance to search also for very 
early signs of hydrops. As far as karyotyping is concerned, 
considering what has already been expressed, we deem 
this necessary only if other extrapulmonary anomalies are 
found. An important issue, in our opinion, is to correctly 
emphasize the relatively high rate of spontaneous regression 
and the consequently very good outcome that these 
lesions show, during prenatal counseling sessions.21 The 
above-mentioned prognostic tools (i.e., CVR and presence 
of hydrops) should be carefully evaluated at diagnosis and 
follow-up ultrasound examinations, since they may allow 
one to identify fetuses at high risk of perinatal mortality 
who can benefit from intrauterine treatment. This may 
consist of simple cyst aspiration or placement of a 
thoraco-amniotic shunt, and relies on the fact that all of 
the cysts communicate with one another. In very carefully 
selected cases, and in a few institutions only, open fetal 
surgery for CAML is considered as a final option for 
CAML with hydrops. Simple cyst aspiration and/or the 
placement of thoraco-amniotic shunts have been demonstrated 
to significantly improve the outcome of fetuses 
with CAML complicated by hydrops. 
Postnatal therapy. The first step is to confirm the volume 
of the lesion by MRI. Although there is no general agreement 
among pediatric surgeons about the need to resect 
the affected lobe, most of them believe that the CAML 
should be removed, even if asymptomatic, by 12 months 
of age. The need to resect the non-functioning lobe is 
based on the high incidence of infection and on the very 
low risk of neoplastic transformation, although, as for 
other types of lesions, if a genetic predisposition to 
neoplastic transformation is thought to be present in the 
alveolar epithelium, the resection of the CAML only 
would not prevent the neoplasia from originating in the 
adjacent lung parenchyma. The standard surgical procedure 
consists of thoracotomy and lobectomy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If hydrops is 
absent, survival is generally unaffected, with no functional 
limitations, regardless of the possible need for 
lobectomy. On the contrary, neonatal death is almost 
certain if hydrops is present and no intrauterine procedure 
has succeeded in reversing it. Overall survival rates 
for prenatally diagnosed CAML are greater than 80% in 
most series. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 195 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Homogeneously hyperechoic unilateral (left-sided in 90% of cases) lesion, sometimes 
extending below the diaphragm; presence of feeding artery on power/color Doppler. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very low. 
Outcome. Good/very good in most instances, with spontaneous regression, selective embolization of the feeding 
artery, or surgical resection. 
PULMONARY SEQUESTRATION (PS) 

Definition. PS consists of an island of lung parenchyma 
that does not communicate with the bronchial tree and is 
fed by the systemic rather than the pulmonary circulation. 
There are two types of PS: intralobar and extralobar. 
Prenatal diagnosis concerns the extralobar type only, 
since intralobar sequestration is not visible on ultrasound, 
despite accounting for three-quarters of the PS 
cases detected after birth. The extralobar variant is further 
subdivided into a supradiaphragmatic and a subdiaphragmatic 
subtype, the former accounting for 90% 
of extralobar PSs and the latter for the remaining 10%. 
The lesion is characteristically unilateral, and involves the 
left lower lobe in 90% of cases. In general, PS shows a 
roughly triangular shape, with the apex pointing towards 
the mediastinum. Typically, extralobar sequestrations 
present a feeding artery branching off the descending 
thoracic or abdominal aorta. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of PS is 
unknown, although it has been suggested that it might 
share the same pathogenesis with CAML, due to the fact 
that the two lesions are frequently associated. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is carried out on the 4- 
chamber view, considering also that the lesion often 
involves the left lower lobe, which is at the same level as 
the heart. PS appears as a well-defined, homogeneously 
hyperechoic, roughly triangular mass, often involving the 
lower part of the left lung (Figure 6.17a,b). Only small PSs 
and the subdiaphragmatic variant may not be readily recognizable 
on the 4-chamber view, and require a lower 
axial view, at the level of the diaphragm (Figure 6.17c,d). 
To complete the ultrasound assessment, it is necessary to 
switch to sagittal views, since only these allow: (i) assessment 
of the caudal extension of the mass (Figure 6.17b); 
(ii) detection and characterization of subdiaphragmatic 
extralobar sequestrations (Figure 6.17d); and (iii) recognition, 
on power or color Doppler, of the feeding artery 
branching off the descending aorta (Figure 6.18). Finally, 
the possible association of ipsilateral hydrothorax (Figure 
6.19), frank hydrops, or other thoracic malformations 
(e.g., a CDH) should be excluded (Figure 6.20). 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). As already mentioned, 
the only difficult differential diagnosis is with 
the solid, microcystic variant of CAML, due to the 
very similar echogenicity of the mass. However, a 
more triangular shape, a location in the left lower 
lung area, and, above all, the recognition of the feeding 
vessel (Figure 6.18) all stand in favor of a PS. With 
the rare subdiaphragmatic subtype of PS, the differential 
diagnosis should include rare tumors (e.g., 
hemangiomas and neuroblastomas). It should be 
noted that in the very rare instance in which a feeding 
vessel is identified entering the solid component of a 
prevalently cystic CAML, the lesion is probably a rare 
case of mixed CAML + PS lesion. 
• Prognostic indicators. As for CAML, the occurrence 
of hydrops is the most ominous prognostic indicator. 
However, there have been cases (although rare) in 
which with the spontaneous regression of the PS, the 
196 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.17 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. This anomaly has 
a hyperechoic aspect and, often, a triangular shape. It can be located 
in the thorax or below the diaphragm. (a, b) Supradiaphragmatic 
pulmonary sequestration: (a) the axial view of the thorax demonstrates 
the homogeneously hyperechoic lesion of the left lung (S); (b) on the 
left parasagittal thoracic view, it is possible to assess its extent and the 
relationship with the abdominal organs. (c, d) Subdiaphragmatic pulmonary 
sequestration: (c) on the axial view of the abdomen, just below 
the diaphragm, it is possible to locate the small hyperechoic lesion 
(arrows), on the right side of the midline; (d) the right parasagittal thoracic 
view confirms the abdominal location of the sequestration 
(arrows). H, heart; li, liver; lt, left side; st, stomach; ra, right atrium. 
Figure 6.18 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. The vascular pedicle 
can be recognized in all cases. Color or power Doppler with a low 
pulse repetition frequency are used to locate the feeding artery, which, 
in most instances, branches off the thoracic or abdominal aorta. (a) 
Axial abdominal view: the feeding artery (arrowheads) is seen branching 
off the abdominal aorta. (b) On the longitudinal view, the inferior 
and superior venae cavae (IVC and SVC) are seen draining into the 
right atrium (RA); the descending aorta is partially hidden by the 
sequestration, and the feeding vessel (arrowhead) is clearly visible. Ao, 
aorta; Li, liver; SHV, suprahepatic veins. 
a b 
c d 
a b 

hydrops has also disappeared, with a good perinatal 
outcome. 
• Association with other malformations. The close histologic 
and pathogenetic relationship with CAML has 
already been underlined. PS, like CAML, may also be 
associated with other pulmonary or thoracic anomalies, 
such as CDH (Figure 6.20), duplication cysts, 
tracheo-esophageal fistulas, and pulmonary artery 
branching abnormalities. 
• Natural history. The tendency to regress and even disappear 
during the 3rd trimester has also been reported 
for PS, which further supports the close pathogenetic 
links with CAML. In some series, this tendency 
has been shown to be even more pronounced 
than that reported for CAML, occurring in 30% of 
cases.24,25 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low. 
Obstetric management. Since the risk of chromosomal 
anomalies is low, karyotyping is not mandatory in the 
case of isolated PS. What should be monitored is the possible 
presence/onset of hydrothorax or hydrops. In most 
cases, the hydrops is a consequence of the hypertensive 
hydrothorax that can occasionally complicate PS. 
In fact, the hydrops often disappears after placement 
of a thoraco-amniotic shunt, which reduces the high 
intrathoracic pressure. The possibility of spontaneous 
regression and a good outcome also in cases complicated 
by hydrops should be communicated to the parents 
during prenatal counseling.25 
Postnatal therapy. This consists of surgical or endoscopic 
removal of mass or, alternatively, of selective embolization 
of the feeding artery under catheterization.26 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The survival rate 
of prenatally detected cases is very high.25 As already 
underlined, the possibility of active prenatal management 
(by drainage and thoraco-amniotic shunt placement) 
of cases associated with hydrops contributes 
significantly to the extremely good survival rates. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 197 
Figure 6.20 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar, associated with 
CDH. In rare cases, pulmonary sequestration may be associated with 
other pulmonary lesions. In this case (at 28 weeks of gestation), the 
sequestration (arrows) is associated with a left-sided diaphragmatic 
hernia. H, heart; li, liver; Rt, right side; St, stomach. 
Figure 6.19 Pulmonary sequestration, extralobar. In some cases, pulmonary sequestration is associated with hydrops. In these cases, a single tap 
or the placement of a thoraco-amniotic shunt may resolve the hydrops due to venous compression. (a) The supradiaphragmatic pulmonary sequestration 
(S) is associated with a severe hypertensive hydrothorax, severely compressing the left lung (arrows). (b) This image shows the tip of a 
needle (arrowhead) inserted to drain the pleural effusion. (c) After drainage of the fluid collection, the left lung re-expands (arrows). The different 
echogenicities of the sequestration (S) and the lung are also evident. Note also the heart displaced in the right hemithorax. 
a b c 

Definition. Laryngeal atresia is an exceedingly rare 
anomaly consisting of three different lesions: agenesis of 
the glottis, agenesis of the larynx, or agenesis of both. As 
a result of each of the three anomalies, the high airways 
are completely obstructed, and this leads to the inclusion 
of laryngeal atresia among the lesions causing CHAOS 
(congenital high airway obstruction syndrome). The 
other oropharyngeal and neck anomalies responsible for 
the CHAOS sequence are illustrated in Chapter 3. Here, 
we describe the laryngeal and tracheal atresias, since 
these two entities are not distinguishable on ultrasound 
and are detected on the basis of the unmistakable 
intrathoracic signs. Furthermore, both bear the same 
ominous prognosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The more accepted pathogenetic 
theory for this kind of lesion implicates the 
impaired blood supply during the embryogenetic period, 
which may have prevented the normal development of 
the trachea/larynx. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As already pointed out, differentiation 
between laryngeal and tracheal atresia is not feasible 
on ultrasound. The diagnosis is made on the 4-chamber 
view of the fetal heart. Typically, both lungs appear 
severely enlarged and highly hyperechoic (Figure 6.21). 
Owing to the exceedingly high intrathoracic pressure, the 
heart is squeezed in between the lungs, appears smaller 
than it really is due to the degree of pulmonary enlargement, 
and shows a reduced (sometimes to zero) cardiac 
axis (Figure 6.21). Relatively often, some fluid is trapped 
in the bronchial tree and is responsible for the bronchogram 
(dilatation of the trachea and bronchi by the 
entrapped fluid) that can sometimes be present: in this 
case, the swollen trachea appears as a small round 
sonolucent area behind the heart (Figure 6.21c). The 
bronchogram, if present, is better displayed with a coronal 
approach: on this view, the dilated trachea is seen 
bifurcating at the level of the carina in the two bronchi. 
On the coronal view of the fetal thorax and abdomen, at 
low magnification, the severe bell-shaped distortion of the 
thorax, the flattening or inversion of the diaphragmatic 
convexity, and the ubiquitous ascites can be appreciated 
(Figure 6.21b). 
• Differential diagnosis (Figure 6.5). There is virtually 
no differential diagnosis to be made, since laryngeal 
atresia represents an absolutely unique lesion on 
ultrasound. Seen once, it will never be forgotten! The 
extremely rare cases (< 3%) of bilateral, solid, microcystic 
ACML would not show the severely increased 
lung volume typical of laryngeal atresia. 
• Prognostic indicators. The lethality of this condition 
makes the identification of poor prognostic signs 
irrelevant. If anything, the detection of severe 
oligoamnios due to concurrent renal agenesis together 
with other major anomalies characterizing Fraser syndrome 
makes the prognosis even worse than it 
already is, considering that the latter is transmitted as 
an autosomal recessive trait. 
• Association with other malformations. Developmental 
anomalies involving the bronchial tree and the esophagus 
may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. A 
significant proportion of cases of laryngeal atresia are 
associated with Fraser syndrome: 
• Fraser syndrome:27 look for . laryngeal atresia +cleft 
lip/palate, congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, 
external ear anomalies, and bilateral renal agenesis 
(Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Possible additional anomalies 
indicating the likely presence of Fraser syndrome should 
be looked for. In fact, isolated laryngeal atresia is a sporadic 
malformation, whereas Fraser syndrome shows 
autosomal recessive inheritance. Karyotyping is not indicated, 
because of the low risk of aneuploidy and the very 
high mortality rate. 
Postnatal therapy. The only available option to try 
salvaging the fetus with laryngeal atresia is the EXIT 
198 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severely enlarged and hyperechoic lungs. Broncogram (abnormal dilatation of the bronchial 
tree). Ascites constantly associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Extremely high: Fraser syndrome. 
Outcome. Extremely unfavorable. The very few survivors have been managed with the EXIT procedure. 
LARYNGEAL ATRESIA – CHAOS 

procedure (ex utero intrapartum treatment: Chapter 3). 
As of 2006, even with this technique, there are fewer 
than five surviving cases of laryngeal atresia reported in 
the literature. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Except for 
the above-mentioned cases, early neonatal death is 
constant, for cases not undergoing termination of 
pregnancy. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 199 
Incidence. Common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Anechoic moon-shaped area, unilateral or bilateral, with the lung in the middle. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Depends on etiology. Good in isolated chylothorax. 
HYDROTHORAX 
Figure 6.21 Laryngeal atresia (22 weeks of gestation). (a) On the axial 4-chamber view, the highly hyperechoic lungs appear severely enlarged. The 
(normal) heart is squeezed into the mediastinum. (b) The coronal view of the fetal trunk demonstrates eversion of the diaphragm (arrows), due to the 
massive enlargement of the lungs, and ascites, which is almost ubiquitous in laryngeal atresia. (c) Another case, associated with Fraser syndrome, in 
which the 4-chamber view demonstrates tracheal dilatation often found in these cases. A, ascites; li, liver; LL, left lung; H, heart; RL, right lung; Tr, 
trachea. 
Definition. This is a fluid pleural effusion. It can be 
unilateral or bilateral, isolated, or in the context of 
generalized hydrops. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is extremely variable, 
including at one end of the spectrum thoracic 
causes, such as in chylothorax, and, at the other, classic 
non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF) (Chapter 4). Thus, 
hydrothorax shares its pathogenesis with that of NIHF, 
if the pleural effusion represents one of the signs of 
hydrops. On the contrary, if the pleural effusion is 
isolated and no other chromosomal or non-chromosomal 
anomalies are associated, it may be due to a malformation 
(atresia or fistula) of the thoracic duct (chylothorax). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydrothorax can be diagnosed on 
the 4-chamber view, as a unilateral or bilateral anechoic 
area. It usually has a roughly moon-shaped appearance, 
due to the fact that it surrounds the lung, except for the 
hilum (Figure 6.22). The hydrothorax is defined as 
hypertensive if the intrathoracic pressure is high and all 
viscera are pushed into the contralateral hemithorax 
(Figure 6.23a). A significant proportion of isolated, 
hypertensive, unilateral hydrothoraces are actually chylothoraces.
28 If the pleural effusion is part of general 
NIHF, the severe edema of the subcutaneus thoracic tissue 
can be seen on the 4-chamber view (Figures 6.22 and 
6.23b). 
• Prognostic indicators. The most important prognostic 
factor in fetuses with hydrothorax is the association 
with NIHF, since in these cases the outcome is generally 
very poor, with a few exceptions described in 
Chapter 4. Another poor prognostic indicator is the 
association with anomalies at high risk of chromosomal 
anomalies, such as congenital heart disease or 
CNS malformations. The absence of any associated 
malformation and/or of any other fluid effusion possibly 
indicative of concurrent hydrops is the only good 
prognostic factor; in fact, in isolated hydrothorax, the 
a b c 

placement of a thoraco-amniotic shunt has been 
demonstrated to improve the outcome of hypertensive 
cases. 
• Association with other malformations. Congenital 
heart disease and ipsilateral pulmonary malformations 
may be associated. 
• Natural history. Chylothorax can regress in 10–25% 
of cases, spontaneously or after a single drainage.29 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. The risk 
applies also to isolated transient hydrothorax, be it of 
early or late 3rd trimester onset, and concerns mainly trisomy 
21 and Turner syndrome (monosomy X). Isolated 
chylothorax has also been shown to bear a not insignificant 
risk of aneuploidy (1–6%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, especially 
if NIHF is associated. There are several syndromes 
that may feature hydrothorax. These may be associated 
with other sonographically detectable anomalies, or, in a 
few instances, the hydrothorax may represent the only 
prenatally recognizable sign. 
Obstetric management. Should a pleural effusion be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory, due to 
the high risk of associated chromosomal anomalies. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be performed 
by an expert, in order to detect major and/or 
minor signs possibly indicative of a syndromic context. If 
the hydrothorax is isolated, and karyotyping has ruled 
out any underlying chromosomal aberration, its evolution 
should be carefully monitored: the detection of signs 
possibly indicating elevated intrathoracic pressure, such 
as flattening of the ipsilateral lung and/or evident mediastinal 
and heart displacement into the contralateral 
hemithorax (Figure 6.23a), may represent an indication 
for a single drainage and/or the placement of a thoracoamniotic 
shunt. In fact, these procedures have been 
demonstrated to be able to prevent or reverse the occurrence 
of hydrops if this is due to the hydrothorax. In particular, 
it has been shown that if the hydrops is a direct 
consequence of the hypertensive hydrothorax, the placement 
of a thoraco-amniotic shunt increases the overall 
survival rate from 10% to 60%.28,29 
Postnatal management. This depends on the cause of the 
hydrothorax. Virtually no treatment is possible for 
NIHF, if idiopathic. On the contrary, in many cases of 
congenital chylothorax, resolution of the effusion occurs 
spontaneously with time, probably because collateral 
lymphatic channels develop. In cases with respiratory 
distress, placement of chest tube drainage and mechanical 
ventilation may be needed. If drainage remains persistent 
and copious, surgery, consisting of ligation of the 
thoracic duct, may be necessary. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overall 
prognosis is guarded and survival exceptional in cases 
associated with NIHF. The only case in which hydrothorax 
may have a good outcome, as already underlined, is 
chylothorax. 
200 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.22 Hydrothorax, bilateral. Hydrothorax appears as a 
moon-shaped anechoic image encircling the ipsilateral lung. In this 
case, the pleural effusion was associated with general hydrops: note the 
severe edema of the subcutaneous tissues (arrowheads). LL, left lung; 
RL, right lung. 
Figure 6.23 Hydrothorax, unilateral, hypertensive. (a) The increased 
intrathoracic pressure is demonstrated by the fact that both the mediastinum 
and the lung ipsilateral to the effusion (arrowheads) are pushed 
into the right hemidiaphragm. (b) As a comparison, note the normal 
expansion of the lung (arrowheads) in a case of unilateral non-hypertensive 
hydrothorax associated with hydrops (subcutaneous edema). 
RV, right ventricle. 
a b 

Definition. Cardiomegaly consists of an increased cardiac 
volume (circumference or area). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In general, cardiomegaly is a 
sign of cardiac overload, which may or may not evolve 
into frank hydrops from heart failure. The cause of the 
cardiomegaly can be cardiac or extracardiac. All conditions 
associated with arterovenous fistulas, such as 
sacrococcygeal teratoma, aneurysm of the vein of Galen, 
placental chorioangioma, and twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome (TTTS) (Figure 6.24), can result in cardiomegaly 
as a sign of cardiac overload. The same is true 
for conditions leading to severe fetal anemia, such as 
parvovirus B19 infection. In such cases, the pathogenesis 
of the cardiomegaly is insufficient emptying of cardiac 
chambers due to the venous engorgement (preload 
increase) associated with elevated intraventricular pressure: 
this leads to systolic dysfunction and ultimately to 
cardiac failure. Alternatively, cardiomegaly can result 
from primary heart diseases: cardiomyopathies inducing 
myocardial dysfunction (pump failure) and/or congenital 
heart diseases associated with severe atrioventricular 
valve insufficiency may be responsible for the development 
of cardiomegaly (see Chapter 5). Premature 
constriction/closure of the ductus arteriosus, both spontaneous 
and induced by cyclooxygenase inhibitors such 
as indomethacin and nimesulide,30 is another rare but 
serious cause of cardiomegaly and heart failure. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is made on the 4-chamber 
view. Except for very severe cases of cardiomegaly, such as 
those characterizing the worst cases of Ebstein’s anomaly 
(Chapter 5), it is necessary to quantify the degree of cardiac 
enlargement by measuring the cardiothoracic ratio: this 
is the ratio between the cardiac circumference (or area) 
and the thoracic circumference (or area) (Figure 6.25). 
The cardiothoracic ratio in these cases is increased 
because the numerator (cardiac circumference or area) is 
increased31 (Figure 6.25a). On the contrary, in thoracic 
and/or pulmonary hypoplasia, the cardiothoracic ratio is 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 201 
Figure 6.24 Abnormalities causing cardiomegaly due to high-output 
cardiac failure. (a) Aneurysm of the vein of Galen, demonstrated on 
power Doppler (G). (b) Sacrococcygeal teratoma: note the enlargement 
of the inferior vena cava (IVC), which drains the large tumor. 
(c) Placental chorioangioma (arrows). (d) Twin-to-twin-transfusion 
syndrome. Note the discrepant biometry between the donor (D) and 
recipient (R) twins. The latter had already developed ascites as a sign of 
high-output cardiac failure. 
Figure 6.25 Abnormal cardiothoracic ratio. The cardiothoracic ratio 
can be abnormal due to cardiomegaly or thoracic hypoplasia. (a) In 
this case, the cardiac enlargement was due to premature constriction 
of the ductus arteriosus, at 36 weeks of gestation. (b) Lethal skeletal 
dysplasias and the fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) can 
be associated with severe thoracic hypoplasia. This case was in the 
context of FADS. 
Incidence. Relatively common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Increased heart circumference or area (> 95th centile), with thoracic circumference or area 
within the normal range. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on etiology, but generally guarded. 
INCREASED CARDIOTHORACIC RATIO: CARDIOMEGALY 
a b 
c d 
a b 

similarly elevated, but due to a decrease in the denominator 
(Figure 6.25b). Therefore, to assess whether it is the 
heart that is enlarged or the thorax that is hypoplastic, the 
thoracic circumference or area should be plotted against 
the nomograms for gestational age (see the Appendix). 
• Prognostic indicators. These are related to the cause of 
the cardiomegaly and the presence or absence of concurrent 
hydrops. Clearly, if the cardiomegaly is due to 
treatable conditions, such as supraventricular tachycardia 
or parvovirus B19 infection, the prognosis is 
better, even in hydropic cases; in fact, with transplacental 
anti-arrhythmic therapy and intrauterine blood 
transfusions, respectively, the hydrops from cardiac 
failure can disappear completely. If, on the contrary, 
hydrops is associated with other non-treatable conditions, 
then the prognosis is generally very poor. 
• Association with other malformations. These include 
congenital heart disease, TTTS, conditions associated 
with arterovenous fistulas. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. It depends 
on the cause of the cardiomegaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
It depends on the cause of the cardiomegaly. 
Obstetric management. Should cardiomegaly be detected, 
fetal echocardiography should be carried out to confirm 
or rule out the existence of congenital heart disease or cardiomyopathy 
as the primary cause of the cardiomegaly. 
In addition, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to detect possible lesions 
associated with arterovenous fistulas. If potentially treatable 
conditions are found, then the intrauterine treatment 
of choice should be performed. This includes antiarrhythmic 
therapy for tachyarrhythmias and intrauterine 
blood transfusions for parvovirus B19 infections. 
With regard to the former, the first-line drug is digoxin, 
which can be administered by a transplacental route 
(oral maternal therapy) or, in highly hydropic fetuses, by 
direct intravenous fetal therapy (umbilical vein). The 
intrauterine therapy of conditions associated with 
arterovenous fistulas is another important issue. Laser 
coagulation of arterovenous anastomoses between the 
two placental sides of a monochorionic twin pregnancy 
complicated by TTTS is well established, and has reduced 
the risk of cerebral damage in surviving TTTS fetuses.32 In 
sacrococcygeal teratomas, there have been some attempts 
at reducing the hemodynamic impact of the mass by fetal 
debulking, drainage of the cystic component and/or direct 
ethanol treatment of the main feeding vessels of the 
tumor; the results are controversial.33 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis 
depends on the cause of the cardiomegaly. As already 
mentioned, good survival can be achieved in cases 
benefiting from intrauterine therapy (anti-arrhythmic 
transplacental or direct therapy for tachyarrhythmias; 
intrauterine blood transfusions for parvovirus B19 infections; 
and placental laser treatment of arterovenous 
fistulas in TTTS). 
202 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Very rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Normal heart circumference or area with thoracic circumference/area below the 5th centile. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very high (mainly, skeletal dysplasia). 
Outcome. Invariably fatal for severe cases. 
INCREASED CARDIOTHORACIC RATIO: THORACIC HYPOPLASIA 
Definition. This is a reduced volume of the ribcage (ribs 
and sternum), due to primary bone diseases (skeletal 
dysplasias) or secondary to severe bilateral pulmonary 
hypoplasia. The minor forms of thoracic hypoplasia 
that are compatible with survival are rarely detected by 
ultrasound in the fetus. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In most instances, severe 
thoracic hypoplasia is an integral feature of a number of 
lethal skeletal dysplasias. Secondary thoracic hypoplasia 
may also be due to severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia. 
The latter occurs very rarely as a primary disease, while 
it is much more often the consequence of a long-lasting 
oligohydramnios from very premature rupture of membranes. 
The pathogenesis of thoracic hypoplasia, when 
this represents a sign of syndromes and/or skeletal 
dysplasias, involves underdevelopment of the ribs and 
the sternum. In those cases in which a neuromuscular 
disease is present, as in the fetal akinesia deformation 
sequence (FADS), the thoracic hypoplasia is the effect of 
the fixed contractures of the diaphragm and the intercostal 
muscles (Chapter 10). In all of these conditions, 

lethal pulmonary hypoplasia is invariably associated 
with thoracic hypoplasia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is made 
on the 4-chamber view. Similarly to what is seen in cardiomegaly, 
the heart will appear to fill the whole thorax, 
but the sonographer should be able to appreciate that in 
this case it is the thorax that is smaller while the heart is 
not affected (Figure 6.25b). As already mentioned, there 
are nomograms in the literature both for the cardiothoracic 
ratio31 and for the thoracic circumference versus gestational 
age (see the Appendix). On the low-magnification 
midsagittal view of the fetal trunk, a dip can be seen on the 
anterior contour of the fetal trunk at the passage between 
thorax and abdomen; this is due to the exceedingly different 
circumferences of a hypoplastic thorax and the normal 
abdomen (Chapter 9, Figure 9.7c). The same sign, but due 
to gross hepatomegaly, can sometimes be seen in severe 
intrauterine cytomegalovirus infection (Chapter 7). 
• Prognostic indicators. When severe, thoracic hypoplasia 
is invariably lethal, since it is associated with 
severe bilateral pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high, especially 
if the frequently associated skeletal dysplasias are 
considered as syndromes. The syndromes detectable 
in utero that can be associated with severe thoracic 
hypoplasia are as follows: 
• Achondrogenesis: look for . thoracic hypoplasia + 
micromelia, micrognathia, and hypomineralization 
(Chapter 9). 
• FADS (fetal akinesia deformation sequence – including 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome): look for . thoracic 
hypoplasia + diffuse joint contractures, micrognathia, 
clubfeet, ulnar deviations of the hands, and extremely 
reduced fetal movements (Chapter 10). 
• Hypophosphatasia: look for . thoracic hypoplasia + 
micromelia and hypomineralization (clavicles excluded) 
(Chapter 9). 
• Short-rib-polydactyly syndrome(s): look for . 
thoracic hypoplasia + micromelia, polydactyly, and 
congenital heart disease (Chapter 9). 
• Thanatophoric dysplasia: look for . thoracic hypoplasia 
+ micromelia and cloverleaf skull (Chapter 9). 
• Thoracic asphyxiating dysplasia (Jeune syndrome): 
look for . thoracic hypoplasia + rhizomelia 
(moderate), polydactyly, and renal anomalies 
(Chapter 9). 
Obstetric management. Should severe thoracic hypoplasia 
be detected, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performed by an expert, in order to assess the other 
abnormal features that in most instances allow one to 
reach a final diagnosis of skeletal dysplasia or neuromuscular 
syndrome. The importance of a correct diagnosis is 
not in the context of the current pregnancy, since this is 
unfortunately destined to end in termination or perinatal 
demise, but with regard to future pregnancies: some of 
the lethal conditions featuring thoracic hypoplasia may 
not occur sporadically but exhibit autosomal recessive 
inheritance. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis is 
very poor in all cases associated with severe thoracic 
(and pulmonary) hypoplasia (see Chapter 9). 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 203 
Incidence. Relatively uncommon. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. 3-vessel view. Non-visualization of the thymus in the upper mediastinum, or thymus 
diameters < 5th centile. To be sought only in fetuses with congenial heart disease possibly at risk of microdeletion 
22q11 (mainly conotruncal anomalies). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very high (microdeletion 22q11). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on the severity of the associated cardiac defect and on the expression of the 22q11 
microdeletion, which is variable. 
THYMUS HYPOPLASIA/APLASIA 
Definition. This is complete absence or hypoplasia of 
the thymus. It is virtually always associated with congenital 
heart disease at risk of 22q11 microdeletion 
(Chapter 5). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The thymus defect is due to 
an abnormal development of the 3rd and 4th branchial 
arches which, in turn, depends on the absent migration of 
neural crest cells towards these embryological structures. 

The genetic derangement responsible for this lack of 
migration is a microdeletion in the so-called DiGeorge 
critical region (DGCR), which maps to chromosome 22, 
locus q11 (see Chapter 10). 
Ultrasound diagnosis (Figure 6.3). The diagnosis of 
thymus aplasia/hypoplasia has only been described fairly 
recently,34 and is made on the upper mediastinal 3-vessel 
view, which is an axial view of the mediastinum at the 
level of the ductal and aortic arches (Figure 6.3b), and/or 
just cranial to this, in which only the thymus is seen, 
between the lungs (Figure 6.3a). In the former view, the 
thymus appears as a well-defined weakly hypoechoic 
roundish solid structure interposed between the great 
vessels, in the prevertebral region, and the sternum. 
Thymus aplasia is diagnosed when the thymus cannot be 
visualized and the great vessels appear to be displaced 
just behind the sternum (Figure 6.26a). If the thymus is 
present but its diameters are below the 5th centile, then 
thymic hypoplasia is present (Figure 6.26b). The importance 
of this finding is related to its capacity to accurately 
predict the risk of 22q11 microdeletion in fetuses previously 
diagnosed with conotruncal anomalies.34 Therefore, 
it should be underlined that checking for the presence of 
the thymus is not a standard ultrasound procedure; it 
should be performed only in fetuses with conotruncal 
anomalies and/or, regardless of the occurrence of CHD, if 
one of the parents has the microdeletion, since in this case 
the transmission risk is 50% (autosomal dominant). 
• Prognostic indicators. The occurrence of thymus 
hypoplasia/aplasia is electively sought in fetuses at 
risk of 22q11 microdeletion. Hence, if the thymus is 
indeed absent or hypoplastic, the presence of the 
microdeletion is very likely (>90% probability), and 
this, of course, represents per se a poor prognostic 
sign. An additional poor prognostic sign, in this context 
may be a conotruncal anomaly with an unfavorable 
anatomy, such as tetralogy of Fallot with absent 
pulmonary valve or common arterial trunk with 
aortic arch interruption (Chapter 5). 
• Association with other malformations. In the context 
of 22q11 microdeletion, thymic anomalies are associated 
with cardiac defects, renal anomalies, fetal growth 
restriction (FGR), and polyhydramnios (Chapter 10). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very high in 
view of the virtually ubiquitous presence of the 22q11 
microdeletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should thymus hypoplasia/aplasia 
be detected in a fetus at risk for 22q11 microdeletion, a 
thorough anatomic scan should be performed by an 
expert, in order to assess the other abnormal features 
(renal anomalies, FGR, and polyhydramnios) that 
increase even more the likelihood of the microdeletion. As 
pointed out above, the associated cardiac defect should 
have already been diagnosed and characterized by fetal 
echocardiography. Fetal karyotyping with Fluorescence 
in situ Hybridization (FISH) analysis for the DGCR is 
mandatory, since only about 5–10% of the microdeletions 
are long enough to show up on conventional G-banding. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final prognosis 
and quality of life depend on the phenotypic expression of 
the microdeletion, which is extremely variable, and on the 
severity of the associated cardiac defect (see Chapter 10). 
204 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 6.26 Thymus hypoplasia/aplasia: 3-vessel view. (a) Thymus 
aplasia at 23 weeks of gestation: the upper mediastinal anatomy is hardly 
recognizable: the right lung (L) and the trachea (arrow) are evident, but 
there is no thymus at all (‘??’) in front of the abnormal great vessels (the 
fetus had tetralogy of Fallot with absent pulmonary valve and 22q11 
microdeletion). (b) Thymus hypoplasia (arrows) at 36 weeks of gestation 
in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot and 22q11 microdeletion. P, 
pulmonary artery; Ao, aortic arch; C, superior vena cava; arrow, trachea. 
REFERENCES 
1. Downward CD, Wilson JM. Current therapy of infants with 
congenital diaphragmatic hernia. Semin Neonatol 2003; 8: 
215–21. 
2. Grandjean H, Larroque D, Levi S. The performance of routine 
ultrasonography screening of pregnancies in the Eurofetus study. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1999; 181: 446–54. 
3. Metkus AP, Filly RA, Stringer MD, Harrison MR, Adzick NS. 
Sonographic prediction of survival in fetal diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Pediatr Surg 1996; 31: 148–51. 
4. Lipshultz GS, Albanese CT, Feldstein VA, et al. Prospective 
analysis of lung-to-head ratio predicts survival for patients with 
prenatally diagnosed congenital diaphragmatic hernia. J Pediatr 
Surg 1997; 32: 1634–6. 
5. Sbragia L, Paek BW, Filly RA, et al. Congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia without herniation of the liver: Does the lung-to-head 
ratio predict survival? J Ultrasound Med 2000; 19: 845–8. 
6. Heling KS, Wauer RR, Hammer H, Bollmann R, Chaoui R. 
Reliability of the lung-to-head ratio in predicting outcome and 
a b 

neonatal ventilation parameters in fetuses with congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25(2): 112–8. 
7. Geary M. Management of congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
diagnosed prenatally: an update. Prenat Diagn 1998; 18: 1155–8. 
8. Fuke S, Kanzaki T, Mu J, et al. Antenatal prediction of 
pulmonary hypoplasia by acceleration time/ejection time ratio of 
fetal pulmonary arteries by Doppler blood flow velocimetry. Am 
J Obstet Gynecol 2003; 188: 228–33. 
9. Levine D, Barnewolt CE, Mehta TS, et al. Fetal thoracic abnormalities: 
MR imaging. Radiology 2003; 228: 379–88. 
10. Ruano R, Joubin L, Sonigo P, et al. Fetal lung volume estimated 
by 3-dimensional ultrasonography and magnetic resonance imaging 
in cases with isolated congenital diaphragmatic hernia. 
J Ultrasound Med 2004; 23: 353–8. 
11. Lyons Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
12. Paladini D, Borghese A, Arienzo M, et al. Prospective ultrasound 
diagnosis of Pallister–Killian syndrome in the second trimester of 
pregnancy: the importance of the fetal facial profile. Prenat Diagn 
2000; 20: 996–8. 
13. Stevens TP, Chess PR, McConnochie KM, et al. Survival in earlyand 
late-term infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
treated with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Pediatrics 
2002; 110: 590–6. 
14. Harrison MR, Sydorak RM, Farrell JA, et al. Fetoscopic temporary 
tracheal occlusion for congenital diaphragmatic hernia: prelude to 
a randomized controlled trial. J Pediatr Surg 2003; 30: 1012–20. 
15. Harrison MR, Keller RL, Hawgood SB, et al. A randomized trial 
of fetal endoscopic tracheal occlusion for severe fetal congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia. N Engl J Med 2003; 349: 1916–24. 
16. Heerema AE, Rabban JT, Sydorak RM, Harrison MR, Jones KD. 
Lung pathology in patients with congenital diaphragmatic hernia 
treated with fetal surgical intervention, including tracheal occlusion. 
Pediatr Dev Pathol 2003; 6: 536–46. 
17. Hunt RW, Kean MJ, Stewart MJ, Inder TE. Patterns of cerebral 
injury in a series of infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia utilizing 
magnetic resonance imaging. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 39: 31–6. 
18. Jaillard SM, Pierrat V, Dubois A, et al. Outcome at 2 years of 
infants with congenital diaphragmatic hernia: a population-based 
study. Ann Thorac Surg 2003; 75: 250–6. 
19. Stocker JT, Madewell JE, Drake RM. Congenital cystic adenomatoid 
malformation of the lung. Classification and morphologic 
spectrum. Hum Pathol 1977; 8: 155–71. 
20. Wilson RD, Hedrick HL, Liechty KW, et al. Cystic adenomatoid 
malformation of the lung: review of genetics, prenatal diagnosis, 
and in utero treatment. Am J Med Genet 2006; 140A: 151–5. 
21. Monni G, Paladini D, Ibba RM, et al. Prenatal ultrasound diagnosis 
of congenital cystic malformation of the lung: a report of 26 
cases and review of the literature. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 
2000; 16: 159–62. 
22. Crombleholme TM, Coleman B, Hedrick H, et al. Cystic adenomatoid 
malformation volume ratio predicts outcome in prenatally 
diagnosed cystic adenomatoid malformation of the lung. 
J Pediatr Surg 2002; 37: 331–8. 
23. Adzick NS, Harrison MR, Crombleholme TM, Flake AW, 
Howell LJ. Fetal lung lesions: management and outcome. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1998; 179: 884–9. 
24. Lopoo JB, Goldstein RB, Lipshultz GS, et al. Fetal pulmonary 
sequestration: a favourable congenital lung lesion. Obstet 
Gynecol 1999; 94: 567–71. 
25. Pumbergera W, Hörmann M, Deutingerc J, et al. Longitudinal 
observation of antenatally detected congenital lung malformations 
(CLM): natural history, clinical outcome and long-term 
follow-up. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg 2003; 24: 703–11. 
26. de Lagausie P, Bonnard A, Berrebi D, et al. Video-assisted thoracoscopic 
surgery for pulmonary sequestration in children. Ann 
Thorac Surg 2005; 80: 1266–9. 
27. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a 
family with negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
28. Longaker MT, Laberge JM, Dansereau J, et al. Primary fetal 
hydrothorax: natural history and management. Pediatr Surg 
1989; 24: 573–6. 
29. Aubard Y, Derouineau I, Aubard V, Chalifor V, Preux PM. 
Primary fetal hydrothorax: a literature review and proposed antenatal 
clinical strategy. Fetal Diagn Ther 1998; 3: 325–33. 
30. Paladini D, Marasini M, Volpe P. Severe ductal constriction 
in the third-trimester fetus following maternal self-medication 
with nimesulide. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 25: 
357–61. 
31. Paladini D, Chita SD, Allan LD. Prenatal measurement of cardiothoracic 
ratio in the evaluation of heart disease. Arch Dis Child 
1990; 65: 20–3. 
32. Senat MV, Deprest J, Boulvain M, et al. Endoscopic laser surgery 
versus serial amnioreduction for severe twin-to-twin transfusion 
syndrome. N Engl J Med 2004; 351: 136–44. 
33. Hedrick HL, Flake AW, Crombleholme TM, et al. Sacrococcygeal 
teratoma: prenatal assessment, fetal intervention, and 
outcome. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 39: 430–8. 
34. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in fetal 
cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 546–52. 
THORACIC ANOMALIES 205 

The main differential feature of the gastrointestinal (GI) 
tract in comparison with other organ systems is that its 
ultrasound appearance varies significantly during pregnancy 
and also, for some sites, in the course of the same 
ultrasound examination, due to the physiology of swallowing, 
stomach emptying, and intestinal peristalsis. It is 
therefore necessary to become acquainted with the 
whole range of anatomic correlates. It should also be 
underlined that the origin of a cystic or solid mass 
detected in the abdominal cavity can also be difficult to 
identify with certainty. For example, a cystic anechoic 
lesion can correspond to very different diagnoses according 
to its site and the relationships with the adjacent viscera: 
enteric duplication cyst, mesenteric cyst, choledochal 
cyst, double bubble in duodenal atresia, adrenal hemorrhage, 
renal cyst, or ovarian cyst. Finally, it should 
be underlined that, as far as obstructive GI lesions are 
concerned (duodenal atresia, esophageal atresia, ileal 
atresia, etc.), the dilatation of the tract proximal to the 
obstruction can become sonographically evident only in 
the 3rd trimester. 
Timing of examination. As already mentioned, the 
ultrasound appearance of the various GI tracts changes 
significantly with advancing gestational age. In the 3rd 
trimester, the density of the intestinal content at the level 
of the colon increases and becomes hypoechoic in comparison 
with the intestinal walls. This allows identification 
of the whole course of the colon, from the cecum to 
the rectum (Figure 7.1). It is also important to consider 
that the sonographic echogenicity of the intestinal walls 
changes significantly with the emission frequency of 
the transducer: higher frequencies (6–7 MHz) make 
the interfaces between the solid intestinal walls and the 
fluid content much brighter, with a consequent overall 
increase in intestinal echogenicity. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views). A 
complete ultrasound assessment of the GI tract requires 
a series of views targeted to the various segments that 
have to be visualized, from the mouth to the rectum. 
Some of these views have already been described in 
Chapters 3 and 6. To these views, those necessary to 
explore the intra-abdominal intestinal tract, the liver, 
and the spleen should be added. 
Cranial views (mouth, pharynx, and esophagus). These 
views have already been described in Chapter 3, and the 
reader may refer to that chapter for full description. 
These views are summarized below: 
• lips: oblique view (Figure 7.2a) 
• tongue/pharynx: axial view (Figure 7.2b) 
Chapter 7 
Anomalies of the gastrointestinal 
tract and abdominal wall 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT 
AND ABDOMINAL WALL: ULTRASOUND APPROACH, 
SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
Figure 7.1 Axial view of the upper abdomen in a 35-week-old fetus. 
Note the dilatation of the colon with the haustra. This finding may be 
indicative of an obstruction or may be completely normal, as it happened 
to be in this case. 
207 

Cranial views and related malformations. We describe 
again the cranial views in order to underline the normal 
ultrasound appearance of the esophagus. This may 
appear, in its proximal part, as a pouch full of amniotic 
fluid, especially if the fetus has just swallowed. The twodimensional 
(2D) sagittal view and the 3D volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C)-derived coronal view of the 
thorax may allow the thoracic esophageal tract to be recognized 
as a thin prevertebral anechoic structure, when 
filled with some amniotic fluid (Figure 7.3). In this situation, 
the thoracic tract of the esophagus may resemble a 
vessel. Power or color Doppler may be used to exclude 
its vascular origin. Also on the 4-chamber view, the 
cross-sectional appearance of the esophagus distended 
by some amniotic fluid may be mistaken for that of an 
abnormal vessel, as in abnormal pulmonary or systemic 
(axygos continuation) venous return. This artifact is 
shown in Figure 7.3d. Some authors have also described 
the sonographic aspect of the esophagus when empty 
as ‘two or more parallel echogenic lines’.1 Finally, it 
should be underlined that also the esophagus, like most 
thoracic anatomic structures, may benefit from a 3D 
approach. In particular, the coronal thoracic plane 
imaged with VCI-C is advantageous for assessment of 
thoracic esophagus (Figure 7.3b). 
Axial view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.4a). This represents the classic view for measurement 
of the abdominal circumference. On this view, 
the following structures of the GI tract can be recognized: 
on the left, the gastric bubble, appearing as a welldefined, 
anechoic, round or oval area (although, in some 
circumstances, particulate matter can be seen floating in 
it); on the right, most of the liver, which shows a weakly 
hyperechogenic echostructure, and the intrahepatic tract 
of the umbilical vein, anechoic with evident walls. 
Nomograms of the normal gastric biometry versus gestational 
age are available in the literature2 (see the 
Appendix). The GI anomalies that can be recognized on 
this view are as follows: 
• esophageal atresia: non-visualization of the gastric 
bubble 
• duodenal atresia/stenosis: double bubble 
• hepatomegaly: increased liver volume 
• splenomegaly: increased splenic volume 
Non-visualization of the gastric bubble (Figure 7.7). 
Following the spirit of this book – from ultrasound sign 
to diagnosis – we believe it useful to define a diagnostic 
algorithm to apply in the case of non-visualization of 
the gastric bubble. The importance of this algorithm 
lies in the fact that the stomach may be impossible to 
display on ultrasound not only in case of esophageal 
atresia but also in a heterogeneous group of other conditions. 
First, it has to be excluded that the stomach is 
not visible because it has just emptied in the duodenum 
following its physiologic emptying cycle. To confirm or 
exclude this frequent cause of non-visualization of the 
gastric bubble, it is sufficient to rescan the woman after 
60–80 minutes; in fact, the physiologic filling–emptying 
cycle of the stomach lasts about 50–60 minutes.3 In 
cases of severe oligohydramnios from premature rupture 
of membranes and, to a lesser extent, from severe 
fetal growth restriction (FGR), the stomach could be 
empty, since the amount of residual amniotic fluid may 
not be enough to ensure a sufficient filling to be recognizable 
on ultrasound. Other very severe conditions 
• neck (hypopharynx and esophagus): sagittal view 
(Figure 7.3a,b) 
• thorax (esophagus): sagittal view (Figure 7.3c) 
• thorax (esophagus): axial 4-chamber view 
(Figure 7.3d) 
Abdominal views (ileus, jejunum, colon, liver, 
spleen, and abdominal wall). The scanning views 
are: 
• axial view of the upper abdomen: stomach and right 
hepatic lobe (Figure 7.4a) 
• axial view of the lower abdomen: small bowel 
(Figure 7.4b) 
• midsagittal view of the abdomen: cord insertion and 
rectal pouch in the pelvis (Figure 7.5a, b) 
• left parasagittal view: spleen 
• right parasagittal view: right hepatic lobe (Figure 7.5c) 
• coronal view (VCI-C): general approach (Figure 7.6) 
208 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.2 Cranial views for the assessment of the upper gastrointestinal 
tract (mouth and pharynx). (a) Oblique view of the lips. (b) Axial 
view of the mouth with the tongue (T) and, behind, the oropharynx 
(arrows). 
GASTROINTENSTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 
ANOMALIES BY SCANNING VIEW 
a b 

that may result in non-visualization of the stomach 
bubble are the fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS) and the other neuroarthrogryposes (Chapter 
10): here the swallowing reflex is blocked due to contracture 
of the masseters and the pharyngeal muscles. 
This leads to polyhydramnios on the one hand and to 
non-visualization of the stomach on the other. In addition, 
it seems that the increased incidence of non-visualization 
of the gastric bubble reported in cases of 
complex facial clefts is due to the fact that the palatal 
anomaly renders deglutition ineffective. The stomach 
may also be impossible to visualize in its usual position 
due to migration, as in left-sided congenital diaphragmatic 
hernia (CDH). Finally, there is an extremely rare 
congenital anomaly, microgastria, which represents an 
arrest in the development of the stomach. A diagnostic 
flow-chart to be applied in the case of non-visualization 
of the stomach is shown in Figure 7.7. 
Axial view of the lower abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.4b). On this view, which is parallel and 
caudal to the axial view discussed above, the small 
bowel, the transverse colon, and, in some cases, the cord 
insertion can be recognized. With minor tilting of the 
transducer, the gallbladder can also be demonstrated. 
The ileal loops appear isoechoic or weakly hyperechoic 
in comparison with the relatively hypoechoic colon. The 
gallbladder has a variable shape, as in postnatal life, and 
usually has an anechoic content. It should be underlined 
that the rare recognition of apparent sludge in the fetal 
gallbladder in the 3rd trimester should not be considered 
to be synonymous with gallstones. The major anomalies 
that may be detected on this view are as follows: 
• Omphalocele: defect of the anterior abdominal wall, 
containing bowel and /or liver, which bulges from the 
cord insertion area 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 209 
Figure 7.3 Ultrasound views of the thoracic esophagus. (a) Sagittal 
view of the fetal neck, showing the course of the esophagus (arrowheads), 
which is temporarily dilated by the swallowing of some amniotic 
fluid. (b) The same region (arrowheads)is shown in the coronal 
view, using three-dimensional volume contrast imaging (VCI-C). (c) 
More caudally, the parasagittal view demonstrates the esophagus 
behind the left atrium (arrowheads). (d) The same region, on the 4- 
chamber view: on this view, it is necessary to differentiate the temporary 
dilatation of the esophagus (arrowhead) from an abnormal 
venous return (systemic or pulmonary). If the anechoic area is due to 
esophageal dilatation, it disappears after a few minutes; in addition, 
the use of color/power Doppler may easily confirm or rule out a cardiovascular 
anomaly. 
Figure 7.4 Axial abdominal views (stomach, bowel, liver, and 
spleen). (a) Axial view of the upper abdomen: the stomach is visible on 
the left, the right hepatic lobe on the right, and the intrahepatic tract of 
the umbilical vein on the midline. (b) Axial view of the lower abdomen 
(ventral approach): the bowel (ileus and jejunum) and a small segment 
of the umbilical vein (arrow) are visible. 
a b 
c d 
a
b 

• Gastroschisis: ileal loops floating freely in the amniotic 
fluid 
• Choledochal cyst: an anechoic cystic structure just 
below the liver 
• Small-bowel atresia: severe dilatation of ileal loops 
proximal to the atretic tract 
• Meconium ileus: diffuse hyperechogenicities and calcifications 
within the intestinal lumen, sometimes 
associated with small-bowel obstruction 
Midsagittal view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.5 a,b). This view allows one to 
assess the contour of the abdominal wall and the cord 
insertion site; in addition, in the pelvis, it is possible to 
identify the rectal pouch behind the bladder: it appears 
as a hypoechoic structure that becomes particularly 
evident in the 3rd trimester, when it is full with meconium. 
In this view abdominal wall defects, namely 
omphalocele, gastroschisis, and in some cases, bladder 
and cloacal extrophy, can be detected. 
Left parasagittal view and related malformations. This 
view is parallel and to the left of the midsagittal one. 
On this view, the stomach and the spleen can be seen, 
although the spleen is very difficult to visualize since it lies 
below the shadows of the lower ribs and has an echodensity 
that is rather similar to that of the liver and the lung. 
With color/power Doppler, using an axial approach, it is 
possible to locate the vascular hilum of the spleen. Nomograms 
reporting the two maximum splenic diameters versus 
gestational age have been published and are reported in 
the Appendix. However, it should be noted that, when 
conspicuous, such as in the case of severe cytomegalovirus 
(CMV) infection, splenomegaly cannot be missed. 
Right parasagittal view and related malformations 
(Figure 7.5c). If the transducer is moved contralaterally, 
towards the right part of the abdomen, the right lobe of 
the liver comes into view, appearing as a solid, weakly 
210 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.5 Other abdominal views (liver, abdominal wall, and 
rectum). (a) Midsagittal view of the abdomen: the cord insertion, 
highlighted by power Doppler, and part of the small bowel (arrowhead) 
are visible. (b) With small movements of the transducer, it is 
possible to visualize, in the pelvis, the bladder and, behind it, the rectal 
pouch (arrow). (c) Right parasagittal view of the abdomen: the right 
hepatic lobe (Li), just below the hypoechoic layer of the diaphragm 
(arrowheads) and some ileal loops are visible. RL, right lung. 
Figure 7.6 Coronal view of thorax and abdomen: volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C): 3D ultrasound allows reconstruction of the coronal 
view of the fetal body, which is rather difficult to obtain with 2D ultrasound. 
On this view, the spatial relationships among the thoracic and 
the abdominal viscera can be studied in detail. The diaphragm appears 
as a hypoechoic layer (arrowheads). In the thorax, the right lung (RL, 
right lung) and the heart (H), in the left hemithorax, are clearly displayed 
(the left lung is hidden by the heart). Below the diaphragm, the 
liver is visible, with its left lobe (LL, left lobe) above the gastric bubble 
(St) and the right lobe (RL); the arrow indicates the gallbladder. 
a
b
c 

ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 211 
hyperechoic structure located between the hypoechoic 
diaphragmatic contour upwards and the ileal loops (and 
the hepatic flexure of the colon in the 3rd trimester) 
downwards. It is on this view that the degree of 
hepatomegaly, if present, is best appreciated. 
Coronal view of the abdomen and related malformations 
(Figure 7.6). This plane represents a lowmagnification 
view of the whole abdomen, and, as such, 
allows one to get a fair idea of the topographic location 
of cysts or bowel dilatation. With 2D ultrasound, 
obtaining this view may require significant manual skills; 
the use of 3D ultrasound makes the display of this plane 
much easier, since it can be reconstructed from a previously 
acquired volume using VCI-C. The major anomalies 
that may be detected on this view are as follows: 
• Esophageal atresia: non-visualization of the 
stomach 
• Duodenal atresia /stenosis: double-bubble sign 
• Hepatomegaly: increased volume of the liver 
• Choledochal cyst: round cystic structure under the 
liver 
• Enteric duplication cyst: round cystic structure 
adjacent to the stomach 
• Splenomegaly: increased volume of the spleen 
Non-visualization 
of the stomacha 
Normal 
amniotic fluid 
Associated 
anomalies? 
Stomach in 
thorax 
Contractures 
Facial cleftings 
No 
Yes 
Absent 
amniotic fluid 
PROM 
Severe FGR 
Bilateral renal 
agenesis 
Esophageal atresiab 
Left-sided CDH 
FADS 
Cleft lip/palatec 
a After ruling out physiologic emptying 
b Only if without transient-esophageal fistula (see text) 
c Complex forms are associated with impaired deglutition 
Figure 7.7 Diagnostic flowchart for the 
case of non-visualization of the stomach. 
PROM, premature rupture of membranes; 
FGR, fetal growth restriction; CDH, congenital 
diaphragmatic hernia; FADS, fetal 
akinesia deformation sequence. 

212 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Urachal 
Cysts 
Mesenteric 
cysts 
Umbilical 
vein varices 
Persistent right 
Umbilical vein 
Choledochal 
cysts 
Hepatic 
cysts 
Duodenal 
atresia 
Multicystic 
dysplastic 
kidney 
Dilatation of the 
renal pelvis 
Adrenal 
hemorrhage 
Duplex 
kidney 
Ovarian 
cysts 
Enteric 
duplication 
cysts 
Splenic 
cysts 
Ureterocele 
Figure 7.8 Differential diagnosis of 
abdominal cystic masses. 
• Small-bowel atresia: severe dilatation of ileal loops 
proximal to the atretic tract 
• Meconium ileus: diffuse hyperechogenicities and 
calcifications within the intestinal lumen, sometimes 
associated with small-bowel obstruction 
Cystic intra-abdominal masses. Again following 
the philosophy of this book – from ultrasound sign to 
diagnosis – in this subsection, a diagnostic algorithm of 
cystic intra-abdominal masses is described, taking into 
consideration their location and aspect. In fact, in 
clinical practice, the detection of a cystic intra-abdominal 
mass comes first, followed by determination of its origin – 
not, unfortunately, the other way round. The proposed 
algorithm for the differential diagnosis of intra-abdominal 
cystic masses is shown in Figure 7.8: this takes into consideration 
the location of the mass and its ultrasound 
appearance. As evident, there are several possible causes 
of cystic intra-abdominal structures. However, using this 
algorithm and/or clinical experience, a final determination 
of the actual origin of the mass is achieved in a good 
number of cases. 

Definition. In esophageal atresia, the communication 
between the proximal and the distal tract of the esophagus 
is absent, due to a lack of development of the intermediate 
esophageal portion, mainly because of an interruption of 
the blood supply during organogenesis. Esophageal atresia 
can occur as an isolated anomaly (10% of cases) or, 
much more frequently, be associated with a tracheoesophageal 
(TE) fistula (90% of cases), i.e., an abnormal 
communication between the trachea and the distal 
esophageal stump. The frequent association with TE fistula 
is responsible for the extremely low intrauterine 
detection rate: this is due to the fact that some amniotic 
fluid may actually reach the distal esophagus and eventually 
fill the stomach, just by transiting through the fistula. 
If this is the case, then ultrasound diagnosis becomes 
virtually impossible, being based on the detection of a constantly 
small gastric bubble. Anatomically, five types of 
esophageal atresia are recognized, according to the Gross 
classification,4 on the base of the anatomy and site of the 
TE fistula: 
• type A: no fistula (8% of cases) 
• type B: fistula with proximal stump (1%) 
• type C: fistula with distal stump (88%) 
• type D: double fistula with both stumps (1%) 
• type E: fistula without concomitant esophageal 
atresia (1%) 
As pointed out above, only type A is reliably detectable in 
the fetus by the non-visualization of the gastric bubble. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect is 
unknown. It originates when, at 8 weeks of gestation, 
the primitive foregut does not divide into the ventral 
tracheobronchial part and the dorsal digestive part. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. First, it should be underlined 
once more that more than 85% of cases of esophageal 
atresia are not detected in utero due to the existence of a 
concurrent TE fistula: this fistula does not prevent 
normal stomach filling in most instances, and only in a 
reduced number of cases is a constantly underfilled stomach 
found. In this regard, it is interesting to report that a 
sonographic sign possibly associated with esophageal 
atresia in the presence of a small stomach has been 
described in a few articles. This consists of a dilatation of 
the proximal esophageal tract, the so-called pouch sign.5 
This sign is observed transiently also in the normal fetus 
after swallowing; in fetuses with a small stomach and 
polyhydramnios, the detection of a persistent pouch sign 
would indicate the likely presence of a TE fistula. The 
overall detection rate, considering all possible signs of 
esophageal atresia, should be in the range of 24–42%.6,7 
The only sign that, if present, is highly indicative of 
esophageal atresia (but only in the 8–10% of cases that 
are not associated with a TE fistula) is non-visualization 
of the gastric bubble (Figure 7.9). As also shown in Figure 
7.7, a wide range of pathologic conditions may be associated 
with this sign, and all of these should be ruled out 
prior to reaching a definite diagnosis of esophageal atresia. 
The fact that these anomalies include very severe or 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 213 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Frequent: 1 /2500–1 /4000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Non-visualization of the gastric bubble, relatively late-onset polyhydramnios. In some of the cases 
associated with a TE fistula, a constantly small stomach. Inconstantly, an upper esophageal pouch (pouch sign). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20–44%): trisomies 21 and, to a lesser extent, 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: VA(C)TER(L). 
Outcome. Generally good, but depends mainly on the extent of the atretic tract. 
ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA – TRACHEO–ESOPHAGEAL (TE) FISTULA 
Figure 7.9 Esophageal atresia. (a) At 23 weeks of 
gestation, a suspicion of esophageal atreria (without 
TE fistula – see text) arises due to persistent 
non-visualization of the gastric bubble in the 
abdomen. The amount of amniotic fluid is normal. 
(b) At 30 weeks of gestation, polyhydramnios has 
developed and the stomach is still not visualized: 
the diagnosis of esophageal atresia is confirmed. 
a b 

lethal conditions, such as FADS, has led some authors to 
identify persistent non-visualization of the gastric bubble 
as a poor prognostic sign per se, being associated with a 
poor pregnancy outcome in roughly 50% of the cases, 
regardless of its cause. The other sign possibly indicative 
of esopheagal atresia is polyhydramnios, which becomes 
clearly evident only in the late 2nd trimester (Figure 7.9b). 
Additional inconstant signs are FGR and persistence of 
the upper esophageal pouch (pouch sign). It should be 
underlined that the association between FGR and polyhydramnios 
is uncommon, the latter usually being associated 
with fetal macrosomia. The development of FGR, 
which is present in 40% of fetuses with esophageal atresia, 
has been thought to be an effect of the reduced intestinal 
absorption of the proteins present in the amniotic fluid 
(due to lack of swallowing), which at term can be as high 
as 2 g of proteins per day. Another interesting feature is 
that 50% of the esophageal atresias associated with 
Down syndrome are type A (i.e, without a TE fistula): 
this is why in the fetus the recognition of an esophageal 
atresia, based on non-visualization of the gastric bubble, 
implies a very high risk of chromosomal anomalies. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all conditions possibly 
associated with non-visualization of the gastric 
bubble. These are shown in Figure 7.7: severe oligohydramnios 
(and consequent lack of amniotic fluid ingestion) 
in the case of premature rupture of membranes or 
bilateral renal agenesis; FADS and related syndromes; 
diaphragmatic hernia; and cleft lip/palate. 
• Prognostic indicators. Association with other major 
anomalies, which is fairly common, represents the 
most important poor prognostic sign, since the occurrence 
of concurrent anomalies makes surgical correction 
of the defect more difficult. In addition, the 
frequent occurrence of a low birthweight, as a result 
of FGR, may render the outcome even more guarded. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are associated in 40–70% of the cases, with prevalence, 
in decreasing order, of GI (28%), cardiovascular 
(24%), genitourinary (13%), and osteomuscular (11%) 
malformations. The VA(C)TER(L) association (see 
Chapter 10), the ‘TE’ of which stands for TE fistula, 
accounts for a significant number of these anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high, reaching 
20–44% of cases in the fetus, with a prevalence of 
trisomies 21 and 18. This high risk is related to the fact 
that only type A esophageal atresia (atresia without 
concurrent TE fistula), which is the one most frequently 
associated with Down syndrome, is diagnosable in utero. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association: look for . esophageal 
atresia (+ TE fistula) + vertebral anomalies (scoliosis, 
hemivertebrae) + anorectal atresia + cardiac (ventricular 
septal defect) + renal anomalies (dysplasia, ectopia, 
etc.) + limb anomalies (aplasia radii) (Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. Should esophageal atresia be 
suspected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should 
be performed by an expert, in order to detect major 
and/or minor signs possibly leading to the diagnosis of 
one of the above-mentioned associated anomalies. 
Fetal karyotyping is also mandatory, because of the 
high risk of Down syndrome and, to a lesser extent, of 
trisomy 18. The delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center where a neonatal intensive care unit 
(NICU) and pediatric surgery are available. The need 
for in utero transport arises from various consideration: 
(i) the consistent risk of associated FGR (40% of 
cases) and prematurity (due to polyhydramnios), which 
may require NICU admission; (ii) the possibility that 
other major anomalies overlooked at prenatal ultrasound 
may be present; (iii) the need for adequate preoperative 
nutrition; (iv) the need for early corrective 
surgery. 
Postnatal therapy. This obviously consists of surgical 
reconstruction of the esophagus and may be carried out 
in a single intervention or require a two-stage procedure, 
according to the length of the atretic segment. The reconstruction 
includes, in addition to a concurrent temporary 
gastrostomy, an end-to-end single-layer anastomosis in 
cases with favorable anatomy and a limited atretic segment. 
Treatment of infants with ‘long-gap’ esophageal 
atresia usually requires interposition surgery: this is a 
staged procedure consisting of cervical esophagostomy 
and gastrostomy at birth, followed by a bowel (colon) or 
gastric tube interposition between the esophagus and 
stomach at 1 year of age. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses with esophageal atresia is quite different if fetal 
series are compared with neonatal ones, as for congenital 
heart disease. This is due to the fact that the cases with 
the poorer prognosis, due to association with syndromic 
and/or chromosomal anomalies, die prior to their enrolment 
in neonatal series. Postnatal series report a 9% 
postoperative mortality rate, with a 22% intrauterine 
mortality rate (termination of pregnancy or spontaneous 
demise). In contrast, fetal series describe an overall 
neonatal mortality rate as high as 75%.6,7 In the surviving 
cases, the most frequent long-term complication is gastroesophageal 
reflux, which, if severe, may also be lifethreatening 
because of the possibility of ab ingestis lung 
infection, followed by esophageal restenosis, which 
occurs in about 30% of cases. 
214 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

Definition. In duodenal atresia, the tract between the 
proximal and distal portions of the duodenum is atretic. 
In most cases (80%), the obstruction is due to complete 
atresia and is caudal to the ampulla of Vater. In the 
remaining 20% of cases, the obstruction can be due to a 
diaphragm or membrane located within the lumen of the 
duodenum, and can be complete or partial (stenosis). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect 
is unknown. The pathogenetic mechanism involves 
an interruption of blood supply during organogenetic 
period, as for most GI tract atresias. According to 
another theory, the defect may be due to a lack of duodenal 
recanalization – always during early embryogenesis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based upon recognition of 
the classic double bubble, associated with polyhydramnios, 
which often develops in the late 2nd, early 3rd 
trimester. Usually, when the midtrimester anomaly scan 
is carried out (at 18–21 weeks of gestation in most countries), 
polyhydramnios is absent and the double bubble 
has not yet completely developed: the only finding consists 
of an evidently dilated stomach, with initial dilatation 
only of the duodenum (Figure 7.10a,b). During 
follow-up scans, which should always be scheduled if the 
stomach presents the above-mentioned features (enlargement 
and evidence of pylorus), the classic double bubble 
becomes clearly visible (Figure 7.10c). Care should be 
taken in demonstrating a communication between the 
two anechoic bubbles, to obtain confirmation that the 
second bubble is actually the dilated proximal duodenum 
(Figure 7.10b): only by demonstrating this communication 
can the rare occurrence of enteric duplication 
cysts or other upper abdominal cysts (Figure 7.8) be 
ruled out. Furthermore, it should be noted that, in the 
less common cases of duodenal stenosis, most of which 
are not diagnosed prenatally, the double bubble may 
become visible only late in gestation or may even never 
occur, with a constantly dilated stomach with evidence 
of the pylorum being the only sign of the partial obstruction. 
Finally, it should be underlined that in the 
extremely rare cases in which duodenal atresia is associated 
with esophageal atresia, the overdistension of the 
stomach and proximal duodenum is massive. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should include all 
other conditions featuring a cystic structure in the 
middle or right upper abdomen (Figure 7.8): choledochal 
cysts, enteric duplication cysts, and hepatic 
cysts. The differential diagnosis is made by simply 
demonstrating the communication between the rightsided 
anechoic structure and the stomach: if this communication 
exists, then the diagnosis can only be 
duodenal atresia. 
• Prognostic indicators. The association with other 
anomalies, which is relatively frequent, represents the 
main poor prognostic sign. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are associated with duodenal atresia in 40–50% of 
cases, with a prevalence (in decreasing order) of other 
GI, vertebral (about 33%), and cardiac anomalies 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 215 
Figure 7.10 Duodenal atresia. (a) At 23 weeks of gestation, initial evidence 
of a double bubble is detected (arrow). (b) After a few 
minutes, intestinal peristalsis demonstrates the communication between 
the stomach (st) and the dilated proximal duodenum. (c) Later in gestation, 
a clear double bubble (arrow) has developed, confirming the suspicion 
of duodenal atresia. (d) Three-dimensional ultrasound with 
inversion mode rendering: the site of the obstruction is clearly visible. 
Incidence. Frequent 1 /2500–1 /10 000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Double bubble, with communication between the two parts; late polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High (20–50%): mainly trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Mainly good. 
DUODENAL ATRESIA 
a
c d
b 

(30%), related to the close association with Down 
syndrome. In particular, the rate of association with 
intestinal malrotation reaches 40%, but more severe 
anomalies of the biliary tract and of the pancreas (annular 
pancreas), which may have a negative impact 
on prognosis, are also not uncommon. These latter 
anomalies are virtually impossible to detect in utero: an 
ultrasound-detectable sign, namely non-visualization 
of the gallbladder, which would be indicative of lifethreatening 
biliary atresia, has a low diagnostic sensitivity, 
due to its frequent occurrence in the normal fetal 
population. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high. Overall, 
40% (range 20–50%) of cases of duodenal atresia are 
associated with Down syndrome. Conversely, 5–15% of 
neonates with trisomy 21 have duodenal atresia. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. Should duodenal atresia be diagnosed 
in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of trisomy 21. In addition, a thorough 
search for associated malformations (including fetal 
echocardiography) should be carried out. With the 
above-mentioned caveats, the gallbladder should be 
searched as well. There is also a consistent risk of 
preterm delivery because of the severe polyhydramnios, 
which constantly develops by the early 3rd trimester. In 
very carefully selected cases, this may benefit from 
amniodrainage. Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center where a NICU and pediatric surgery are 
available. In fact, it has been demonstrated that in utero 
transport to tertiary referral centers as a result of prenatal 
diagnosis of duodenal atresia has contributed significantly 
to improving the final outcome of such fetuses.8 
Postnatal therapy. The surgical approach to this anomaly 
is carried out just after birth. The operative management 
of duodenal atresia is determined by the anatomic 
findings and the associated anomalies noted at laparotomy. 
Bypass procedures for duodenal atresia or stenosis 
include duodenoduodenostomy or duodenojejunostomy. 
Additional surgical procedures may be needed in 
the case of associated intestinal, pancreatic (annular pancreas), 
and/or biliary malformations. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses diagnosed with duodenal atresia is generally 
good, except for the cases in which severe biliary 
tract anomalies are present. These are responsible for the 
20–40% neonatal mortality rate reported in most series. 
If only isolated cases are considered, then overall survival 
is extremely good, with an early postoperative 
mortality rate of 3–5% and a late mortality rate that 
does not exceeds 6%.9 Hence, about 90% of neonates 
with isolated duodenal atresia survive. Of these, 25% 
will require an additional surgical procedure, needed to 
remove a restenosis or postoperative complications 
such as gastro-esophageal reflux, by 6 years of age. Lateonset 
sequelae are represented by megaduodenum, 
duodenogastro-esophageal reflux, and peptic ulcers. The 
quality of life is normal in the overwhelming majority of 
cases. 
216 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Frequent: 1 /2500–1 /5000 live births. 
Diagnosis. Severe late-onset dilatation of the ileal loops proximal to the obstruction. Late-onset polyhydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Generally good, but guarded in apple-peel variant and multiple-site atresia. 
SMALL-BOWEL ATRESIA 
Definition. Small-bowel atresia can be single or multiple. 
It can be due to an intraluminal diaphragm or membrane 
(type I: 20% of cases) or present as complete atresia of 
the affected segment. In the latter instance, this can show 
a fibrous string connecting the two blind-ending stumps 
(type II: 32% of cases) or a complete separation of the 
two stumps without any fibrous connection (type III: 
48% of cases). Type III includes the two variants that 
bear the worst prognosis, due to the severely reduced 
active intestinal surface: type IIIB (11% of cases), in 
which the bowel shows the so-called apple-peel aspect, 
and type IV (17% of cases), in which the atresia involves 
multiple sites. As far as the anatomic site of the atresia is 
concerned, the jejunum only is involved in 50% 
of cases, the ileus only in 43% of cases, and both intestinal 
tracts in the remaining 7% of cases. The anatomic 
site of the lesion is important, since there are some differences 
related to the site of the atresia. Ileal atresias are 

more often single, show a higher tendency to perforation 
in utero, and are associated with a higher neonatal mean 
weight and more advanced gestational age at delivery. In 
contrast, jejunal atresias are more often multiple, tend to 
dilate rather than to perforate, and show a significantly 
lower neonatal mean weight and less advanced gestational 
age at delivery in comparison with ileal atresias. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of the defect 
is unknown. Investigations in animal models and in 
humans have demonstrated that intestinal atresia is due 
to a vascular insult, consisting of an atresia or torsion of 
the feeding artery during the rotation of the midgut. The 
apple-peel variant has been hypothesized to be the effect 
of vascular occlusion of a superior mesenteric artery 
branch. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is based 
mainly on the detection of the severe dilatation of the 
intestinal loops proximal to the obstruction, which is 
absent in most cases prior to 25 weeks of gestation. The 
polyhydramnios is also of late onset. Hence, the first 
sonographic evidence of a possible small-bowel atresia is 
the isolated dilatation of an ileal loop, showing a transverse 
diameter of greater than 7 mm (Figure 7.11a), 
according to the published nomograms,10 which are also 
given in the Appendix. Additional signs that contribute 
to confirming the diagnosis are a centroabdominal location 
of the affected loop, its hyperechoic walls (Figure 
7.11a), increased peristalsis, and the presence of endoabdominal 
calcifications possibly indicative of a meconium 
ileus. In the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester, the 
malformation is fully demonstrated by ultrasound, with 
severe dilatation of the ileal/jejunal loops proximal to the 
obstruction, showing particulate matter moving with the 
increased peristaltic waves (Figure 7.11b,c). It should be 
underlined that it is not possible to identify the real site of 
the obstruction (ileal or jejunal). The only features that 
may point towards one of the two sites are the evidence 
of intestinal perforation (ascites with particulate matter 
and/or calcifications) for the ileus or extreme dilatation 
without perforation for the jejunum (Figure 7.12). 
• Differential diagnosis. It should be pointed out that 
the ultrasound signs of small-bowel atresia are virtually 
the same as those characterizing Hirschprung’s disease 
(aganglionic megacolon) and volvulus. Therefore, a 
differential diagnosis among these three completely 
different causes of intestinal obstruction cannot be carried 
out in most instances. Only the timing and the 
rapidity of the appearance of the loop dilatation may 
be roughly indicative of the likely diagnosis: gradual 
for atresia, and sudden (in 3–4 days) for volvulus. 
In addition, the differentiation from meconium ileus, 
which is characterized by a mechanical intraluminal 
obstruction due to the increased consistency of the 
meconium, is similarly rather challenging, if not impossible. 
The evidence of diffuse intra-abdominal calcifications 
would suggest the occurrence of meconium 
peritonitis, which follows intestinal perforation. FGR 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 217 
Figure 7.11 Ileal atresia. (a) Before 24 weeks of gestation, there is hardly any evidence of intestinal dilatation. The only doubtful sign is 
represented by a moderate dilatation (> 7 mm) of a single ileal/jejunal loop, possibly associated with a hyperechoic aspect of the wall (arrowheads). 
(b) In the 3rd trimester, the obstruction becomes evident, with moderately severe dilatation of various loops. In the dilated bowel loops cranial 
to the obstruction, increased intestinal peristalsis is seen, with the intestinal content moving from one loop to the adjacent one. (c) At 36 weeks, by 
following the course of the dilated loops, it is possible to demonstrate the communication between the various dilated segments (the maximum 
transverse diameter of the loops was 23 mm). 
Figure 7.12 Jejunal atresia (37 weeks of gestation). Note the 
extremely severe dilatation without evidence of perforation (absence of 
meconium peritonitis). The arrowheads indicate the site of the peristaltic 
wave, opening and closing the communication between adjacent 
loops from (a) to (b). 
a b c 
a b 

can be associated, especially if the atresia is in the 
jejunum, due to the consequent consistent protein 
malabsorption. 
• Prognostic indicators. The detection of intra-abdominal 
calcifications, possibly suggesting the presence of 
a meconium ileus complicated by perforation and 
meconium peritonitis, represents one of the most 
important poor prognostic signs. The poorer prognosis 
is related to the worse outcome of the cases complicated 
by perforation and to the fact that, in the 
case of meconium ileus, the risk of underlying cystic 
fibrosis is very high (> 90%). According to a recent 
retrospective report, another prognostic factor seems 
to be polyhydramnios.11 Its presence would indicate a 
higher risk of delayed anastomosis and a longer 
hospital stay, due to an increased rate of surgical 
complications. 
• Association with other malformations. Major anomalies 
are very rarely associated with intestinal atresias. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. There is a 10% risk of cystic fibrosis; however, if 
meconium peritonitis is associated, the risk of cystic 
fibrosis reaches 90%. 
Obstetric management. Should ileo-jejunal atresia be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is not especially recommended, 
because of the low risk of chromosomal aberrations. 
With regard to perinatal management, it should be 
noted that the risk of preterm delivery is significant, due 
to the ubiquitous occurrence of late-onset but severe 
polyhydramnios. Amniodrainage may be an option in 
very carefully selected cases, in order to reduce the uterine 
overdistension and the associated risk of preterm 
delivery. The delivery should be planned in a tertiary 
referral center. Although there is no indication for 
cesarean section, the rate of malpresentation is increased 
by the common occurrence of severe polyhydramnios. 
The need for in utero transport derives from the 
increased risk of preterm delivery and FGR. Furthermore, 
surgery has to be carried out immediately after 
birth in most cases. 
Postnatal therapy. The surgical procedure includes 
removal of the atretic tract(s) and end-to-end intestinal 
anastomosis. Only in selected, more complex cases does 
the procedure involve a two-step procedure with an 
initial ileostomy followed by the anastomosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The final outcome 
of fetuses with ileo-jejunal atresias is generally 
good, except for the relatively rare cases of apple-peel 
atresia or multiple atresias (types IIIB and IV). In fact, in 
these cases, the total length of the intestine is significantly 
reduced, and this leads to malabsorption (shortbowel 
syndrome). Also, the association with volvulus, 
perforation, and meconium peritonitis, which complicates 
less than 10% of the cases, negatively affects the 
survival rate, being responsible for a 10% increase in 
postoperative mortality. 
218 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. No data available. 
Diagnosis. Mechanical ileal obstruction due to the increased consistency of meconium; significant risk of 
perforation and consequent meconium peritonitis. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. If cystic fibrosis is considered here, the risk is extremely high (>90%). 
Outcome. Depends on the underlying cystic fibrosis and its phenotypic expression. 
MECONIUM ILEUS 
Definition. Meconium ileus is characterized by an ileal 
mechanical obstruction caused by inspissated meconium. 
The meconium is thicker than normal due to a 
high protein content, the primary cause of which is cystic 
fibrosis, associated with most cases of meconium ileus. 
This obstruction leads relatively often to ileal perforation 
and consequently meconium peritonitis. In some 
cases, the obstruction occurs more distally, in the colon, 
where the meconium causes a mucus plug that obstructs 
the rectum. Also in this case, the risk of underlying cystic 
fibrosis is high. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. As already mentioned, cystic 
fibrosis is associated in more than 90% of cases. In the 
few cases not associated with this genetic condition, the 
etiology of the intestinal obstruction remains unclear. 
The pathogenetic mechanism leading to the obstruction is 
represented by the significant changes in the components 

of the meconium caused by the cystic fibrosis: this shows 
a very high protein content and, at the same time, less 
fluids, due to their impaired intraluminal secretion. This 
leads to a significant inspissation, which in turn delays 
and eventually blocks the intraluminal transit of the 
meconium along the relatively narrow ileal lumen. Once 
the obstruction occurs, the loops proximal to the obstruction 
dilate and, due to the weak elasticity of the ileal walls 
relatively often perforate, with the thick meconium 
spilling into the abdominal cavity, with a consequent 
severe adhesive peritonitis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based upon recognition of 
an ileal obstruction, with one or multiple dilated loops 
that characteristically show hyperechoic content and 
similarly hyperechoic walls (Figure 7.13). In meconium 
ileus, the obstruction is usually of late onset, becoming 
evident in the late 2nd trimester, after 24–25 weeks of 
gestation. The ultrasound appearance is pleomorphic. 
The dilated ileal loops may show hyperechoic content 
or, in other cases, meconium/fluid levels; the walls may 
appear normal or thickened and hyperechoic. The situation 
is further complicated by the frequent occurrence of 
meconium peritonitis, which is characterized by diffuse 
intra-abdominal calcifications. If the obstruction 
involves the ileus, the colon is typically empty, since 
meconium transit is blocked. As already mentioned, in a 
minority of cases, the obstruction involves the colon, 
with evidence of a distal mucus plug. The association 
with cystic fibrosis is also present for this variant, 
although at a lower rate (25%). It has to be underlined 
that, in a significant number of cases, the first evidence 
of meconium ileus at ultrasound consists of the so-called 
hyperechoic ileus. This finding, in the early–mid 2nd 
trimester, may have different underlying causes: trisomy 
21 (3%), severe FGR with ileal ischemia, or meconium 
ileus. 
• Differential diagnosis. As already pointed out, the 
differential diagnosis with simple small-bowel atresia 
may be impossible. The detection of a highly hyperechoic 
meconium within the ileal loops and/or of 
intra-abdominal calcifications due to the meconium 
peritonitis may point towards meconium ileus as the 
most likely diagnosis. 
• Prognostic indicators. If an intestinal obstruction is 
possibly identified as meconium ileus, this is itself a 
poor prognostic sign, especially if associated with 
meconium peritonitis. This is due to the extremely 
strong association with cystic fibrosis, which affects 
the mid- to long-term prognosis; and to the surgical 
difficulties encountered in dealing with the meconium 
peritonitis, which may require multiple bowel 
resections. 
• Association with other malformations. This is 
unknown. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. However, 
considering that the first evidence of a meconium ileus 
may be a hyperechoic ileus, it should be remembered 
that this soft marker carries a risk of trisomy 21 of 
roughly 3%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
high, if the almost ubiquitous cystic fibrosis is considered 
as a syndrome. 
Obstetric management. If meconium ileus is detected in 
a fetus, the option of an amniocentesis performed to 
obtain fetal DNA for cystic fibrosis testing should be discussed 
with the parents. In fact, as already mentioned, 
the diagnosis of meconium peritonitis is usually made 
after 24–25 weeks of gestation, which is the limit for termination 
of pregnancy in those countries in which there 
is a time limit for this procedure. Therefore, in these 
countries, DNA testing will not alter the course of pregnancy 
if, as is highly probable, the results of the test will 
become available in the early 3rd trimester of pregnancy. 
On the other hand, in countries in which termination for 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 219 
Figure 7.13 Meconium ileus. (a) At 29 weeks of gestation, some ileal 
loops are dilated and show hyperechoic walls (arrow). The presence of 
macrocalcifications (arrowheads) demonstrates the perforation and the 
consequent meconium peritonitis. (b) Specimen after surgery. (c) The 
same case as in (b): an oblique view of the abdomen also demonstrates 
the presence of a secluded sac of ascites containing meconium sludge 
(arrow). (d) Another case showing diffuse intra-abdominal calcifications 
(arrows), consistent with a diagnosis of meconium peritonitis. 
a b 
c d 

serious fetal conditions is permitted until delivery, this 
caveat does not apply, and DNA testing may be easily 
carried out. As already mentioned, if the ultrasound 
finding is a hyperechoic ileus but not yet meconium 
ileus, then karyotyping is justified by the 3% risk of 
Down syndrome associated with this finding. 
Regardless of the results of DNA testing, in the case 
of meconium ileus, the fetus should be delivered in a 
tertiary referral center, in order to optimize neonatal 
management, which includes surgery for the bowel 
obstruction and, if not already performed, DNA testing 
for cystic fibrosis. In this regard, the helpful role of prenatal 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been 
underlined: this technique can improve the low diagnostic 
yield of prenatal ultrasound for meconium 
peritonitis.12 
Postnatal therapy. The postnatal work-up should 
include a contrast computed tomography (CT) scan, 
in order to ascertain persistent intestinal perforation 
invisible on prenatal ultrasound. The timing of surgery 
depends on the clinical presentation. If bowel atresia is 
associated, bowel resection with end-to-end anastomosis 
should be carried out soon after birth. If the ileus is not 
associated with anatomic atresia, then simple saline, 
water-soluble contrast enema or N-acetylcysteine therapy 
may induce meconium passage. Clearly, the longterm 
prognosis depends on the clinical expression of the 
underlying cystic fibrosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The outcome of 
fetuses diagnosed with meconium ileus is extremely variable, 
depending on the abdominal situation (concurrence 
of ileal atresia or of meconium peritonitis) and on 
the association with cystic fibrosis. Survival and quality 
of life depend directly on the severity of the cystic fibrosis. 
The early surgical mortality rate has been reported to 
be as low as 2%,13 which underlines once more that survival 
is dependent almost only on the clinical severity of 
the underlying cystic fibrosis. 
220 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Diagnosis. Late-onset dilatation of sigmoid colon and rectum, often with hyperechoic meconium. Normal 
amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomies 18 and 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: predominantly associated with various expressions of the caudal 
regression sequence. 
Outcome. Good, if isolated. If syndromic, depends on the associated malformations (as in caudal regression). 
ANORECTAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. All of these are malformations causing distal 
obstruction of the GI tract. Anorectal malformations can 
be divided, on the basis of their embryologic origin, into 
the following: 
• external malformations, due to abnormalities of the 
development and fusion of the external perineal layers, 
such as an imperforate anus with/without fistula 
• internal malformations, in which the developmental 
anomaly involves the primary partition of the cloaca 
by the urogenital septum – this group includes pure 
rectal atresia and rectal atresia with fistula 
• mixed malformations, including all possible sites of 
ectopic anus 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Of the above-mentioned malformations, 
only anorectal atresia is detectable by ultrasound 
in a minority of cases, in the 3rd trimester of 
pregnancy. The main ultrasound finding possibly indicative 
of such a malformation is overdistension of the 
rectum and, to a lesser extent, of the sigmoid colon 
(Figure 7.14). Relatively often, the mecoium in the 
dilated rectal pouch becomes hyperechoic. The amount 
of amniotic fluid is unchanged. On the contrary, if the 
anorectal atresia is associated with a rectovesical fistula, 
the amniotic fluid is reduced. If polyhydramnios is noted 
in association with anorectal atresia, this is due to the 
associated anomalies. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes only the higher 
bowel obstructions; the site and the hyperechoic 
meconium in the rectal pouch may help in reaching 
the diagnosis. It should be underlined that under normal 
conditions, some meconium does fills the rectal 
pouch, especially in the 3rd trimester (Figure 7.1a). 
However, the maximum diameter of the rectum does 
not exceed that of the adjacent full bladder under 
normal conditions. If the rectal pouch is larger then 

the full bladder, and shows a bilobed appearance, 
then anorectal obstruction is likely. 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with other anomalies is a relatively common 
finding in cases of anorectal atresia (up to 70–90%): 
these are mainly urogenital malformations, because of 
common embryologic origin (cloaca and urogenital 
sinus). Other commonly associated malformations 
involve the GI tract, the skeleton, and the central nervous 
system (CNS). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (trisomies 
18 and 21). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with anorectal atresia are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L): look for . anorectal malformation + 
vertebral anomalies + cardiac defects + esophageal 
atresia (TE fistula) + renal agenesis + limb anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
• Caudal regression syndrome: look for . anorectal 
malformation + renal agenesis + sacral agenesis + 
lumbar vertebral anomalies + femoral hypoplasia + 
talipes (Chapter 10). 
• Sirenomelia: look for . anorectal malformation + 
fusion of inferior limbs + renal agenesis + severe 
vertebral anomalies + genital anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
Obstetric management. If anorectal atresia is diagnosed 
in the 3rd trimester, a careful assessment of the fetal 
anatomy should be performed in order to exclude associated 
anomalies. The clinical situation is completely 
different if the possibility of an anorectal malformation 
arises following the diagnosis, in the early 2nd 
trimester, of caudal regression syndrome or, worse, 
sirenomelia. In such circumstances, the diagnosis of an 
anorectal malformation is of no prognostic significance, 
since the above-mentioned anomalies are 
already lethal due to the associated bilateral renal agenesis. 
In the case of isolated anorectal malformation, 
delivery should be planned in a tertiary referral center, 
in order to ensure the best possible perinatal management 
of the lesion, which usually comprises a diagnostic 
work-up and a surgical approach to the distal bowel 
obstruction. 
Postnatal therapy. Improvements in the surgical 
approach to this anomaly (sagittal anorectoplasty, 
PSARP) have recently yielded very good functional 
results, with a significant number of patients experiencing 
normal fecal continence. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. If the anorectal 
malformation is isolated, the prognosis and overall survival 
are good. However, not all neonates undergoing 
PSARP achieve fecal continence. Postoperatively, the 
patients can be categorized into three groups with different 
treatment options for the management of postoperative 
problems: group I includes patients with poor 
anatomy, flat bottom, poor-quality muscle, sacral defect, 
and urinary incontinence. In theses cases, muscle transfers 
and/or definitive colostomy are considered. Group 
II includes patients with good-quality muscle and 
sacrum but misplaced bowel. In these cases, the option 
to consider is repositioning of the bowel. Finally, group 
III includes patients suffering from constipation. These 
patients can be managed with enemas, suppositories, or 
anterior resection. In contrast, if other major anomalies 
are present, then the final prognosis depends mainly 
on the severity of these anomalies. The prognosis is 
poor in most cases presenting with multiple anomalies 
within the broad spectrum of the V(A)CTER(L)/caudal 
regression syndrome. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 221 
Figure 7.14 Anorectal atresia. (a) Normal filling of the rectal pouch (arrow), behind the bladder (BI). (b) Evident dilatation of the rectum, which 
also shows a hyperechoic content (arrows). (c) The fetus after termination of pregnancy. In addition to other anomalies, anorectal atresia was 
confirmed: the anal orifice is not visible. 
a b c 

Definition. Hepatomegaly is defined as an increased 
volume of the liver. Similarly, splenomegaly refers to an 
increased volume of the spleen. They may be associated 
or occur independently. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology of hepatomegaly 
comprises a wide spectrum of causes. Intrauterine 
fetal infections are among the most common causes of 
hepatomegaly. CMV infection, when severe, is commonly 
associated with hepatosplenomegaly. The wellknown 
myeloproliferative disease associated with Down 
syndrome may be responsible, in some cases, for moderate 
to severe hepatomegaly. Also, rare benign and malignant 
hepatic tumors, such as hemangioma or hepatoblastoma, 
may induce hepatomegaly. It should also be noted that 
hepatomegaly due to venous congestion is often present 
in those cardiac and extracardiac conditions possibly 
causing heart failure. In fact, the first step of cardiac failure 
in the fetus is an increase in central venous pressure, 
which in turn causes venous congestion in the liver, due 
to the fact that because of the patency of the two shunts 
(foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus), all increases in 
cardiac pressure are reflected in the right heart. Finally, 
there are two very rare syndromic conditions, namely the 
Beckwith–Wiedemann and Zellweger syndromes, that 
can be associated with hepatomegaly. 
Fetal infections are also the primary cause of 
splenomegaly, with or without hepatomegaly. In particular, 
CMV infection, when severe, is typically associated 
with splenomegaly, as well as hepatomegaly and ascites, 
in addition to other signs of infection (CNS calcifications, 
etc.). Other rather unusual causes of late-onset 
splenomegaly are storage diseases, such as Gaucher 
and Niemann–Pick syndromes, which, in the late 3rd 
trimester, may lead to splenomegaly. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. If the enlargement of the spleen 
and/or liver is severe, the diagnosis of these conditions 
is straightforward, the two organs occupying most of 
the abdomen. The recognition of hepatomegaly and 
splenomegaly is made even simpler if ascites, which 
acts as an intra-abdominal contrast medium, is associated 
(Figures 7.15 and 7.16). If hepatomegaly is very 
pronounced, the prominence of the liver pushes the 
anterior abdominal wall, causing a dip at the thoracoabdominal 
junction, similarly to what happens in cases of 
severe thoracic hypoplasia, although in this case it is the 
abdomen that is enlarged rather than the thorax that is 
hypoplastic (Figure 7.16). Nomograms of the maximum 
diameters of the liver and the spleen have been published14 
and are shown in the Appendix. Nomograms giving 
liver and spleen volumes versus gestational age have 
been published, due to the widespread use of 3D ultrasound. 
However, we feel that the measurement of the 
two cross-sectional diameters of the viscera remains easier 
and faster (Figure 7.17). It should be underlined that, 
especially in the case of CMV infection, the involvement 
of the spleen is predominant (Figure 7.18). 
• Differential diagnosis. Virtually non-existent. Care 
needs only be taken not to mistake the left hepatic 
lobe, which is larger in utero than in postnatal life, for 
the spleen. 
• Prognostic indicators. Clearly, the final prognosis 
depends mainly on the cause of the hepatomegaly/ 
splenomegaly. If other signs of severe fetal infection, 
such as cerebral calcification or ascites, are present, 
then these are highly indicative of a poor prognosis. 
• Association with other malformations. The enlargement 
of the liver and/or the spleen does not itself represent 
a malformation; it is rather an acquired lesion 
due to enviromental factors (e.g., infections). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is virtually absent, 
except for the already-mentioned myeloproliferative disease 
which, in a minority of Down syndrome fetuses, 
leads to evident hepatomegaly. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. Hepatomegaly can be associated with the following: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: look for .hepatomegaly 
+ omphalocele + body hemihypertrophy + 
macroglossia (Chapter 10). 
• Zellweger syndrome: look for . hepatomegaly + 
polycystic kidney + agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
222 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Rare. Often due to severe fetal infections. 
Diagnosis. Enlarged liver/spleen. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low, except for the myeloproliferative disease typical of trisomy 21. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. Hepatomegaly can be associated with the Beckwith– 
Wiedemann and Zellweger syndromes. 
Outcome. Depends on the underlying cause. 
HEPATOMEGALY/SPLENOMEGALY 

Obstetric management. Should hepatomegaly/ 
splenomegaly be diagnosed in a fetus, the first issue to 
consider is a possible infective cause. Therefore, a careful 
interview with the mother with the aim of disclosing any 
possible infectious episodes, which in most cases are also 
simple flu-like events, should be carried out. Maternal 
serologic evidence of recent CMV or other hepatotropic 
infections should be sought. In addition, a thorough 
ultrasound assessment searching for additional signs of 
fetal infection (cerebral calcification, hydrocephalus, 
ascites, and cardiomegaly (myocarditis)) should be performed 
by an expert. 
Postnatal therapy. This is directly related to the underlying 
cause of the hepatomegaly/splenomegaly. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis of 
the hepatomegaly/splenomegaly also depends on its 
cause. Storage diseases are usually lethal within a few 
months/years of life. In cases due to intrauterine infections, 
the neonatal outcome will depend upon the type of 
infection and on its severity. In the case of CMV infection, 
fetal involvement may range from a limited hepatitis 
of moderate severity to very important sequelae such 
as hearing loss or neurologic damage. Early perinatal 
demise may also occur in severe CMV infection. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 223 
Figure 7.15 Hepatomegaly. This patient had had serologically 
confirmed hepatitis A infection in the 1st trimester. At 19 weeks, 
ultrasound demonstrated the following: (a) Axial view: evident 
hepatomegaly, with capsular macrocalcification and moderate ascites. 
(b) Left parasagittal view: The ascites and moderate enlargement of the 
left hepatic lobe (LL, arrowheads) are shown; in such a situation, the 
left hepatic lobe should not be mistaken for the spleen, which was normal 
in this case (c) (SPL and arrowheads). 
Figure 7.16 Severe hepatomegaly due to CMV infection. (a) on the 
axial view of the upper abdomen, it is possible to recognize the 
enlarged, hyperechoic, and rather inhomogeneous liver (arrows). (b) 
On the right parasagittal view, the degree of hepatomegaly is easily 
evaluated and the prominence of the abdomen in comparison with the 
normal thorax is evident (arrowheads). 
a
b
c 
a
b 

224 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.17 Hepatomegaly. The simultaneous presence of ascites acts as a natural contrast medium, allowing 3D ultrasound (surface rendering) 
to visualize the enlarged liver (L), the spleen (on the left), and the bowel (arrow). However, in this case, the diagnostic role of 3D imaging is limited. 
Figure 7.18 Splenomegaly in two cases of severe fetal 
CMV infection. (a) On the coronal view, at 37 weeks of 
gestation, it is possible to recognize the severely enlarged 
spleen (Spl), the lower pole of which reaches the bladder 
(Bl) and a concurrent similarly severe hepatomegaly (Li). 
(b) A similar case, at 36 weeks of gestation, showing severe 
hepatosplenomegaly, ascites, and intra-abdominal calcifications. 
Both neonates died of widespread CMV infection. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent. 1/4000 live births, but higher in utero. 
Diagnosis. Round, solid mass that deforms the anterior abdominal wall, usually containing the right hepatic lobe 
and some bowel loops. The cord insertion is on the mass. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. High: trisomies 18 and 13 and triploidy. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high: Beckwith–Wiedemann, Cantrell. 
Outcome. Good if the lesion is isolated and the liver is not completely herniated. Very poor in the case of 
associated malformations and/or chromosomal aberrations. 
OMPHALOCELE 
a b 

Definition. Omphalocele is a defect in the closure of the 
abdominal wall that also involves the cord insertion. The 
herniated organs are wrapped in a two-layered sac, with 
the two layers being the peritoneum and the amnion. 
The incidence at birth is 1/4000 live births. 
Anatomy. The cord insertion is located on the top of the 
sac. Two variants of omphalocele exist, according to the 
presence or absence of the liver in the sac. The two variants 
have a different embryogenesis and may have a 
completely different prognosis, due to the differential 
risk of associated chromosomal anomalies. Rupture of 
the two-layered membranes occurs in about 10% of 
cases. In this rare circumstance, as reported below, the 
differential diagnosis with gastroschisis may be difficult. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. An omphalocele is sonographically 
represented by a bulging structure that (i) arises from the 
anterior abdominal wall; (ii) contains some abdominal 
viscera (liver and/or bowel); and (iii) presents the cord 
insertion on its convexity (Figures 7.19 and 7.20). The 
presence of the umbilical vein within the omphalocele is 
an indirect sign of the fact that this anomaly represents 
a primary closure defect of the abdominal wall (Figure 
7.21). In some cases, ascites may also be associated, 
and care should then be taken not to mistake the ascites 
for amniotic fluid (Figure 7.20b), as this would lead to 
an erroneous diagnosis of gastroschisis. In addition, it 
should be noted that polyhydramnios, possibly secondary 
to bowel obstruction at the level of the wall defect or 
within the omphalocele, may complicate one-third of 
cases. If the liver is detected within the omphalocele 
(Figure 7.22a), the diagnosis is certain also early in gestation; 
if, on the contrary, only some bowel loops are seen 
in it, care should be taken to differentiate a real omphalocele 
(Figure 7.22b) from the physiologic herniation of the 
intestine within the cord that is frequently seen until 
the 11th week of gestation (Figure 7.22c). Therefore, if 
an omphalocele containing only ileal loops is identified 
earlier than the 12th week of gestation, the fetus should 
be rescanned in a week’s time: if the herniation persists, 
then it is an omphalocele; if it has disappeared, then it 
was a physiologic transient herniation of the intestine in 
the cord. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 225 
Figure 7.19 Omphalocele in a fetus with multiple anomalies (anencephaly, omphalocele, and bilateral aplasia radii). (a) At 23 weeks of gestation, 
the axial view of the abdomen demonstrates a large omphalocele containing the liver (the arrows indicate the large wall defect). (b) 3D lowmagnification 
maximum-mode rendering showing the anencephaly and the omphalocele (arrowheads). (c) The stillborn fetus: the omphalocele 
(arrowhead), with the cord insertion, and the aplasia radii with ectrodactyly are shown. 
Figure 7.20 Omphalocele. (a) Midsagittal view of the abdomen: a case of omphalocele containing the liver at 29 weeks of gestation (normal 
karyotype). (b) Rarely, ascites can be associated with the omphalocele and can be detected in the sac (Asc); color Doppler shows the umbilical vein. 
(c) A small omphalocele, containing only some bowel loops (19 weeks of gestation) in a fetus with trisomy 18. Note the concurrent cord cyst 
(arrowhead), which is also often associated with trisomy 18. The inset shows the specimen with the small omphalocele and the bowel loops visible 
under the omphalocele membranes. 
a
a 
b 
b c 
c 

• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
should include other abdominal wall defects and the 
physiologic herniation in the cord that disappears completely 
after the 11th completed week of gestation. The 
differences with gastroschisis are evident: in an 
omphalocele, there is a sac containing the viscera, 
whereas in gastroschisis, the viscera float freely in the 
amniotic fluid. In addition, the cord insertion is normal 
226 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.22 Omphalocele. (a) At 11–12 weeks of gestation, an omphalocele can reliably be diagnosed only if it contains the liver (arrow). (b) In 
fact, if the omphalocele contains bowel loops only, as in this case (arrowheads), to confirm the diagnosis and rule out physiologic herniation of 
intestine in the cord, it is necessary to wait until the 12th completed week of gestation. In this case, it was associated with trisomy 13, enlarged 
nuchal translucency and subcutaneous edema, visible also in the image. (c) For comparison, in this image, an axial view of the abdomen showing a 
physiologic herniation of the bowel in the cord (arrows) at 11 weeks of gestation is shown. (d) Pentalogy of Cantrell (15 weeks of gestation): in 
addition to the omphalocele, the sternal cleft with ectopia cordis is demonstrated by power Doppler (arrowhead). 
Figure 7.21 Omphalocele: 3D ultrasound. (a) 
Multiplanar imaging, showing the omphalocele on the 
three orthogonal planes, which enables assessment of its 
content and extension (arrowheads indicate the abdominal 
wall defect; the arrow indicates cord insertion). (b) Surface 
rendering demonstrates the cord insertion on the top of the 
omphalocele (arrows), in between the two knees (g). 
a b 
a b 
c 
d 

in gastroschisis, the defect of which is paramedian, 
while in an omphalocele, it inserts on the top of the sac. 
If a large omphalocele contains the whole of the liver, 
this should be differentiated from the so-called 
limb–body–wall complex, which is characterized by 
major distortion of the body anatomy, with severe scoliosis 
and limb and skull abnormalities. Another entity 
that should be differentiated from pure omphalocele 
is cloacal exstrophy, in which omphalocele extends 
caudally and is associated with bladder extrophy and 
anomalies of the external genitalia. This anomaly is 
described in Chapter 8. In the case of omphalocele, the 
recognition of a normal bladder in the pelvis rules out 
this very rare possibility. 
• Association with other malformations. Congenital 
heart disease and urogenital and GI malformations 
are often associated with omphalocele. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is high (mainly trisomies 
18 and 13; in a few cases, triploidy, trisomy 21, 
and Turner syndrome). It should be underlined that the 
chromosomal risk is higher in the case of a small 
omphalocele containing only bowel loops. On the contrary, 
huge omphaloceles containing the liver are rarely 
associated with chromosomal anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high. The 
syndromes detectable in utero that can be associated 
with omphalocele are as follows: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: look for .omphalocele 
+ macroglossia + somatic hemihypertophy + polycystic 
kidney (Chapter 10). 
• Pentalogy of Cantrell (Figure 7.22d):15 look for . 
omphalocele + diaphragmatic hernia + sternal fusion 
defects + ectopia cordis + cleft lip/palate. 
Obstetric management. Should an omphalocele be 
diagnosed in a fetus, karyotyping is mandatory because 
of the high risk of chromosomal anomalies, which is 
greatest if the defect is small and contains bowel only. 
In addition, fetal echocardiography and a thorough 
anomaly scan should be performed to detect possibly 
associated defects. With regard to delivery, there is no 
consensus on the need for cesarean section, advocated by 
some authors to reduce the risk of traumatic rupture 
of the sac during passage through the birth canal. 
Empirically, it has been suggested that a cesarean section 
may be indicated in cases presenting with huge (>5cm) 
omphaloceles, with spontaneous delivery recommended 
for smaller lesions. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical correction of the defect may be 
performed in a single intervention or may require a twostep 
procedure, according to the size of the omphalocele. 
In fact, in those cases in which the whole liver has herniated, 
the limited intra-abdominal pressure is insufficient to 
allow normal growth of the abdomen. As a result, there is 
no space left in the abdomen to accommodate the large 
volume of the liver. In these cases, the defect is only partially 
closed, and the viscera remaining outside the 
abdomen are wrapped up in a sterile silastic bag (or 
spring-loaded silos). The final closure is delayed until the 
growth of the abdominal wall will allow complete closure 
without an abnormal increase in intra-abdominal pressure. 
Alternatively, rotational muscular flaps may be used 
to increase the surface of the anterior abdominal wall. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Early neonatal 
mortality is generally due to the associated anomalies, 
and may be as high as 80% in the case of multiple anomalies 
or even 95–100% in the case of severe aneuploidies 
or syndromes. On the contrary, if the omphalocele is isolated, 
and the liver is not in the sac, the prognosis is 
excellent, at least in pediatric series. Should the liver 
be in the sac, the prognosis is relatively poor and significant 
respiratory sequelae have been reported. As for 
other malformations, prenatal series yield very different 
results, with significantly lower survival rates and much 
poorer quality of life.16 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 227 
Incidence. Rare. 
Diagnosis. Bowel loops freely floating in the amniotic fluid. Para-umbilical wall defect. Normal cord insertion. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. Concurrent joint contractures of the legs with hypoplastic lower limb 
muscles indicate the presence of congenital amyoplasia. 
Outcome. Very good, unless rare complications including perforation, infarction or infection of the herniated loops 
occur. 
GASTROSCHISIS 

Definition. Gastroschisis is characterized by a paraumbilical 
defect of the abdominal wall through which 
bowel loops herniate to float freely in the amniotic fluid. 
Anatomy. The defect involves all the layers of the abdominal 
wall, and the herniated viscera consist, in the overwhelming 
majority of cases, of bowel loops only; in very 
rare circumstances, the stomach and, exceptionally, urogenital 
structures may herniate as well. As already pointed 
out, there is no membrane wrapping the herniated viscera, 
as in omphalocele, and these float freely in the amniotic 
fluid. This very fact increases the likelihood of chemically 
induced inflammation of the herniated bowel loops, 
which may lead to perforation. The pathogenetic mechanism 
leading to the para-umbilical defect involves an 
abnormal regression of the right umbilical vein or, alternatively, 
a vascular accident during embryogenesis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is 
straightforward and relies on the recognition of freely 
floating bowel outside the fetal abdomen (Figure 7.23). 
Once the suspicion of gastroschisis has been raised, a 
closer inspection may lead to identification of the right 
para-umbilical wall defect through which the bowel herniates. 
Usually, the defect is small (< 2 cm), and this is 
responsible for the occurrence of bowel infarction due to 
torsion and/or compression of the mesenteric pedicle on 
the rim of the defect. In some cases, during the 3rd 
trimester, thickening and edema of the intestinal walls, 
possibly associated with dilatation (Figure 7.24), may 
indicate the onset of obstruction and/or of even worse 
complications such as infarction. Some authors have 
described how, in extremely rare cases, after severe 
dilatation of an ileal loop due to obstruction, the dilatation 
may completely disappear due to complete necrosis 
of the affected loop (vanishing gut). 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis with 
omphalocele has already been addressed in detail in 
the previous section. The only other condition that 
may, to a limited extent, mimick gastroschisis is the 
limb–body–wall complex, especially if this is due to 
amniotic bands. In such a rare circumstance, the 
damage created by the amniotic band may extensively 
228 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 7.23 Gastroschisis at 16 weeks of gestation. (a) 3D multiplanar imaging, showing the bowel loops floating freely in the amniotic fluid. The 
insert at lower right shows the corresponding surface rendering. (b) Another case, at 12 weeks of gestation. 
Figure 7.24 Gastroschisis at 31 weeks of gestation. The appearance 
of bowel dilatation in the 3rd trimester represents a complication, indicating 
a likely obstruction. This situation may evolve with perforation 
and/or necrosis of one or more bowel loops. (a) Sagittal view of the 
fetal trunk showing some normally sized loops close to the fetal arm 
and one severely dilated tract (arrow). (b) Axial view demonstrating 
also some meconium blocked in the dilated loop (arrowhead). (c) 
Surface rendering demonstrating the dilated loop (the same as in (b)). 
(d) Below the dilated loop, most of the herniated bowel is of normal 
size. 
a 
a 
b 
b 
c d 

involve the abdominal wall, with consequent herniation 
of bowel and other viscera. However, in this 
lethal condition, there are other major anomalies of 
the spine, the limbs, and, possibly, the skull, which 
lead to the diagnosis. 
• Association with other malformations. Intestinal 
perforation and consequent peritonitis represent complications 
rather than associated malformations. 
Gastroschisis is rarely associated with non-GI anomalies. 
The only severe condition that would significantly 
worsen the prognosis, if present, is so-called 
congenital amyoplasia, which is characterized by 
absence of limb muscles, which are replaced by 
fibrous and fatty tissue. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is extremely low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is extremely 
low, except for the rare association with the above 
mentioned congenital amyoplasia. 
Obstetric management. Should gastroschisis be detected 
in a fetus, karyotyping is not mandatory, because of the 
low risk of chromosomal anomalies. Similarly, the risk 
of associated non-chromosomal anomalies is low, and 
the only issue that needs to be addressed is the presence 
and function of the lower limb muscles. Serial follow-up 
scans should be scheduled in order to detect possible 
local complications, such as dilatation, wall edema, 
or perforation. With regard to the mode of delivery, no 
definite conclusion has been reached on the real need 
for cesarean section in order to avoid tearing on the 
mesenteric pedicle of the herniated bowel. In fact, 
almost the same risk applies for delivery of the fetal 
abdomen with gastroschisis in the course of cesarean 
section. The only aspect for which the operative modality 
of delivery would be preferable is the possible risk of 
infection of the bowel exposed to the bacteria of the 
birth canal. 
Postnatal therapy. As for omphalocele, surgical reduction 
of the defect may be carried out in a single operation 
or approached with a two-step procedure, according to 
the state and amount of herniated bowel. The same silastic 
bag (or spring-loaded silos) mentioned for omphalocele 
may be used for gastroschisis in those cases in which 
the single-step closure of the defect would dangerously 
increase the intra-abdominal pressure. Regardless of the 
procedure, the outcome is very good in the overwhelming 
majority of cases. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The postoperative 
mortality rate has been reported to be as low as 
15%. Causes of death are sepsis and the complications 
of mesenteric ischemia. However, in more recent series, 
the survival rate exceeds 90%. 
ANOMALIES OF THE GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT AND ABDOMINAL WALL 229 
REFERENCES 
1. Avni EF, Rypens F, Milaire J. Fetal esophagus: normal sonographic 
appearance. J Ultrasound Med 1994; 13: 175–80. 
2. Goldstein I, Reece EA, Yakoni S, et al. Growth of the fetal stomach 
in normal pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 1987; 70: 641–4. 
3. Sase M, Nakata M, Tashma R, Kato H. Development of gastric 
emptying in the human fetus. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 
16: 56–9. 
4. Gross RE. The Surgery of Infancy and Childhood. Philadelphia, 
PA WB Saunders, 1953. 
5. Satoh S, Takashima T, Takeuchi H, et al. Antenatal sonographic 
detection of the proximal esophageal segment: specific evidence 
for congenital esophageal atresia. J Clin Ultrasound 1995; 23: 
419–23. 
6. Stringer MD, Mc Kenna KM, Goldstein RB, et al. Prenatal 
diagnosis of esophageal atresia. J Pediatr Surg 1995; 30: 
1258–63. 
7. Stoll C, Alembik Y, Dott B, Roth MP. Evaluation of prenatal 
diagnosis of congenital gastro-intestinal atresias. Eur J Epidemiol 
1996; 12: 611–16. 
8. Romero R, Jeanty P, Pilu GL, et al. The prenatal diagnosis of 
duodenal atresia. Does it make any difference? Obstet Gynecol 
1988; 71: 739–41. 
9. Escobar MA, Ladd AP, Grosveld JL, et al. Duodenal atresia and 
stenosis: long-term follow up over 30 years. J Pediatr Surg 2004; 
39: 867–71. 
10. Paralekar S. Sonography of normal fetal bowel. J Ultrasound 
Med 1991; 10: 211–13. 
11. Iacobelli BD, Zaccara A, Spirydakis I, et al. Prenatal counselling 
of small bowel atresia: watch the fluid! Prenat Diagn 2006; 26: 
214–17. 
12. Cham KL, Tang MHY, Tse HY, Tang RYK, Tam PKH. 
Meconium peritonitis: prenatal diagnosis, postnatal management 
and outcome. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 676–82. 
13. Mushtaq I, Wright VM, Drake DP, et al. Meconium ileus secondary 
to cystic fibrosis. The East London experience. Pediatr 
Surg Int 1998; 13: 365–9. 
14. Roberts AM, Mitchell JM, Pattison NS. Fetal liver length in 
normal and isoimmunized pregnancies. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
1989; 161: 42–6. 
15. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
16. Brantberg A, Blaas HGK, Haugen SE, Eiknes SH. Characteristics 
and outcome of 90 cases of fetal omphalocele. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2005; 26: 527–37. 

The urogenital system develops from the intermediate 
mesoderm. During folding of the embryo in the horizontal 
plane, this mesoderm is carried ventrally; then, a longitudinal 
ridge of mesoderm, the urogenital ridge, forms on 
each side of the dorsal aorta. This structure will eventually 
give rise to parts of the urinary and genital tract. The part 
of urogenital ridge giving rise to the urinary system is the 
nephrogenic cord; the part giving rise to the genital system 
is the genital ridge.1 
The urinary system begins to develop prior to the genital 
system. Three regions of excretory kidney develop in 
the human embryo: pronephros, mesonephros, and 
metanephros. These arise sequentially from the intermediate 
mesoderm beginning at days 19–21 of development. 
The pronephros and mesonephros degenerate, 
while the metanephros will develop into the adult kidney. 
The metanephros begins to develop during the 5th week 
of development and start to be functionally active 5 
weeks later. Initially, it consists of two cell types: the 
epithelium of the ureteric bud and the mesenchyme of the 
metanephric blastema. A series of reciprocal interactions 
between these two structures causes the ureteric bud to 
repeatedly branch to form the ureter, the renal pelvis, the 
calices, and the collecting tubules. Concurrently, the mesenchyme, 
induced by the adjacent ureteric bud branch 
tips, undergoes a transformation to form the nephrons. 
The first glomeruli develop by 8–9 weeks, and the 
nephrogenesis continues in the cortex of the fetal kidney 
until 34–36 weeks. 
The bladder develops from the urogenital sinus, and 
the first stage of bladder development involves division 
of the cloaca into the anorectal and urogenital regions. 
Initially, the bladder is in continuity with the allantois, 
but eventually this structure regresses, converting into a 
thick fibrous cord, the urachus, which connects the bladder 
with the umbilicus. 
The mature human kidneys contain about a million 
nephrons, each consisting of specialized segments, 
including glomeruli, proximal tubules, the loop of 
Henle, and the distal tubule, connected to the tree-like 
collecting duct system and intimately associated with the 
vascular supply. 
Timing of examination. Ultrasound screening of urinary 
tract anomalies is generally performed at 19–21 weeks 
of gestation, despite the fact that at this gestational age a 
significant number of late-onset renal diseases, such as 
most forms of hydronephrosis, cannot yet be identified. 
In fact, the incidence of prenatally detected urinary tract 
malformations depends also on the timing of the scan: 
the later the ultrasound examination is performed, 
the higher the percentage of urinary tract anomalies 
detected. 
Ultrasound approach and scanning planes (views) 
Kidneys. Anatomic assessment of the kidneys can be made 
on two scanning planes: axial and longitudinal. On axial 
views, the kidneys appear as two round paravertebral 
structures with the pelvis oriented towards the midline. 
On longitudinal views, they appear elliptic. The adrenal 
glands are located just cranial to the kidneys, and, in cases 
of renal agenesis, can be mistaken for the kidneys. On the 
axial view of the kidney, it is possible to measure its width 
and thickness. The length of the kidney, from the upper to 
the lower pole, can be measured on the longitudinal view. 
Nomograms for kidney size at different gestational ages 
are given in the Appendix. The ratio between renal circumference 
and abdominal circumference is approximately 
0.27–0.30 and remains constant throughout 
pregnancy. The fetal kidneys can be visualized on ultrasound 
in most cases by the end of the 1st trimester (12 
weeks), when they appear as two hyperechoic paravertebral 
structures (Figure 8.1); in the 2nd trimester, they 
lose their hyperechoic appearance, while by the 3rd 
trimester, it is possible to distinguish between the cortex 
Chapter 8 
Urinary tract anomalies 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE UROGENITAL TRACT: ULTRASOUND 
APPROACH, SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
231 

and the medulla; the renal pyramids appear hypoechoic, 
while the pelvis appears as a small medial sonolucent 
area (Figure 8.2). The cortex is peripheral to the medulla 
and is slightly more echogenic. The size of the pelvis in 
axial sections (Figure 8.3) should not exceed 4mm 
before the 32nd week and 7 mm from the 33rd week 
until term.2 
Bladder. The bladder can be visualized as soon as urine 
production begins, at about 10 weeks of gestation. On 
transvaginal ultrasound, the bladder can be always 
visualized by 12 weeks in the middle of the fetal pelvis 
as a circular anechoic structure with echoic walls. The 
ultrasound aspect of the bladder does not change during 
gestation, and, under physiologic conditions, the 
thickness of its walls should never exceed 2–3mm 
(Figure 8.4a). The perivesical arteries, which run laterally 
to the bladder (Figure 8.4b), are easily detected on 
color Doppler, and represent useful ultrasound landmarks 
that can help to differentiate the bladder from 
other cystic formations that might be present in the 
fetal pelvis. 
Ureters and urethra. Both of these structures are not 
visible prenatally, except in cases of disease. Figure 8.5 
shows the main embryologic events occurring during 
definitive formation of the kidneys. 
232 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.2 Ultrasound appearance of the fetal kidney at 28 weeks of 
gestation: the renal pyramids may be seen as hypoechoic structures 
within the renal parenchyma; the renal pelvis may be seen as an echofree 
area medially. 
Figure 8.1 (a) Normal fetal 
kidneys at 13 weeks of gestation. 
At this stage, the kidneys appear 
as bilateral hyperechoic structures 
in the paravertebral regions 
(arrows). (b) Normal fetal kidneys 
at 18 weeks. The kidney 
appears slightly hyperechoic 
(arrows) compared with surrounding 
tissues; the renal pelvis 
is seen centrally. 
Figure 8.3 Axial scan through 
the fetal abdomen, showing measurement 
of the normal (a) and 
enlarged (b) renal pelves. 
B 
a b 
A 

MB 
RP 
MC 
U 
UB 
b 
A systematic approach to the fetal urinary tract requires 
ultrasound assessment of both kidneys, the bladder, and 
the amount of amniotic fluid. 
Absent kidney. If one of the two kidneys is not found on 
ultrasound in its proper location, then it may be ectopic 
or completely absent (unilateral agenesis). In the former 
case, the most common ectopic site is represented by the 
pelvis, in the presacral area or in the iliac fossa; alternatively, 
and, much more rarely, the ectopic kidney can 
be fused with the contralateral one (simple or fused 
crossed renal ectopia). If the kidney cannot be found in 
ectopic sites, then a putative diagnosis of unilateral renal 
agenesis can be formulated after excluding the possibility 
of severe renal hypoplasia. If both kidneys are absent 
(bilateral agenesis), the bladder cannot be visualized and 
only after 16 weeks of gestation will severe oligohydramnios 
be associated. 
Abnormal renal echogenicity and size (Figure 8.6) 
• If both kidneys appear hyperechoic in comparison 
with the liver or spleen, and larger than normal, this 
will point towards a diagnosis of polycystic kidneys. 
If additional extrarenal abnormalities are associated 
(especially of the skeleton and central nervous system 
(CNS), then the kidney anomaly is likely to be part of 
a well-defined syndrome. 
• If the kidneys are small and hyperechoic, then this 
may indicate the presence of Potter type IV cystic 
renal dysplasia. 
• If the kidneys are hyperechoic and normal in size and 
no associated extrarenal anomalies are found, the picture 
may simply represent a variant form of normal 
kidney development, although some authors have 
included this feature (i.e., normally sized hyperechoic 
kidney), among the soft markers of aneuploidy. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 233 
Figure 8.5 Development of the kidney. (a) Sketch of a lateral view of a 5 week embryo, showing the primordium of the metanephros. (b,c) Sketches 
showing successive stages in the development of the metanephric diverticulum or ureteric bud (fifth to sixth week). Observe the development of the 
ureter, renal pelvis and major calices. (UB, ureteric bud; P, Remnant of pronephros; M, mesonephros; MB, metanephric blastema; RP, renal pelvis; 
U, ureter; MC, major calix.) 
a 
Figure 8.4 (a) Axial scan 
through the fetal pelvis showing 
the bladder wall (arrows). (b) 
Color flow Doppler image showing 
both perivesical arteries separating 
around the bladder 
(arrow). 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 
a b 

234 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Hyperechoic 
kidney 
Polycystic 
kidneys 
Normal 
variant or 
soft marker? 
Cystic dysplasia 
Potter type 4 
Volume 
+ Other anomalies 
Bardet–Biedl 
syndrome 
Beckwith–Wiedemann 
syndrome Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome 
Perlman syndrome 
Zellweger syndrome 
Figure 8.6 Algorithm to be applied in the case of hyperechoic kidneys. 
Calicopyelic 
dilatation 
Ureteropelvic 
junction 
obstruction 
Vesico-ureteral 
junction obstructionb 
Unilateral 
vesico-ureteral 
reflux 
Post-urethral valvesa 
Bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Moderate 
Severe 
No 
Ureteronephrosis? 
Bladder 
dilatation? 
aComplete valves, with absent amniotic fluid 
bOften associated with duplex kidney, 
as in this case 
Figure 8.7 Algorithm to be applied in the case of calicopelvic dilatation. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 235 
Bladder 
not visualizeda 
Kidneys 
present? 
Normal 
echogenicity? 
Hyperechoic 
kidneys 
Yes 
Yes 
No Absent amniotic fluid 
Bilatral 
renal 
agenesis 
No 
ARPKD 
ADPKD 
Potter IVd 
Reduced 
amniotic fluid + 
abnormal 
Dopplerc 
Normal 
amniotic fluid 
lower 
abdominal 
mass 
Severe 
FGRc 
Bladder 
exstrophy 
Volume - 
reduced 
amniotic fluid 
aAfter ruling out physiologic transient 
emptying 
bSometimes reduced amniotic fluid 
cOften with hyperechoic ileus from 
mesenteric ischemia 
dObstructive cystic renal dysplasia 
Volume + 
normal 
amniotic fluid b 
Volume + 
absent 
amniotic fluid 
Figure 8.8 Algorithm to be applied in the case 
of non-visualization of the bladder. ARPKD, 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; 
ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney 
disease; FGR, fetal growth restriction. 
• If parenchymal cysts of various sizes are detected, and 
the overall renal volume is increased, a diagnosis of 
multicystic kidney can be made, if the cysts do not 
communicate with one another; otherwise, it could be 
a case of severe hydronephrosis. In both cases, it is of 
the utmost importance, for prognostic purposes, to 
make a careful assessment of the contralateral kidney, 
as described below. 
• If unilateral calicopyelic dilatation is present 
(Figure 8.7), then the hydronephrosis may be due to 
obstruction or vesico-ureteral reflux. The operator 
should check for signs of dilatation of the ureter to 
exclude the possibility of pyelo-ureteral junction 
obstruction, thereby hypothesizing that an obstruction 
of the vesico-ureteral junction or a reflux might 
be present. 
• If bilateral hydro-ureteronephrosis is present together 
with mild distension of the bladder, but normal thickness 
of the bladder walls and a normal quantity of 
amniotic fluid, then the most likely diagnosis is that of 
bilateral vesico-ureteral reflux. 
• Conversely, if the bladder is clearly dilated and with 
thickened and hyperechoic walls, and significant oligohydramnios 
is associated, then this points towards a 
diagnosis of lower urinary tract obstruction. In this 
case, hydro-ureteronephrosis may be associated with 
increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma (Potter 
type IV cystic dysplasia). 
• If the fetal bladder cannot be seen, then the diagnostic 
algorithm shown in Figure 8.8 should be applied, and 
a firm diagnosis made only after weighing up all of 
the parameters listed above. 

236 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
RENAL AGENESIS 
Incidence. Unilateral form: 1/1000. Bilateral form: 1–2/5000. 
Diagnosis. Bilateral form: lack of visualization of the kidneys and bladder associated with severe oligohydramnios 
(after the 16th week). Unilateral form: lack of visualization of one kidney, with normal bladder and amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low risk in isolated unilateral forms (< 1%); slightly higher in isolated bilateral 
renal agenesis. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High: 20–25%. 
Outcome. Bilateral form: uniformly fatal. Unilateral form: good, if isolated. 
Definition. Renal agenesis is defined as complete 
absence of one or both kidneys (unilateral or bilateral 
renal agenesis). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This anomaly is due to failure 
of the development of the ureteric bud with absence 
of any interaction with the metanephric blastema.3 The 
incidence is 1/1000 newborns for the unilateral form and 
1–2/5000 for the bilateral form. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Sonographic diagnosis of bilateral 
renal agenesis is based on the impossibility of visualizing 
the kidneys and the bladder, associated with severe 
oligohydramnios after the 16th week of gestation. In 
these cases, it is important not to mistake the adrenal 
glands for the kidneys (Figure 8.9). The lack of an 
acoustic window, due to the severe oligohydramnios, can 
make the diagnosis challenging in some cases. In addition, 
the adrenal glands may be mistakenly interpreted as 
kidneys: in fact, due to the absence of the kidneys, these 
glands sometimes appear hypertrophic or merely rounder 
than normal. Although amnioinfusion has been proposed 
as a diagnostic aid, it is generally sufficient to employ 
color/power Doppler to confirm the absence of the renal 
Figure 8.9 Bilateral renal agenesis. (a) The absence of both kidneys is evident despite the associated oligohydramnios; the arrows indicate both 
adrenal glands in the paraspinal regions. (b) The ultrasound image shows the absence of both kidneys; the right adrenal gland appears enlarged 
(arrowheads); the typical ‘ice cream sandwich’ appearance of the adrenal gland is characterized by the hypoechoic cortex and hyperechoic medulla; 
this is quite different from the normal kidney. 
In most renal abnormalities, the prognosis is worse if 
the lesion is bilateral and/or if it is associated with 
extrarenal anomalies. In fact, bilateral renal malformations 
often cause renal insufficiency, which in 
turn is responsible for severe oligohydramnios. This 
may induce Potter sequence anomalies, including the 
Potter facies, clubfeet, and other skeletal deformities; 
the association of extrarenal anomalies increases 
the risk of chromosomal and non-chromosomal 
syndromic conditions. 
CHARACTERIZATION OF MAJOR ANOMALIES 
a b 

arteries, feature consistent with the diagnosis of bilateral 
renal agenesis (Figure 8.10). The course of the superior 
vesical arteries can also help to confirm the absence of the 
bladder. Fetal biometry and Doppler evaluation of the 
umbilical artery velocity waveform rules out another 
cause of non-visualization of the fetal bladder and oligohydramnios, 
namely fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
Most cases of unilateral renal agenesis escape prenatal 
diagnosis because the bladder and amount of amniotic 
fluid are normal and so there are no indirect signs raising 
the suspicion of renal disease. Moreover, in the same way 
as in bilateral agenesis, the presence of the adrenal gland 
in the ipsilateral renal loggia may resemble the kidney. 
Color Doppler can be used in doubtful cases to confirm 
the absence of the ipsilateral renal arteries (Figure 8.11). 
However, prior to a definite diagnosis of unilateral 
kidney agenesis, care should be taken to rule out the 
more frequent presence of an ectopic kidney (or of renal 
hypoplasia). In the third trimester, the findings of an 
enlarged kidney contralateral to the empty renal fossa 
can assist in diagnosing in utero absence of the other kidney. 
In fact, unilateral renal agenesis can cause compensatory 
hypertrophy of the contralateral kidney. 
Artefacts. As stated above, there is a risk of mistaking the 
adrenal glands for the missing kidney(s), considering also 
the impaired acoustic window. The features that may 
help in differentiating the adrenals from the kidneys are 
as follows: the adrenal glands are smaller and oblong, 
and (in contrast to the renal medulla), the adrenal 
medulla is hyperechoic rather than hypoechoic. Finally, 
the renal pelvis cannot be visualized (Figure 8.9). 
• Differential diagnosis. In cases of bilateral renal agenesis, 
the differential diagnosis should include other conditions 
possibly responsible for severe oligohydramnios: 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 237 
Figure 8.10 (a) Color flow Doppler shows both renal arteries in a case of autosomal recessive polycystic renal disease (ARPKD) (b) Absence of the 
renal arteries is noted in a case of bilateral renal agenesis, while the aorta is clearly shown; the arrows indicate the adrenal glands. 
Figure 8.11 Unilateral renal agenesis. (a) Color Doppler image demonstrating a single renal artery; the arrow indicates the pelvis of the single kidney, 
? indicating the empty contralateral renal area (b) 3D power Doppler of the same case, showing a single renal artery (RA) branching off the 
abdominal aorta; the arrow indicates the absence of a contralateral renal artery. IA, common iliac arteries 
a b 
a b 

severe FGR and rupture of the membranes. In the 
presence of severe FGR, umbilical artery velocimetry is 
usually abnormal, while the presence of a normal bladder 
can identify rupture of the membranes. 
• Association with other malformations. The anomalies 
most frequently associated with unilateral renal agenesis3 
affect the contralateral kidney and the internal 
genital organs (which cannot be visualized in the prenatal 
period). Extrarenal anomalies often associated 
with bilateral renal agenesis include cardiac, cerebral 
and skeletal malformations. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low in 
isolated bilateral forms (1–5%), and low in unilateral 
forms (< 1%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is high 
(20–25%). Renal agenesis can be the main sign of 
more than 40 different syndromes.3 The most common 
syndromes and associations are as follows: 
• Fraser syndrome:3 look for . renal agenesis + laryngeal 
atresia, cryptophthalmos, and syndactyly 
(Chapter 10). 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . renal agenesis 
+ vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, CHD, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, and limb anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Caudal regression syndrome:3 look for . renal agenesis 
+ sacral agenesis, lumbar vertebral anomalies, 
and femoral hypoplasia (Chapter 10). 
• Sirenomelia:3 look for . renal agenesis + fusion of the 
lower limbs, anal atresia, vertebral anomalies, and 
genital anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Cerebro-oculofacial–skeletal syndrome:3 look for . 
renal agenesis + microcephaly, micrognathia, and 
joint contractures. 
• Otocephaly:3 look for . renal agenesis + agnathia, 
microstomia, holoprosencephaly, and cleft lip/palate. 
If renal agenesis is isolated, the empiric risk of recurrence 
is 3.5%, whereas if it is one sign of a syndrome, the risk 
of recurrence is obviously the risk associated with the 
underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. Karyotyping is not mandatory 
for the unilateral form. Although the association with 
chromosomal anomalies is not considered to be high in 
the bilateral form, some authors advise karyotyping,4 
especially in cases associated with other malformations, 
to help estimate the recurrence risk. Ultrasound investigation 
of the parents’ kidneys is necessary in case of unilateral 
agenesis, in view of the autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern of the condition. After delivery, 
scintigraphy should be performed to gain postnatal confirmation 
of the renal agenesis and to assess the residual 
renal function. 
Postnatal therapy. No treatment is available for bilateral 
renal agenesis: one-third of fetuses die in utero and the 
remaining two-thirds die immediately after birth due to 
severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Bilateral renal 
agenesis is always lethal, due to the associated severe 
pulmonary hypoplasia. In fact, apart from provoking the 
typical Potter sequence (Potter facies, deformation of 
hands and feet, etc.), severe oligohydramnios induces 
lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. The compression of the 
fetal chest by the uterine walls and the absence of amniotic 
fluid arrest pulmonary development. In cases of unilateral 
agenesis, if the controlateral kidney is unaffected, 
the prognosis is good and the survival and quality of life 
are normal. 
238 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
PELVIC KIDNEY 
Incidence. 1/700 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Visualization of the kidney in the pelvis, beside the bladder. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Good in isolated forms. 
This features an abnormal position of the kidney, which 
in most cases is located in the pelvis (Figure 8.12 a,b). 
The ectopic kidney can be positioned either ipsilaterally 
or contralaterally (crossed renal ectopia) (Figure 8.12c). 
RENAL ECTOPIA 

Definition. The kidney is positioned in the fetal pelvis, 
either in the iliac fossa or on the midline in the pre-sacral 
area. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The kidney fails to migrate 
up into the lumbar region between the 6th and 10th 
weeks of gestation.1 The incidence of this anomaly is 
approximately 1/700 liveborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The kidney is not visible in its usual 
location. Only the adrenal gland is visible, and can sometimes 
be mistaken for the kidney; instead, the kidney is 
positioned in the pelvis beside the bladder (Figure 8.12a), 
which shows normal filling. The amount of amniotic fluid 
is normal. In some cases, the vascularization of the pelvic 
kidney is as a tributary of the iliac arteries, rather than of 
the descending abdominal aorta (Figure 8.12b). 
• Differential diagnosis. A pelvic kidney must be differentiated 
from unilateral agenesis and from crossed 
renal ectopia (Figure 8.12c), in which both kidneys are 
present, often partly fused, in the same half of the 
abdomen. It should be underlined that the visualization 
of a pelvic kidney is often hampered by interposition of 
bowel loops and shadowing from the iliac wing. Color 
Doppler may be useful to locate the hilum of the 
ectopic kidney. 
• Association with other malformations. Apart from 
anomalies of the genital tract, which in any case 
cannot be identified in the prenatal period, the pelvic 
kidney can be associated with gastrointestinal and 
cardiac anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is low. 
Obstetric management. An accurate anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert in order to exclude the 
presence of associated anomalies. Ultrasound examination 
of the parents’ kidneys is recommended. Serial ultrasound 
follow up is warranted in order to detect possible 
late onset vesicoureteral reflux, which is not uncommon. 
Postnatal therapy. There is no treatment. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In isolated 
forms, the prognosis is good. Vesico-ureteral reflux is 
frequently present.
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 239 
Figure 8.12 Pelvic kidney. (a) Oblique scan through the fetal pelvis. The kidney (arrows) is seen within the pelvis, lying superior to the bladder 
(BL). (b) Color flow Doppler shows the pelvic kidney artery (arrow), which originates from the aorta at a more caudal level than the contralateral 
renal artery (RA). K, pelvic kidney. (c) Crossed fused renal ectopia. Note the two fused kidneys (arrows); the lower pole of the upper one is fused 
with the upper pole of the lower one. In these cases, the kidneys are also abnornally rotated, as in horseshoe kidney. 
HORSESHOE KIDNEY 
FUSION ANOMALIES 
Incidence. 1/400 newborns. 
Diagnosis. In axial scans, the isthmus linking the two inferior poles of the kidneys can be seen in front 
of the descending aorta. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. 5–8%: Turner syndrome and trisomy 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. moderately high: 12–16%. 
Outcome. In isolated forms, horseshoe kidney is asymptomatic in about half of cases. Increased incidence of 
infections and vesico-ureteral reflux. 
a b c 

Definition. The kidneys are fused, with an equal amount 
of renal tissue on each side of the midline. The inferior 
poles of the kidneys are linked by an isthmus of fibrous 
tissue or parenchyma. The ureters do not cross the 
midline before entering the renal sinuses. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Horseshoe kidney is the 
most common type of fusion anomaly. The anomaly 
originates after the interaction of the ureteral buds with 
the metanephric blastema, but before the migration and 
rotation processes.3 The horseshoe kidney is usually 
positioned lower than normal because its ascent in the 
normal position is impeded by the emergence of the 
inferior mesenteric artery. The incidence is 1/400 newborns 
and is higher in males. This anomaly has a heterogeneous 
etiology. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On transverse or oblique views 
of the fetal abdomen, the isthmus connecting the inferior 
poles of the two kidneys can be seen in front of the 
descending aorta; the kidneys appear medially and 
anteriorly rotated. In this scanning plane, it is also possible 
to see the two renal pelvises (Figure 8.13), which 
have a more anterior location and are often slightly 
dilated. 
• Association with other malformations. The anomalies 
most frequently associated include hydronephrosis 
(possibly due to vesico-ureteral reflux or ureteral 
obstruction) and genital anomalies (unrecognizable in 
the fetus). In one-third of the cases, extrarenal anomalies 
(CNS, cardiac, and skeletal malformations) are 
associated.3 Association with Wilms’ tumor in the 
prenatal period has also been described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is not insignificant 
(5–8%). Horseshoe kidney is present in 30% of cases of 
Turner syndrome and about 20% of trisomy 18. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high (12–16%). The best known syndromes possibly 
associated with horseshoe kidney are: 
• Caudal regression syndrome:3 look for . horseshoe 
kidney + sacral agenesis, lumbar vertebral anomalies, 
and femoral hypoplasia (Chapter 10). 
• Otocephaly:3 look for . horseshoe kidney + 
agnathia, CHD, and cleft lip/palate. 
• Oro-cranio-digital syndrome:3 look for . horseshoe 
kidney + cleft lip/palate, microcephaly, hypoplastic 
thumbs, and elbow deformities. 
In isolated forms, the recurrence risk is not significantly 
increased. 
Obstetric management. An accurate anatomic scan 
should be performed by an expert in order to exclude the 
presence of associated anomalies. Karyotyping is indicated, 
especially if other anomalies are associated. Serial 
ultrasound monitoring should be warranted to detect the 
possible late onset of vesicoureteral reflux, which is not 
uncommon. 
Postnatal therapy. Postnatal treatment may be indicated 
in the presence of hydronephrosis and/or associated 
reflux. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In about half of 
the isolated forms, the anomaly is asymptomatic. 
Postnatal follow-up is advised because of the significant 
association with infections, hematuria, and vesicoureteral 
reflux. Prognosis, survival, and quality of life are 
poorer if the disease is associated with other anomalies, 
especially in the context of a syndrome. In isolated 
forms, the prognosis is good. 
240 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
BL 
Figure 8.13 Horseshoe kidney. Ultrasound images showing (a) both renal pelvises (arrows), which have a more anterior location than normal, 
and (b) the slightly lower than normal location of the horseshoe kidney. The arrows indicates the renal pelvises; BL, bladder. 
a b 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 241 
POLYCYSTIC AND DYSPLASTIC KIDNEYS 
One of the prenatal ultrasound renal findings that can 
represent a difficult diagnosis is the bright or hyperecoic 
kidney. A large bright or hyperechoic kidney 
(Figure 8.14) represents a dilemma, especially in the 
presence of a normal amniotic fluid volume, since different 
underlying etiologies can be present, including 
also genetic syndromes (Table 8.1). Recently, the study 
of fetal renal disease in animal models, along with molecular 
biologic studies, has allowed investigation of the 
relationship between specific renal histologic lesions 
and the underlying molecular mechanisms of disease;5 
this may help achieve a better comprehension of kidney 
diseases and their sonographic features. 
The increased echogenicity of the renal parenchyma 
can result from the presence of dysplasia and/or multiple 
microscopic cyst. The term dysplastic kidney is used to 
encompass a heterogeneous group of disorders due to 
abnormal development and differentiation of the 
metanephric mesenchyme, and to abnormal interaction 
with the ureteric bud. In a relevant proportion of cases, 
dysplastic kidneys are associated with ectopic placement 
of ureteric orifices, and/or with abnormalities of the urinary 
tract, leading to unilateral, bilateral, or focal 
obstruction of urine flow. Dysplastic organs often contain 
cysts, usually deriving from dilated terminal ampullae 
of the ureteric bud. As a general rule, severely 
dysplastic kidneys have no excretory function, are usually 
attached to atretic or absent ureters, and remain 
asymptomatic only if unilateral. On ultrasound, as 
Figure 8.14 Coronal view of two hyperechoic kidneys in a 21 week 
fetus. 
Table 8.1 Conditions associated with bright kidneys
Renal Associated Kidney 
Condition Amniotic fluid macrocysts anomalies Inheritance volume 
ARPKD Decreased +/-* - AR Increased 
ADPKD Normal +/-* - AD Increased 
Beckwith– 
Wiedeman syndrome Normal/increased - + AD or Increased 
sporadic 
Perlman syndrome Increase/decreased - + AR Increased 
Trisomy 13 Normal/decreased +/- + Sporadic Increased/normal 
Bardet–Biedl syndrome Normal +/-* + AR Increased 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome Decreased + + AR Increased 
Zellweger syndrome Normal +/- + AR Normal/increased 
Elejaide syndrome Decreased - + AR Increased 
Cystic dysplastic Decreased +/- - 10% AD Normal/decreased 
kidney (Potter IV) 
ARPKD, autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease; ADPKD, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; 
AR, autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant. *Renal macrocysts are present in a minority of cases. 

242 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
reported above, the increased echogenicity of the renal 
parenchyma can be related to the dysplasia and/or multiple 
microscopic cyst, although it does not represent a 
specific sign, since at times it is also present in the 
absence of dysplasia. Sometimes, even if the parenchyma 
is not hyperechoic, the dysplasia may still be present. 
Organs with focal dysplastic lesions may exhibit an 
almost normal function and may be diagnosed later in 
life owing to the late onset of signs and/or symptoms 
related to their larger size, or to the occurrence of frequently 
relapsing infections. 
In the case of hyperechoic kideny +/- renal macrocysts, 
ultrasound examination of the parents and grandparents 
is useful. Kidney morphology must be evaluated and their 
size compared with the reference table. An accurate 
anatomic scan should be performed in order to exclude/ 
detect other malformations and karyotyping should be 
discussed, especially if other anomalies are present. 
AUTOSOMAL RECESSIVE POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (ARPKD) – POTTER TYPE I 
Incidence. 1/20 000–40 000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Both kidneys are increased in volume and are hyperechogenic. The bladder cannot be visualized, and 
severe oligohydramnios is present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The pathology is monogenic (single gene disorder with multiple mutant alleles). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High, if the polycystic aspect and not the genetic cause is considered. 
Outcome. Unfavorable, due to associated severe pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Definition. This is a bilateral anomaly mainly characterized 
by fusiform cystic dilatations of the collecting ducts. 
The kidneys appear spongy and there is no clear separation 
between cortex and medulla. The cut surface 
demonstrates cortical extension of fusiform or cylindrical 
spaces arranged radially throughout the renal 
parenchyma from the medulla to the cortex.6,7 It is a 
hereditary disorder, with an autosomal recessive inheritance 
pattern.6 The disease is associated with portal and 
interstitial fibrosis of the liver. According to the time of 
onset, which is a function of the proportion of dilated 
renal ducts, ARPKD is subdivided into perinatal, neonatal, 
infantile, and juvenile forms. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The disease is caused by 
mutations in the PKHD1 gene on chromosome 6p21.6 
The protein encoded by the PKHD1 gene is known 
as polyductin or fibrocystin, and is characterized by a 
single transmembrane segment and a short cytoplasmic 
C- terminal portion. However, significant genetic heterogeneity 
is present. Primary anomalies of the tubular cilia 
are clearly involved in the pathogenesis of the disease. 
The incidence is 1/20 000–1/40 000 newborns. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. On ultrasound, ARPKD is characterized 
by increased volume and evident hyperechogenicity 
of both kidneys. These two signs result 
from the insonation of interfaces provided by the walls 
of the microcysts (Figure 8.15). The bladder cannot be 
seen, and severe oligohydramnios is generally present, 
starting from 16 weeks onwards. Despite the fact that 
in some cases the disease becomes sonographically recognizable 
in the 3rd trimester only, in more than 50% 
of cases the diagnosis can be made in the 2nd trimester. 
Repeated sonographic measurements of kidney length 
appear to be the most useful parameter. In addition, 
unlike in the normal kidney, in the 3rd trimester it will 
not be possible to differentiate the cortex from the 
medulla because corticomedullary differentiation is less 
defined or completely lacking6,7 (Figure 8.15a). In some 
cases macrocysts are present. In milder forms, which 
have been demonstrated to involve only part of the 
nephrons, prenatal ultrasound diagnosis may be very 
challenging. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the 
autosomal dominant form of polycystic kidney disease 
(ADPKD – Potter type III). The latter is generally associated 
with a normal quantity of amniotic fluid and a 
normal bladder (Table 8.1). Moreover, the differentiation 
between the cortex and the medulla is more pronounced 
in comparison with ARPKD, because the 
cortex tends to be hyperechoic whereas the medulla is 
normally hypoechoic, probably due to confinement of 
the microcysts to the cortical region7 (Figure 8.16b). 
However, the family history and a rapid ultrasound 
assessment of the parents’ kidneys often solve any 
diagnostic doubt, because of the different inheritance 
pattern of the two diseases (autosomal recessive for 
ARPKD, autosomal dominant for the adult form). 

• Association with other malformations. These include 
cystic fibrosis of the liver (Figure 8.15b), pulmonary 
hypoplasia, and the Potter phenotype (both linked to 
severe oligohydramnios sequence). It should be noted 
that in ARPKD, the disease spectrum ranges from 
mild kidney alterations with severe liver involvement 
to the reverse picture. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The condition is a 
single-gene disorder, not associated with karyotypic 
alterations. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. An enlarged 
and hyperechoic kidney can be found in a relatively 
high number of syndromic conditions7 (Table 8.1). In 
Bardet–Biedl syndrome, as in ARPKD, there is little or 
no corticomedullary differentiation; however, polydactyly 
is present and the quantity of amniotic fluid 
and bladder filling are normal. In Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome, the markedly increased kidney volume is 
generally apparent even earlier, and CNS anomalies 
and polydactyly are associated in most cases, although 
they are difficult to recognize because of the common 
occurrence of severe oligohydramnios. The presence 
of the extrarenal findings is sufficient to make a 
differential diagnosis in the two aforementioned 
syndromes and in other rarer conditions characterized 
by an enlarged and hyperechoic kidney 
(Table 8.1): 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + cephalocele, microcephaly, polydactyly 
(Chapter 10). 
• Bardet–Biedl syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + polydactyly and genital anomalies. 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + macroglossia, omphalocele, and hemihypertrophy 
(Chapter 10). 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 243 
Figure 8.15 Autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease 
(ARPKD) – Potter type I. 
(a) Axial scan through the fetal 
abdomen showing the enlarged 
hyperechoic kidneys (arrows). (b) 
Sagittal scan of the fetal abdomen 
showing the increased echogenicity 
of the liver due to cystic 
fibrosis (arrowheads); the arrow 
indicates the polycystic kidney. 
a b 
Figure 8.16 Polycystic kidney disease. (a) In ARPKD, there is no clear separation between cortex and medulla; thus the kidney appears 
homogeneously hyperechoic. (b,c) In ADPKD, on the other hand, there is a more evident differentiation between the cortex and medulla. (b, c: 3D 
US with SRI)
a b c 

• Perlman syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
diaphragmatic hernia, macrosomia, cleft palate, and 
dextrocardia. 
• Elejalde syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
omphalocele, corpus callosum agenesis, macrosomia, 
craniosynostosis, and skeletal dysplasia. 
Obstetric management. After the 24th week of gestation, 
management is conservative. Molecular typing of polycystic 
kidneys has yielded a better understanding of the disease, 
but the possibility of making an early genetic 
diagnosis of the disease during the prenatal period is still 
very limited. In the case of ARPKD, mutations of the 
PKHD1 gene are responsible for the disease, but there is a 
high rate of allelic heterogeneity and a high frequency of 
missense mutations, whose identification usually requires 
gene sequencing. For this reason, in sporadic cases identified 
in the prenatal period, it is unlikely that the 
specific mutation will be identified within a reasonable 
time-frame. However, when other cases have occurred in 
the family, there are much more technical possibilities, 
because linkage analysis (individualizing the haplotype 
associated with the disease) can be performed under suitable 
conditions (informed consent of the family and available 
DNA from a previously affected family member). In 
doubtful cases in which other anomalies are associated, 
karyotyping may be advisable. 
Postnatal therapy. No treatment is possible. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Up to 30% of 
affected individuals die in the early neonatal period due 
to respiratory insufficiency, and the majority of surviving 
infants develop hypertension. Progression to endstage 
renal disease occurs in 20–45% of cases within 
15 years, but a proportion maintain renal function 
into adulthood, where complications of liver disease 
predominate. 
244 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
MULTICYSTIC DYSPLASTIC KIDNEY (MCDK) – POTTER TYPE II 
Incidence. At birth, 1/1000–5000 live births; unilateral in approximately 75–80% of cases. 
Diagnosis. Unilateral: the kidney is increased in volume, with multiple non-communicating cysts of variable size; 
the parenchyma is hyperechoic; normal amount of amniotic fluid and bladder visualized. Bilateral: same as above 
+ severe oligohydramnios and inability to visualize bladder. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low in isolated unilateral forms (2–4%), reaches 15–18% in bilateral 
forms and 25–28% when associated with other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. 5–10%. 
Outcome. Unilateral form: involution of the kidney, resulting in disappearance in a significant percentage of cases 
within the first 2 years of life. Bilateral form: unfavorable prognosis. 
Definition. There is an enlarged kidney with parenchyma 
replaced by multiple, non-communicating cysts, of variable 
size and number. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is due to an abnormal 
development, associated in a significant percentage of 
cases with early obstruction (atretic ureters).3 It is unilateral 
in approximately 75–80% of cases, but may also be 
bilateral or segmented, in which case small areas of 
normal renal parenchyma are also present. The incidence 
is 1/1000–5000 live births. It is usually sporadic, 
but recurrence has been described in 1–2% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the majority of cases, the ultrasound 
diagnosis can be made in the 2nd trimester, and 
relates to a single kidney with multiple cysts of variable 
size mixed with hyperechogenicity of the parenchyma 
(Figure 8.17a). The dimensions of the kidney are 
often significantly increased and depend on the number 
and dimensions of the non-communicating cysts 
(Figure 8.17b). The bladder and quantity of amniotic 
fluid are usually normal. The volume of multicystic 
kidneys is often increased, and for this reason MCKD 
represents one of the most common causes of abdominal 
mass in the neonate. A variety with reduced volume 
is also described, as is the possibility of evolution 
into renal hypoplasia. In rare cases, the cystic element 
may only involve part of the kidney, particularly 
when associated with the presence of a duplex kidney. 
The ipsilateral renal artery may be absent or small, 
with the presence of Doppler velocity waveform 
anomalies. When, less frequently, both of the kidneys 
are multicystic (Figure 8.17c), severe oligohydramnios 
is present and the bladder cannot be visualized. 

In sporadic cases, the multicystic kidney may also 
have an ectopic site. 
• Differential diagnosis. This mainly involves hydronephrosis. 
When the position of the cysts resembles 
that of a calicopyelic dilatation, the presence of anomalous 
renal tissue between the cysts and the lack of 
communication between the cysts indicates a diagnosis 
of multicystic kidney. If the differential diagnosis is 
particularly difficult, some authors have suggested 
aspiration of the cystic fluid, which, in the case of 
multicystic kidney, shows high phosphate levels.8 
• Association with other malformations. Children 
with unilateral MCKD have an increased risk 
of abnormalities of the contralateral kidney 
and the lower urogenital tract; heart, CNS, and 
gastrointestinal problems have frequently been 
reported in association. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively low 
(2–4%); but reaches 15–18% in bilateral forms and 
25–28% when associated with other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is 5–10%. 
The most common syndromes possibly associated with 
MCKD are as follows: 
• Brachio-otorenal syndrome:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + pre-auricular tags and branchial cleft 
fistulas. 
• Cerebrorenodigital syndrome:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + digital and limb anomalies, and CNS 
malformations. 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . multicystic 
kidney + vertebral anomalies, anal atresia, CHD, 
tracheo-esophageal fistula, and limb anomalies 
(Chapter 10). 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 245 
Figure 8.17 Multicystic dysplastic kidney disease 
(MCKD) – Potter type II. (a)Axial scan through the 
fetal abdomen showing an enlarged right kidney 
(arrow) with multiple cysts within the hyperechoic 
parenchyma; the contralateral kidney is normal. 
(b) Coronal scan through the fetal abdomen showing 
an enlarged kidney with increased echogenicity and 
numerous non-communicating cysts. (c) Axial scan 
through the fetal abdomen showing 2 hyperechoic 
enlarged kidneys and multiple macrocysts. 
a b 
c 

246 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
AUTOSOMAL DOMINANT POLYCYSTIC KIDNEY DISEASE (ADPKD) – POTTER TYPE III 
Incidence. Affects approximately 1/1000 people. 
Diagnosis. Kidneys moderately increased in volume, hyperechogenic (often the cortex only), with a bladder that 
can be visualized and normal or slightly reduced amniotic fluid. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The anomaly is monogenic. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high, if the polycystic aspect and not its cause is considered. 
Outcome. Although the symptoms usually occur in the 3rd–5th decades of life, the prognosis is apparently worse 
in the prenatally detected forms. 
In isolated forms, the risk of recurrence is 3%; in 
syndromic forms, it is that of the underlying syndrome. 
Obstetric management. In the case of unilateral involvement, 
serial ultrasound scans should be arranged in order 
to follow up the lesion during gestation, as it may sometimes 
reduce in volume; at the same time, the onset of 
hydronephrosis (up to 40% of cases) on the contralateral 
kidney should be verified. In the case of unilateral 
MCKD, meticulous long-term (pre- and postnatal) 
screening of the entire urinary tract is warranted. In bilateral 
forms, the prognosis is unfavorable due to the presence 
of the oligohydramnios, due to the complete renal 
insufficiency, which may result in the Potter sequence and 
death from lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Postnatal therapy. After birth, scintigraphy is recommended 
to confirm the type of lesion in doubtful cases 
and to evaluate residual renal function. During the early 
years of life, serial ultrasound follow-up must be carried 
out. Evaluation of the contralateral kidney is important, 
to ascertain the possible presence of associated anomalies 
and/or an infection. Nephrectomy is recommended if the 
multicystic kidney is symptomatic, being responsible for 
hypertension, hematuria, or infection. In this regard, 
it must be remembered that during the first 2 years of 
life, there is a high chance of involution of the multicystic 
kidney. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Although occasional 
cases of infection or hypertension associated with 
multicystic kidneys have been reported, prognosis, 
survival, and quality of life are good in the majority of 
cases of isolated forms. When the multicystic disease is 
bilateral, a conservative approach is recommended, after 
the 24th week, due to the unfavorable prognosis. 
Definition. This is a bilateral anomaly mainly characterized 
by cysts that arise from all areas of the nephron 
or collecting duct. The disease is inherited with an 
autosomal dominant pattern. It is typically of adult 
onset, becoming symptomatic usually in the 3rd–5th 
decades of life,3 but it can be identified in the fetus in 
families at risk. In prenatal life, ADPKD is characterized 
by the presence of enlarged kidneys that also 
show increased parenchymal echogenicity (often 
involving the outer layer only) due to the presence of 
microcysts. In ADPKD, initial nephron and collecting 
duct formation is unremarkable, but cystic dilatation 
of these structures then ensues, causing secondary loss 
of adjacent normal parenchyma. According to some 
authors, the cases identified in the fetus have a worse 
prognosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. This is the most common 
hereditary kidney disorder, with an incidence of 1/1000 
in the general population. Mutations of two genes on 
chromosome 16 have been found to be responsible for 
the disease. Mutations of the PKD1 gene, encoding polycystine 
1, are responsible for approximately 85% of 
cases, whereas mutations of the PKD2 gene, encoding 
polycystine 2, are responsible for approximately 
10–12% of cases; the latter mutations are responsible 
for the less severe cases occurring later in life. It is probable 
that there is also a third gene responsible for the 
remaining cases, but it has not yet been identified. Both 
polycystines are located in the primary cilia of the renal 
tubules, and are involved in regulation of the cell cycle 
and in the intracellular transport of calcium (voltageactivated 
calcium channels). The prevailing pathogenetic 
hypothesis is that of the so-called second-hit theory: the 
genetic defect causes the focal formation of cysts, which 
initially involve less than 5% of the nephrons; a subsequent 
somatic mutation in the normal allele causes full 
expression of the disease later in life. The considerable 
variation in the phenotypic expression of the disease 
within individual families, and the variability of 

extrarenal events, suggests interaction between environmental 
factors and other modifying genes in modulation 
of the clinical expression. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The kidneys are hyperechoic 
(often in the cortical region only) and moderately 
increased in volume. Fetal cases with the presence 
of macrocysts have also been described. The bladder 
and quantity of amniotic fluid are usually normal. 
Furthermore, corticomedullar differentiation is 
increased in a great number of cases because the cortical 
is hyperechoic whereas the medulla is regularly 
hypoechoic, probably due to the selective presence of 
microcysts in the cortical region6,7 (Figure 8.18a). Less 
frequently, as in the autosomal recessive variety, the 
kidneys are considerably increased in size and corticomedullar 
differentiation is absent or decreased or 
macrocysts may be present (Figure 8.18b,c). The ultrasound 
picture described above frequently follows a 
normal result during the 2nd-trimester scan; furthermore, 
a normal ultrasound result during the prenatal 
period does not exclude the presence of this disease. On 
the contrary, in some families, the sonographic signs of 
renal disease are evident as early as the 15th week. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis of 
the two polycystic kidney variants is based on a 
positive family history and on the recognition, in 
the autosomal dominant variant, of moderately 
enlarged kidneys with normal bladder and amniotic 
fluid7 (Table 8.1). Furthermore, corticomedullar 
differentiation is frequently increased in ADPKD 
while it is lost in ARPKD (Figure 8.18). In a minority 
of cases of ADPKD, the kidneys are severely 
enlarged and show loss of corticomedullary 
differentiation. In a few cases, ADPKD may also 
feature late-onset oligohydramnios. A hyperechoic 
polycystic kidney (cystic dysplasia) can also be present 
in a number of syndromic conditions described 
below. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. The disease is monogenic. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. The following 
syndromic conditions may have a polycystic kidney 
among their typical features (Table 8.1): 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + encephalocele, microcephaly, and 
polydactyly. 
• Bardet–Biedl syndrome:3 look for . polycystic 
kidney + polydactyly and genital anomalies. 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . 
polycystic kidney + macroglossia, omphalocele, and 
hemihypertrophy. 
• Perlman syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
diaphragmatic hernia, macrosomia, cleft palate, and 
dextrocardia. 
• Elejalde syndrome:3 look for . polycystic kidney + 
omphalocele, agenesis of the corpus callosum, macrosomia, 
craniosynostosis, and skeletal dysplasia. 
Obstetric management. Once ADPKD has been diagnosed 
in a fetus, serial ultrasound monitoring is necessary 
in order to assess changes in the amount of amniotic 
fluid, which reflects renal function. If the prenatal diagnosis 
is prospective (in the absence of a known family history), 
ultrasound examination of the parents’ kidneys is 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 247 
Figure 8.18 Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) – Potter type III. (a) Ultrasound image showing an enlarged kidney with 
increased differentiation between the cortex and the medulla. (b) The presence of some macroscopic cysts within the enlarged kidney may represent 
another ultrasound variety of ADPKD. (c) 3D surface rendering of the same case as in (b). 
a b c 

Definition. Potter type IV cystic dysplasia is due to 
early and severe obstruction of the collecting system. 
This causes the formation of cysts, which are variously 
distributed in the renal parenchyma, with prevalence 
in the cortical part; the kidney volume is normal or 
decreased. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Potter type IV cystic dysplasia 
is commonly secondary to an early obstruction of the 
urinary tract (mainly lower urinary tract) that results in 
an abnormal environment during nephrogenesis, lasting 
for the rest of the gestational period.3 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis of renal 
cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) secondary to early and 
severe obstruction of the urinary tract is based on the 
recognition of increased echogenicity of the renal 
parenchyma associated with cysts, which are more often 
pericortical (Figure 8.19). The increased echogenicity of 
the renal parenchyma is related to the dysplasia, 
although it does not represent a specific sign: in fact, the 
kidneys can be hyperechoic but not dysplastic or, conversely, 
show normal echogenicity and impaired function. 
In its bilateral form, Potter type IV cystic dysplasia 
is associated with early and severe obstruction of the 
urethra that is responsible for severe oligohydramnios 
and thickening of the bladder walls (Figure 8.20). 
• Differential diagnosis. The main conditions to be distinguished 
from Potter type IV cystic dysplasia are 
shown in Table 8.1. 
• Association with other malformations. A significant 
association with cardiac and cerebral malformations 
has been reported. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is 5–10% in isolated 
forms, but is higher (15–25%) if associated with 
other anomalies. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is 5–10%. 
The most common syndromes possibly associated with 
cystic renal dysplasia are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . renal cystic dysplasia 
+ vertebral anomalies, anorectal atresia, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, CHD, and limb anomalies. 
• Cerebrorenodigital syndrome:3 look for . renal 
cystic dysplasia + digital and limb anomalies and 
CNS malformations. 
• Tuberous sclerosis:3 look for . renal cystic dysplasia 
+ cardiac rhabdomyomas and intracranial 
calcifications. 
Obstetric management. In the unilateral variety, which is 
less frequent, it is of the utmost importance to monitor 
the sonographic aspect and function of the contralateral 
248 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
indicated, given the autosomal dominant pattern of 
inheritance. The genetic diagnosis in ADPKD appears 
complex, due to the genetic heterogeneity (with two 
genes identified: PKD1 and PKD2), and to the sizes of 
the genes themselves, which make a direct search for the 
mutations both long and expensive; hence, in these cases, 
pedigree-based linkage analysis usually represents the 
only possible choice. However, it should be noted that 
the very late onset of the kidney failure in this disorder 
and the possible treatment (dialysis and transplant) 
reduce the yield of genetic prenatal diagnosis. In families 
at risk, serial fetal ultrasound monitoring allows disclosure 
during the 2nd trimester of the fetuses affected with 
ADPKD, with the earliest evidence being at 15 weeks in 
selected cases. 
Postnatal therapy. Dialysis and transplant are the treatment 
options to be applied when the pathology becomes 
manifest (usually the 3rd–5th decades of life). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Generally, 
the disease becomes clinically evident during the 3rd–5th 
decades of life. However, it has recently been reported 
that prenatal recognition of the disease is a bad prognostic 
sign, since these neonates are apparently likely to 
develop hypertension during the first year of life. 
OBSTRUCTIVE CYSTIC DYSPLASIA – POTTER TYPE IV 
Incidence. The bilateral form is more frequent. 
Diagnosis. Kidney(s) of normal or reduced dimensions with increased echogenicity of the parenchyma and 
presence of cysts in variable positions (frequently pericortical). If bilateral, oligohydramnios and a dilated bladder 
with thick walls are present. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. 5–10% in isolated forms; higher if associated with other anomalies (15–25%). 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. 3–6% in isolated forms. 
Outcome. In isolated forms, this depends on the severity of the obstruction and the extent of the dysplasia. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 249 
Figure 8.19 Obstructive renal 
cystic dysplasia – Potter type IV. 
(a) Coronal scan through 
the fetal abdomen showing 
a hydronephrotic kidney with 
echogenic parenchyma. (b) Ultrasound 
image showing several 
subcortical small cysts (arrowheads). 
k, kidney. 
HYDRONEPHROSIS 
Incidence. 1–5/500 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Dilatation of the collecting system of the kidney. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low in isolated cases: 1–3%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low: 6–8%. 
Outcome. In the first 2 years of life: spontaneous regression in approximately 30–40% of cases and need for 
surgery in 20–50% of cases, according to the grade of hydronephrosis present during the prenatal period. In 
bilateral forms associated with oligohydramnios, unfavorable prognosis with the possibility, in selected cases, of 
in utero therapy. 
a b 
kidney, in order to exclude the occurrence of concurrent 
diseases that might worsen the prognosis. In the bilateral 
form, termination of pregnancy or conservative treatment 
after 24 weeks of gestation may be advised. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical removal of the obstruction is 
relevant only in those cases in which residual renal function 
has been confirmed. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In bilateral forms, 
the prognosis is unfavorable; in the majority of cases, 
neonatal death is due to pulmonary hypoplasia, as a consequence 
of the severe oligohydramnios. In the unilateral 
form, the outcome depends on the presence of contralateral 
kidney anomalies and on possible associated anomalies. Figure 8.20 Obstructive renal cystic dysplasia – Potter type IV. 
Coronal scan of the fetal abdomen showing a distended urinary bladder 
(BL) and hydronephrotic kidneys with echogenic cortex (arrows). 
HYDRONEPHROSIS, HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS, AND 
BLADDER DILATATION 
Hydronephrosis, hydro-ureteronephrosis, and bladder 
dilatation can be associated or not with obstructions 
of the urinary tract. In this section, these three 
ultrasound findings will be examined and related 
to their most common causes. Hydronephrosis and 
hydro-ureteronephrosis will be dealt with together 
because of their relatively similar characteristics. 
The prognosis and treatment of these three abnormal 
renal findings will be discussed at the end of the 
section. 

Definition. Hydronephrosis is characterized by dilatation 
of the collecting system of the kidney. Fetal hydronephrosis 
is usually the expression of a mild-to-moderate 
obstruction of the urinary tract (Table 8.2), and less frequently 
of a non-obstructive pathology. In addition, in 
some cases, it may represent a transient finding related 
to the normal development of the urogenital system. 
Paradoxically, an obstructive lesion of the urinary tract 
may not show any sign of hydronephrosis and be 
recognized only for the presence of renal dysplastic 
modifications frequently associated with oligohydramnios. 
Generally speaking, the severity of the ultrasound 
findings and the clinical situation are dependent upon 
the severity of the obstruction, its time of onset, and its 
duration. As a result, the ultrasound evaluation of a 
fetus with abnormal dilatation of the urinary tract must 
take into consideration various parameters: the volume 
of amniotic fluid, the level and degree of dilatation, the 
time of onset, the unilateral or bilateral nature of 
the damage, and finally the association with other 
malformations. 
An important and controversial issue is the cut-off used 
to differentiate the diameter of a normal renal pelvis from 
an abnormally dilated one. The confusion arises from the 
fact that a slight dilatation of the renal pelvis can also be 
encountered in normal fetuses. In fact, even if mild dilatation 
of the renal pelvis may represent the first evidence of 
more severe obstructions, in most instances, mild 2ndtrimester 
renal pyelectasias will resolve either in utero or 
within the first year of postnatal life.9,10 Of the various 
cut-off values proposed by different authors, one of the 
more widely accepted is the following: the anteroposterior 
diameter of the pelvis on a transverse view of the 
abdomen should not, under normal conditions, exceed 
4 mm up to 32 weeks of gestation and 7 mm from the 
33rd week onwards.2 The confusion has increased after 
the discovery that in more than 50% of the cases examined 
in one study, the pelvic diameter showed significant 
variations below and above the 4 mm cut-off over an 
observation period of approximately 2 hours.11 Factors 
influencing the diameter of the fetal pelvis include the 
state of hydration of the mother, the grade of distension 
of the fetal bladder, and recent emptying of the bladder 
itself. On the contrary, what is highly indicative of an 
obstructive lesion is dilatation of the renal calices. 
Hydronephrosis with or without dilatation of the 
ureters accounts for approximately 50% of all prenatally 
detected renal abnormalities.12 Its incidence is 1–5 
per 500 newborns. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The response of the kidney 
to obstruction of urinary flow during the prenatal period 
will depend on the time of onset and the severity of the 
obstruction. Very early obstructions may lead to renal 
dysplasia (poor branching of the collecting ducts and 
deficient formation of glomeruli and tubules), associated 
with abnormal differentiation (transformation of tubular 
epithelial cells into myocytes and chondrocytes). 
Late or partial obstruction delays maturation of the 
nephrons, and may result in a reduced number of 
nephrons at birth (variously associated with atrophy 
and fibrosis). The functional damage caused by the 
obstruction usually leads to a progressive dilatation of 
the pelvis, the calices, and the ureters which act as 
a ‘compensation chamber’ to reduce the intrarenal 
pressure. In severe and early obstruction, the consistently 
increased intraluminal pressure upstream of the obstruction, 
results in an irreversible loss of nephrons due to 
ischemic damage. In contrast, in the case of incomplete 
but long-lasting obstruction, vasoactive amines released 
by the tubules cause a decrease in urine production and 
an increase in ureteral peristalsis. 
Recent evidence, both from animal models and from 
newborns, has demonstrated the involvement of the 
renin–angiotensin system, with angiotensin-dependent 
renal vasoconstruction proportional to the severity of 
the obstruction. At least in animals, inhibition of the 
renin–angiotensin system with angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors is capable of reducing the 
renal damage and preserving renal function at birth. 
Furthermore, it seems that renal damage occurring in 
obstructive uropathies is not limited to the tubules but 
extends to the glomeruli, with consequent activation 
of apoptosis. On the other hand, these experimental 
findings cannot be translated, at least for the time being, 
into clinical practice, as the marked inhibition of the 
renin–angiotensin system during nephrogenesis is 
accompanied by widespread tubular and vascular abnormalities 
and a decrease in the expression of growth 
factors critical for development of the fetus. 
• Unilateral hydronephrosis: can be due to an obstruction 
of the uretero-pelvic junction, in which the ureter 
is unaffected; vesico-ureteral reflux; obstruction of the 
250 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 8.2 Urinary causes of hydronephrosis 
• Pelvic ureteric junction dostruction (PUJO) 
(unilateral or bilateral) 
• Vesico-ureteric junction obstruction 
• Megaureter (with or without reflux) (unilateral or 
bilateral) 
• Cloacal dysgenesis 
• Complicated duplex kidney (unilateral or bilateral) 
• Bladder pathology (posterior urethral valves, PUVs) 
• Vesico-ureteric reflux (VUR) (unilateral or 
bilateral) 
• Megacystics microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome 

vesico-ureteral junction, in which both hydronephrosis 
and ureteronephrosis are present. 
• Bilateral hydronephrosis: can be due to bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux and urethral obstruction, which 
is usually associated with evident ureteral dilatation. 
Bladder overdistension may be present in both conditions, 
although it is more often found in cases of urethral 
obstruction. Less frequently it can be due to 
bilateral ureteropelvic junction obstruction. 
• Association with other malformations. These relate 
mainly to the contralateral kidney and are represented 
by multicystic kidney, ectopia, and renal agenesis. 
Associations with extrarenal anomalies include 
CHD, skeletal dysplasias, and spine anomalies, usually 
within a syndromic context. 
The most frequent cause of hydronephrosis is obstruction 
of the uretero-pelvic junction, which is unilateral in 
approximately 70% of cases. Table 8.2 shows the most 
frequent causes of hydronephrosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Hydronephrosis is diagnosed if the 
dilatation involves the renal collecting system only, with 
normal ureters and bladder. With time, some cases of 
mild pyelectasis evolve into moderate or severe 
hydronephrosis. The grade of dilatation may increase 
with advancing gestation, resulting in a reduction of 
the cortical thickness (Figure 8.21), or it may remain 
unchanged. In rare cases, the extremely dilated collecting 
system may perforate, with formation of a paranephric 
pseudocyst, a urinoma, which is associated with poor or 
absent renal function. It is important to underline that 
hydronephrosis is considered moderate or severe only 
when the calices are dilated, or when the renal pelvis is 
so dilated as to cause cortical atrophy, respectively. 
In the case of unilateral hydronephrosis, it is important 
to evaluate the contralateral kidney to exclude 
associated anomalies. The amount of amniotic fluid 
may be normal or even increased due to a reduction in 
the ability of the obstructed kidney to concentrate 
urine; in the case of bilateral obstruction, the amniotic 
volume may be normal only if the onset of the obstruction 
is recent or incomplete, otherwise, there is severe 
oligohydramnios. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in isolated 
forms. Some studies have shown an increased incidence 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 251 
Figure 8.21 Ultrasound images showing several different degrees of hydronephrosis. (a) The kidneys show moderate pyelectasia. (b) Sagittal scan 
of a hydronephrotic fetal kidney showing dilatation of the pelvis and calices; the calices are confluent and dilated. (c) Coronal scan of the kidney in 
a case of ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction; the renal pelvis (RP) and caliceal distension (arrows) end abruptly at the ureteral junction. 
(d) Severe UPJ obstruction presenting as an abdominal cyst; the renal parenchyma is thinned to a few millimeters. 
a b 
c d 

of aneuploidy among fetuses with pyelectasia. However, 
due to the high prevalence of this sign in the fetus, we 
believe that fetal karyotyping should be considered only 
if another major anomaly or other risk factors are 
present at the same time. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low: 6–8%. The syndromes most frequently associated 
with hydronephrosis are as follows: 
• VA(C)TER(L) association:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ vertebral anomalies, anorectal atresia, tracheoesophageal 
fistula, cardiac defects, and limb 
anomalies (Chapter 10). 
• Schinzel-Giedion syndrome:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ midface retraction, skull anomalies, 
talipes, and cardiac anomalies. 
• Camptomelic dysplasia:3 look for . hydronephrosis 
+ bowed tibiae/femurs, scapular hypoplasia, micrognathia, 
and sex reversal in males. 
252 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.22 Vesico-ureteric 
junction obstruction. (a) Hydronephrosis 
and dilatation of the 
ureter (arrow) are present. K, 
kidney; BL, bladder. (b) Hydroureteronephrosis 
and ureterocele: 
ultrasound image showing a 
tubular anechoic formation, with 
a tortuous path, corresponding 
to a dilated ureter, which extends 
from the renal pelvis to the retrovesical 
region. Hydronephrosis is 
associated. Note the ureterocele 
within the bladder. 
a b 
HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS 
Definition. This is dilatation of the renal pelvis associated 
with dilatation of the ureter. The main causes are 
obstruction of the vesico-ureteral junction, vesicoureteral 
reflux, obstruction secondary to ureterocele, 
and ectopic ureter. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In obstruction of the vesicoureteral 
junction, the distal part of the ureter is usually 
reduced in size. Vesico-ureteral reflux involves a continuous 
or intermittent retrograde flow of urine from the 
bladder into the upper urinary tract. Interestingly, in 
contrast with postnatal life, where the male-to-female 
ratio is 1 : 5, most neonates with prenatally diagnosed 
reflux are males. A possible explanation may be the 
increased voiding pressure required in males, which 
in utero would compress the vesico-ureteral junction, 
leading to the reflux.12 The third, less common, cause of 
hydro-ureteronephrosis in the fetus is duplex kidney 
with ectopic ureterocele. In this case, the ureter draining 
the lower pole is usually refluent, while that draining the 
upper pole, which has an ectopic vesical orifice, has an 
intravesical ureterocele. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound aspect of ureteral 
dilatation is that of a tubular, tortuous anechoic structure 
(Figure 8.22) with a diameter ranging from a few millimeters 
up to 2–3 cm and extending from the renal pelvis 
to the retrovesical region. Hydronephrosis is associated. 
In unilateral forms, the bladder and the amount of amniotic 
fluid are normal. Sometimes, in severe bilateral 
vesico-ureteral reflux, the association of severe hydroureteronephrosis 
with moderate to severe bladder distension 
may mimic the presence of lower urinary tract 
obstruction. In the case of bilateral severe obstruction, 
the amount of amniotic fluid may be decreased. When 
the cause of the obstruction is a duplex kidney with 
ectopic ureterocele, the ultrasound picture is based on the 
presence of hydronephrosis in the upper-pole moiety only 
(Figure 8.23); when the hydronephrosis is marked, cystic 
dilatation of the upper pole may dislocate and hide the 
normal morphology of the lower pole, complicating the 
ultrasound diagnosis. In these cases, the only hint leading 
to the diagnosis of a duplex kidney is the intravesical 
ureterocele associated with the hydro-ureteronephrosis. 
However, in addition, the ureterocele may be difficult to 
detect: with an empty bladder, the ureterocele itself may 
be mistaken for the bladder or, vice versa, with a full bladder, 
the ureterocele may flatten along the bladder wall 
due to the high intraluminal pressure, becoming sonographically 
unrecognizable. Finally, it should be note that 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 253 
not all duplex kidneys and not all vesico-ureteral junction 
obstructions are associated with ureteronephrosis. 
• Differential diagnosis. In the bilateral form, upper 
causes of hydro-ureteronephrosis should be differentiated 
from lower urinary tract obstruction 
(Table 8.3). In the unilateral form, the differential 
diagnosis includes unilateral obstruction of the 
pyelo-ureteral junction, in which there is no 
ureteral dilatation. In the case of a duplex kidney 
with ectopic ureterocele, the presence of the ureterocele 
protruding into the vesical lumen identifies 
this type of lesion. 
• Association with other malformations. In the unilateral 
form, contralateral kidney anomalies are frequently 
associated. 
Figure 8.23 Duplex kidney with two collecting systems and ectopic ureterocele. (a) The arrowhead indicates the ureterocele within the bladder. 
(b) Color Doppler flow demonstrating two renal artery branches. (c) Ultrasound image showing hydronephrosis of the upper pole only (arrow). (d) 
Surface rendering of the same case, demonstrating the duplex kidney with a dilated ureter. 
a b 
c d 
Table 8.3 Differential diagnosis of distended bladder. Breakdown of ultrasound signs by type of lesion. 
Diagnosis Liquor volume Kidneys Ureters Bladder 
Megacystis microcolon Normal/increased Hydronephrosis Normal/dilated Distended, 
intestinal hypoperistalsis normal walled 
syndromes (MMIHS) 
Posterior urethral valves Normal/decreased Hydronephrosis, Dilated Distended, thick- 
(PUV) or cystic dysplasia walled, (dilated 
(Potter IV) urethra) 
Urethral atresia Usually absent Small, hyperechoic Usually not visible Distended, thinwalled 
Vesico-ureteric reflux Normal Hydronephrosis Usually dilated Distended, 
normal-walled 

Definition. In this section, we will illustrate all anomalies 
associated with a dilated bladder and, usually, hydroureteronephrosis 
or hydronephrosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A dilated bladder may be due 
to obstructive or non-obstructive anomalies. The first 
group comprises posterior urethral valves (typical of male 
fetuses), urethral steno-atresia, and cloacal dysgenesis 
(mainly female). In the second group, the bladder dilatation 
is not due to obstruction but rather to abnormalities of 
the vesical tone (atonia), frequently related to neurologic, 
genetic (e.g., megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome), or chromosomal disorders. Early and 
complete obstruction (urethral atresia, and complete posterior 
urethral valves) may result in conspicuous dilatation of 
the bladder, with elevation of the diaphragm and distension 
and thinning of the abdominal wall. The consequent 
deficit of abdominal wall muscles, together with megaureter 
and cryptorchidism, completes the clinical condition 
known as prune belly syndrome, which can occur as a primary 
lesion or be secondary to various causes, with urethral 
obstruction being the most common. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. An enlarged bladder detected 
at ultrasound may simply be a transient phase in the 
normal voiding cycle, or, if persistent and/or severe, it 
may be secondary to reflux or obstructive, neurogenic, 
or myopathic causes. Ultrasound diagnosis of lower 
urinary tract obstruction is based on visualization of a 
dilated bladder with thick and hyperechoic walls, sometimes 
associated with bladder neck and proximal urethral 
distension; hydro-ureteronephrosis, when present, 
is usually bilateral (Figure 8.24). In the case of urethral 
atresia, the early onset of the obstruction, which dates 
back to organogenesis, is responsible for a severe dilatation 
of the bladder, which frequently occupies the 
whole abdomen as early as the 13th week of gestation 
(Figure 8.25 and Table 8.3). If mild to moderate vesical 
dilatation is present as early as the 10th–14th week 
(Figure 8.26), with a longitudinal bladder diameter of 
7–15 mm, 23% of the fetuses have a chromosomal 
anomaly. However, if the karyotype is normal, spontaneous 
resolution of the megacystis occurs in about 90% 
of cases. If the longitudinal diameter of the bladder is 
greater than 15 mm, the risk of aneuploidy is about 
10%, and in the chromosomally normal group, the condition 
is invariably associated with progressive obstructive 
uropathy.13 
The associated hydro-ureteronephrosis is due to the 
increased intravesical pressure. Reflux and urinary 
sequestration increase the intrarenal pressure, leading to 
a dilatation of the collecting system and impairing, by 
254 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.24 Posterior urethral 
valve. (a) Ultrasound image 
showing the distended bladder 
with hydronephrosis and 
dilatation of both ureters RD, 
right kidney; RS, left kidney; U, 
ureters; V, bladder. (b) The 
bladder is distended and there 
is dilatation of the proximal 
part of the urethra (arrow). 
a b
DILATED BLADDER 
Incidence. 1/2000–4000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. Dilatation of the bladder associated with hydro-ureteronephrosis (or hydronephrosis). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively high. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively high. 
Outcome. If the lesion is isolated and the amount of amniotic fluid is within the normal range, the prognosis may 
be favorable; if, on the other hand, oligohydramnios is already present before the 24th week of gestation and the 
kidneys are hyperechoic (with or without cysts), the prognosis is unfavorable. 

compression, the blood flow to the proximal renal 
tubules. The consequent parenchymal damage results in 
a loss of proteins, which are no longer reabsorbed, in the 
fetal urine. Sometimes, the vesicoureteral reflux resulting 
from the obstruction may cause massive unilateral 
hydronephrosis that can totally destroy the kidney, 
decompressing the contralateral kidney, which may only 
show moderate hydronephrosis. The extremely high 
intraluminal pressures may also lead to rupture of the 
bladder; in this case, urinous ascites and decompression 
of the collecting system will occur (Figure 8.27). Spontaneous 
decompression takes place in approximately 10% 
of the cases. The ultrasound picture will depend on the 
duration and degree of the obstruction. In the case of 
incomplete obstruction, as in some cases of posterior 
urethral valves, the amniotic fluid will be normal or 
slightly decreased. It should be noted that in some cases 
of complete posterior urethral valves, the early and longlasting 
obstruction can lead to severe cystic dysplasia 
with complete loss of renal function. As a result, the production 
of urine will be extremely reduced. In this case, 
the sonographic findings will consist of hyperechoic kidneys, 
possibly with small pericortical cysts, and severe 
oligohydramnios; the dilatation of the collecting system 
(i.e., pelves, ureters, and bladder), may be moderate or 
non-existent. It is also necessary to underline that the 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 255 
Figure 8.25 Urethral atresia. 
(a) Ultrasound image showing 
massive dilatation of the bladder 
and hyperechoic kidneys. 
(b) Gross pathology shows a 
very distended abdomen and 
small chest. The lack of musculature 
gives the abdominal wall 
a flaccid, wrinkled appearance – 
hence the name ‘prune belly 
syndrome’. 
Figure 8.26 Sagittal scan through the abdomen of a 13-week fetus 
showing mild distension of the bladder and a dilated posterior urethra. 
Figure 8.27 Rupture of an obstructed bladder (arrow) may occur, 
producing urinous ascites, as shown in this ultrasound image. 
a b 

compressive action of the increased intraluminal pressure 
on the tubules may precede sonographic evidence of 
hydronephrosis by days or weeks. In contrast, the 
absence or disappearance of pelvic dilatation, in the 
presence of a hyperechoic, structurally disorganized, or 
frankly dysplastic kidney, may represent the final result 
of a protracted period of endoluminal hypertension. The 
conclusion about the ultrasound diagnosis of obstructive 
urinary lesions is that a correct diagnosis requires 
longitudinal observation. 
• Differential diagnosis. Posterior urethral valves must 
be differentiated from severe vesico-ureteral reflux: 
bladder dilatation and severe hydro-ureteronephrosis 
may be present in both; however, posterior urethral 
valves are associated with thickened bladder walls 
and dilatation of the proximal urethra, which are 
absent in vesico-ureteral reflux. In addition, the volume 
of amniotic fluid is more frequently reduced in 
urethral obstruction. In the case of complete posterior 
urethral valves, the sonographic evidence is 
remarkable from the end of the 1st trimester, featuring 
a severely dilated bladder occupying the whole 
abdomen and moderate oligohydramnios. In this 
regard, it must be underlined that the amniotic fluid 
will disappear completely by the 14th–16th weeks of 
gestation, when its production will be accounted for 
by the fetal kidney only. Hydronephrosis is more frequently 
associated with incomplete rather than complete 
urethral obstruction. In lower urinary tract 
obstruction presenting in the 1st and 2nd trimesters, 
hyperechoic kidneys are predictive of severe renal 
dysplasia in 95% of cases. Finally, it should be noted 
that bladder dilatation (megacystis) can also be associated 
with non-obstructive disorders, usually in the 
context of genetic syndromes, as in case of the megacystis 
microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis (MMIH) 
syndrome, in which the amount of amniotic fluid is 
usually increased and dilatation of the stomach is frequently 
present (Figure 8.28). 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with cardiac anomalies and anal atresia has been 
described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively high: 
8–20%. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
high: 7–12%. 
256 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
OBSTETRIC MANAGEMENT, POSTNATAL THERAPY, AND PROGNOSIS OF 
HYDRONEPHROSIS, HYDRO-URETERONEPHROSIS, AND BLADDER DILATATION 
Ultrasound monitoring of fetuses with urinary obstruction, 
together with the study of animal models, has 
expanded the understanding of the natural history of 
this disease, and has allowed the definition of some general 
diagnostic criteria and algorithms for pre- and postnatal 
management of such patients. However, several 
aspects of the physiopathology of fetal obstructive 
uropathies remain unresolved, which in turn limits both 
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. 
The first crucial point is the inability of the sonographic 
examination to fully define the extent and 
severity of parenchymal damage and to forecast its outcome 
at the time of initial diagnosis, with the possible 
exception of the most severe forms of cystic dysplasia, 
associated with severe oligohydramnios. The technical 
feasibility of in utero vesico-amniotic shunting, to be 
performed in selected cases to relieve prenatal urinary 
tract obstruction, has led to research into sensitive biochemical 
markers that might accurately reflect the 
(residual) fetal renal function. Unfortunately, this 
approach has been unsuccessful so far, for a number of 
reasons. First, the biochemical function of the fetal kidney 
is only partially known, and depends largely on gestational 
age. Then, the fetal blood or urine 
concentration of any putative biochemical marker of 
renal function is strongly influenced by its transplacental 
passage. Lastly, with the limitations cited above, it 
appears infeasible to define cut-off values that can reliably 
forecast the progression of renal damage, thereby 
justifying intrauterine interventions. To a certain extent, 
the same applies to the adult patient, as demonstrated 
by the unresolved debate around the no-return value of 
Figure 8.28 Megacystis microcolon intestinal hypoperistalsis 
syndrome. Ultrasound image showing megacyst, hydronephrotic 
kidneys, and polyhydramnios (arrow). 

serum creatinine predicting the progression towards 
end-stage renal disease. 
Based on the available evidence, it is reasonable to 
adopt the following schedule for the management of 
fetal hydronephrosis. Following identification of urinary 
tract dilatation, a detailed anatomic scan should be performed 
to exclude the presence of associated extrarenal 
anomalies. In the case of unilateral obstruction, a reduction 
of the ipsilateral glomerular filtration rate and a 
compensatory increase in the function of contralateral 
kidney are the expected responses, with a presumably 
near-normal global excretory function. Management 
should therefore be limited to serial ultrasound followup, 
prolonged at least until the first year of age, associated 
with postnatal biochemical evaluation of renal 
function. This approach is based on the apparent sonographic 
normality of the contralateral kidney and the 
urinary tract, on the lack of oligohydramnios, and on 
the presence of urine in the fetal bladder; as such, it is 
limited by the fact that the assessment of renal function 
relies exclusively on the sonographic appearance. A 
detailed analysis of subjects with unilateral dysplastic 
kidneys diagnosed in utero showed that the usually 
hypertrophic contralateral kidney was also prone to 
hydronephrosis, urolithiasis, and infection during postnatal 
life in about 30% of cases. Furthermore, uncomplicated 
fetal unilateral hydronephrosis has been 
reported in a few cases to progress to irreversible uremia 
early in postnatal life. This may simply be the 
effect of a significant reduction in the number of 
nephrons, despite the compensatory hypertrophy of the 
contralateral kidney during fetal life: accordingly, renal 
insufficiency would develop when the already reduced 
renal functional reserve has to cope with an increased 
functional demand over the years in postnatal life. 
However, recent research has revealed that the picture 
is far more complex: it has been demonstrated that unilateral 
obstruction can lead to activation of a number 
of hemodynamic mechanisms, such as the renin– 
angiotensin system, which account for functional and 
eventually structural modifications of the contralateral 
kidney. Then, unilateral obstruction may trigger an 
array of metabolic and immunologic mechanisms that 
may involve the contralateral kidney and eventually 
lead to uremia. Despite all of the above reported 
concerns, the lack of conclusive evidence and a favorable 
cost/benefit judgement supports a conservative 
approach to the fetus with unilateral obstruction. 
In the case of bilateral obstruction, the first step is 
always to rule out the simultaneous existence of other 
major lethal anomalies. Termination of pregnancy may 
be an option, where legally allowed, in these unfortunate 
cases. If the association with other significant 
anomalies (including chromosomal abnormalities) has 
been excluded, and the amniotic fluid is normal, then a 
conservative ultrasound follow-up is required, with 
surgical correction usually being postponed until birth. 
All the concerns and limitations reported for unilateral 
obstruction are even more compelling in this case. 
After the 24th week of gestation, the detection of oligohydramnios, 
at the time of diagnosis or thereafter, 
requires a more accurate evaluation of renal function. 
The sonographic recognition of bilateral renal 
dysplasia is an indication of an unfavorable outcome. 
Nevertheless, renal function should be explored with 
more invasive procedures. Fetuses with renal damage 
have hypertonic urine with a higher concentration of 
proteins as compared with normal fetuses or fetuses 
with low urinary tract obstruction and a good outcome. 
It should be recalled that up to the 20th week of 
gestation, fetal urine is isotonic with plasma, owing to 
the immaturity of tubular function. At this early stage, 
the fetal blood concentration of ß2--microglobulin may 
be a valuable marker of renal function. Urinalysis 
should be performed on the urine collected after prolonged 
bladder drainage of 48–72 hours, and the 
results should be confirmed at least thrice. The severity 
of urine hypertonicity (Nau> 100 mmol/L and 
Cau> 95th centile) correlates with the severity and 
extent of renal damage. In the case of severe renal damage, 
the degree of hypertonicity remains stable or tends 
to increase. At the opposite end of the spectrum, in 
fetuses who may benefit from intrauterine surgery, the 
degree of urine hypertonicity tends to decrease towards 
the normal range over time. In conclusion, fetuses with 
bilateral hydronephrosis, oligohydramnios, and bladder 
enlargement, associated with a normal karyotype 
and without coexisting malformations, in whom urine 
hypertonicity tends to decrease over time, are candidates 
for in utero surgery (placement of a vesico-amniotic 
shunt, cystoscopy with ablation of the posterior 
urethral valve, etc.). Conversely, if sonographic and 
biochemical findings indicate an unfavorable outcome, 
then termination of pregnancy or no intervention are 
the only possible options. In very carefully selected 
cases, in the presence of lung maturity and an acceptable 
renal function, preterm delivery with early 
ex utero surgery may be considered. It should also be 
noted that some reports have described how, in a 
few circumstances, a single tap of a dilated bladder 
has unblocked the obstruction, resolving the 
hydronephrosis. The suggested mechanism behind 
these events is that the reduction in intraluminal pressure 
may allow the opening of a functional valve or 
resolve a sphincteral spasm, in this way removing an 
apparent obstruction. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 257 

Definition. Bladder exstrophy is a very rare congenital 
malformation in which the anterior wall of the bladder is 
absent and the posterior wall is exposed to the amniotic 
fluid.3,14 It is caused by incomplete closure of the lower 
abdominal wall. The defect is associated with separation 
of the pubic bones, a low-set umbilicus, and abnormal 
genitalia. Bladder exstrophy may occur as an isolated 
anomaly or be part of a still more complex situation 
represented by exstrophy of the cloaca, in which 
omphalocele, bowel anomalies, spina bifida, and phallus 
bifidus may be associated. The term OEIS complex 
(Omphalocele, Extrophy of the bladder, Imperforate 
anus, and spinal defects) is used to describe the spectrum 
of malformations in cloacal exstrophy. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Embryologically, exstrophy 
of the bladder occurs during the 4th week of gestation 
and is the consequence of a failure in the migration of 
mesenchymal cells between the ectoderm of the 
abdomen and cloaca; abnormally shaped and weakened 
abdominal muscles are also present. The incidence of 
bladder exstrophy is about 1/30 000 births, with a 3 : 1 
male-to-female ratio. Cloacal exstrophy is the result of 
an embryologic maldevelopment of the cloacal membrane 
that prevents the migration of mesenchymal tissue 
and impedes normal lower abdominal development. 
Its incidence is about 1/200 000–1/400 00 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound signs (Figure 
8.29) of bladder exstrophy are: non-visualization of the 
bladder in the pelvis and recognition of a small moderately 
echoic solid mass bulging from the lower abdominal 
wall. The amniotic fluid volume is normal14 (Figure 
8.8). Minor findings, often difficult to identify, include 
a low insertion of the umbilical cord, widening of the 
iliac crests, and a small penis. In cloacal exstrophy, nonvisualization 
of the fetal bladder is associated with the 
recognition of a large infraumbilical anterior abdominal 
wall defect or a cystic abdominal wall structure, the 
latter representing a persistent cloacal membrane. 
Omphalocele is present in most cases (Figure 8.30). 
Spinal anomalies including meningomyelocele, renal 
anomalies, and abnormalities of the lower limbs are often 
found. A hint that may lead to a diagnosis of bladder 
258 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 8.29 Bladder exstrophy (a, b) Ultrasound images showing an 
exteriorized bladder (arrows). (c) 3D surface rendering of the exteriorized 
bladder (arrows). Associated hypospadias is evident. 
a
b
c 
BLADDER/CLOACAL EXSTROPHY 
Incidence. Bladder exstrophy: 1/30 000 newborns. Cloacal exstrophy: 1/200 000–1/400 000newborns. 
Diagnosis. Failure to visualize the bladder in the pelvis. Presence of a small mass on the lower abdominal wall 
(bladder exstrophy). Ample abdominal wall defect with presence of omphalocele or cystic anterior abdominal wall 
structure in contact with the amniotic fluid (cloacal exstrophy). 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Relatively low. 
Outcome. The survival rate is about 90% in the case of bladder exstrophy, but decreases to 75% for cloacal 
exstrophy. The quality of life depends on the success of surgical correction. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 259 
Figure 8.30 Cloacal exstrophy. (a) Axial view of a large omphalocele (arrowheads). (b) Sagittal view of the lower body, showing the omphalocele 
(arrowheads) and the bladder exstrophy (arrows). (c) The fetus after termination of pregnancy. Frontal view of the large omphalocele. Note the 
cord insertion on the top of the sac. (d) Lifting the sac of the omphalocele, the concurrent bladder exstrophy (arrows) is shown. 
a
b 
c
d 
exstrophy is a parallel course of the intra-abdominal 
umbilical arteries: in the case of bladder exstrophy, the 
two umbilical arteries are adjacent to one another and 
have a parallel and not converging course. 
• Differential diagnosis. For cloacal exstrophy the 
main differential diagnosis is with omphalocele. 
However, in the latter, the bladder can always be 
visualized in the fetal pelvis. With regard to the differential 
diagnosis between the two forms of exstrophy, 
the omphalocele is absent in isolated bladder 
exstrophy, and associated spinal dyraphisms are 
uncommon. 
• Association with other malformations. Generally, 
only genital abnormalities are associated with bladder 
exstrophy; on the contrary, as already mentioned, 
cloacal exstrophy is frequently associated with genital, 
neural tube, gastrointestinal (including anal atresia), 
and cardiac anomalies. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is low in both 
defects. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low in both defects. 
Obstetric management. If bladder/cloacal exstrophy is 
detected in a fetus, a thorough anatomic scan should be 
performxed by an expert in order to recognize possible 
associated anomalies, especially in the case of cloacal 
exstrophy. Their diagnosis is of key importance in order 
to accurately assess the surgical procedures needed to correct 
the defect. Delivery should take place in a tertiary 
referral center in order to provide adequate perinatal management 
of the different anomalies present. As far as the 
mode of delivery is concerned, fetuses with bladder 
exstrophy may be delivered spontaneously. The same considerations 
as for omphalocele apply to cloacal exstrophy: 
it may be appropriate to delivery by cesarean section those 
cases in which the abdominal mass is larger than 5 cm. 

Definition. Renal tumors are benign or malignant 
neoplasms arising in the fetal kidney. Prenatal recognition 
is extremely rare. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Mesoblastic nephroma, 
which is a benign lesion, is the most common tumor, 
followed by the malignant Wilms’ tumor (nephroblastoma). 
Some genetic markers (WT1 and WT2 on chromosome 
11 and WT3 on chromosome 16p) have been 
identified for Wilms’ tumor arising in the context of 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. As for most neoplasms, 
the diagnosis is generally made in the 3rd trimester. 
The tumor mass may occupy part of the kidney or 
replace it completely (Figure 8.31). If it is very large, a 
mass effect on adjacent abdominal viscera may be 
detected. Usually, mesoblastic nephromas show illdefined 
margins due to the absence of a capsule, whereas 
neprhoblastomas are usually capsulated. Increased vascularization 
may be detected on color/power Doppler. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly adrenal 
lesions, such as hemorrhage or tumors, due to the 
location of the mass. However, if the tumor is of renal 
origin, the renal parenchyma is reduced and not compressed 
as in adrenal tumors. In addition, adrenal 
tumors tend to be hypoechoic, whereas renal tumors 
are usually weakly hyperechoic. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chormosomal syndromes. This is relatively 
low. Nephroblastoma may be associated with the 
following: 
• Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:3 look for . 
nephroblastoma + polycystic kidney, macroglossia, 
omphalocele, and hemihypertrophy (Chapter 10). 
• Denis–Drash syndrome:3 look for . nephroblastoma 
+ ambiguous genitalia and diaphragmatic 
hernia (rare). 
260 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
RENAL TUMORS 
Incidence. Extremely rare in the fetus. 1/125 000 during childhood. 
Diagnosis. The lesion is usually unilateral. The kidney is partly or totally replaced by a mass with ill-defined 
margins and high vascularization. It may have or have not a capsule. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Low. 
Outcome. Depends on histology, but is generally good. 
Postnatal treatment. In the case of bladder exstrophy, 
restoration of bladder function after surgical correction 
occurs in a significant percentage of cases. Multiple surgical 
procedures are needed in the case of cloacal exstrophy. 
Repairing the defects involves dissection of the fused rectum, 
vagina, and urethra, which have formed a common 
channel, allowing their separation and proper placement 
on the perineum. The objectives of the surgical approach 
are to achieve bowel control, urinary control, and normal 
sexual function. All three goals may be achieved; or only 
two, one, or none of them (occasionally) may be possible. 
Prognostic factors include the quality of the sacrum, the 
quality of the muscles, and the length of the common 
channel (>or <3 cm). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The prognosis for 
bladder exstrophy is better if only the bladder is 
involved, with a 90% survival rate. Until a few decades 
ago, the prognosis for cloacal exstrophy was very poor. 
Advances in surgical techniques have resulted in an 
improved survival rate (approximately 70–80% of 
cases). The functional prognosis with regard to fecal 
continence depends on the complexity of the defect and 
the status of the spine and sacrum. Urinary control 
varies, depending on the length of the common channel: 
intermittent catheterization is needed in over 60% of 
patients with common channel length of less than 3 cm 
and in about 20% of cases with common channel length 
greater than 3 cm. However, the bladder neck is competent 
in most patients, and patients who require catheterization 
remain dry between micturitions; only rarely is 
urinary continence not achieved. It should be noted that, 
in addition, the majority of male individuals have 
extremely abnormal genitalia. 

URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 261 
AMBIGUOUS GENITALIA 
Incidence. 1/50 000–70 000 newborns. 
Diagnosis. It is difficult to differentiate micropenis with cryptorchidism from clitoromegaly with normal labia; in 
males, the main findings are micropenis, ventral curvature of the penis, retained testicles, scrotum bifidum, and 
hypospadias; in females, the main finding is clitoromegaly. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Relatively low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
Outcome. Good in isolated forms, unfavorable if associated with other anomalies. 
Obstetric management. Should a renal tumor be 
detected in a fetus, a thorough search for possible signs 
of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (polycystic kidney, 
macroglossia, and hemihypertrophy) must be carried 
out. Fetal karyotyping is not mandatory, because of the 
low risk of chromosomal anomalies. In large tumors, 
fetal echocardiography may be of help to detect signs of 
high-output cardiac failure, sometimes associated 
with large fetal masses. Delivery should take place in a 
tertiary referral center in order to ensure adequate diagnostic 
work-up, including abdominal ultrasound and 
magnetic resonance imaging of the neonate. Subsequent 
management is determined by the final diagnosis. 
Postnatal therapy. Surgical removal of the tumor, or 
nephrectomy, may be necessary in the neonatal 
period. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. In general, the 
overall prognosis is good, with good survival rates. The 
relatively few cases in which cardiac failure develops 
in utero are those more likely to die after birth. 
Figure 8.31 Nephroblastoma. 
Axial (a) and coronal (b) scans 
of the fetal abdomen showing a 
solid echogenic mass above the 
kidney (arrows). 
a b 
Definition. The term ‘ambiguous genitalia’ is used when 
the external genitalia are different from the genetic sex, 
or when they are not certainly indicative of a male or 
female phenotype. The incidence of this anomaly is 
1/50 000–70 000 newborns. 
Anatomy. Ambiguous genitalia are the expression of a 
heterogeneous group of disorders with different etiology, 
frequently referring to chromosome anomalies and/or 
endocrine disorders.15 Currently, there is no universally 
accepted classification of sexual differentiation disorders. 
The most widely accepted is based on the histology 
of the existing gonad, with an etiologic subclassification. 
According to this gonad classification there are five main 
categories: 
I. Only an ovary is present (female pseudohermaphroditism). 
II. Only a testis is present (male pseudohermaphroditism). 
III. Ovary and testis are present (true hermaphroditism). 
IV. Testis and gonadal ‘streak’ are present (mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis). 
V. Only a gonadal streak is present (pure gonadal 
dysgenesis). 

Female pseudohermaphroditism (hyperandrogenized 
female). This anomaly comprises the majority of cases of 
ambiguity in the external genitalia. These are female 
individuals with a 46,XX karyotype and ovarian 
gonadal tissue. They have normal müllerian duct structures 
(normal internal genitalia). The majority of cases 
are due to accumulation of androgens upstream of the 
enzymatic block in the biosynthesis of cortisol. The two 
main enzymatic defects responsible for virilization of the 
female fetus are the deficiencies of 21-hydroxylase and 
of 11ß-hydroxylase, which account for 95% of cases. 
The former deficiency is responsible for most cases of 
adrenogenital syndrome (AGS). Newborns with AGS 
show a degree of virilization that varies according to the 
severity of the enzymatic deficit. The most frequent 
morphologic characteristics are clitoromegaly, with 
a clitoris that may reach the dimensions of a phallus; 
the presence of a single vaginal and urethral opening 
(urogenital seat); and hyperpigmented labia majora 
characterized by roughness typical of scrotal skin, while 
the labia minora are fused. The pelvic organs are completely 
feminine and unremarkable. The diagnosis is 
based on the blood levels of 17-hydroxyprogesterone 
and 11-deoxycorticol, and the final confirmation is 
obtained by molecular investigation of the CYP21 gene, 
the site of the mutation responsible for the enzymatic 
block. Deficiency of 11ß-hydroxylase accounts for only 
10% of the cases of congenital AGS. The CYP11B gene, 
which codes for 11ß-hydroxylase, is located at chromosome 
8q21 and comprises eight exons, whose sequence 
can be analyzed to find any mutations. Another unlikely 
cause of female pseudohermaphroditism is the maternal 
intake of androgens during pregnancy. 
Male pseudohermaphroditism (hypoandrogenized male). 
This anomaly includes all syndromes due to a deficit 
in the synthesis of testosterone or to an abnormal testosterone 
receptor that is not able to convey the hormonal 
input to the target cells. Patients belonging to this group 
are all males with a 46,XY complement. The production 
of testosterone is essential for the development of the 
external genitalia in the male. There is a close correlation 
between development of the embryo and the concentration 
of fetal testosterone. At the 6th week of gestation, in 
response to a luteinizing hormore (LH) peak from the 
hypophysis, there is a detectable increase in the production 
of testosterone by the fetal testes. The concentration 
of fetal testosterone remains high until the 14th week of 
gestation. After this period, gonadal stimulation is 
mainly sustained by placental LH. The presence of sufficient 
concentration of testosterone in the final weeks of 
gestation is responsible for further growth of penile 
dimensions until birth. The main phenotypic characteristic 
of male pseudohermaphroditism is micropenis, 
either isolated or associated with cryptorchidism. Three 
enzymatic anomalies can be responsible for inadequate 
androgen stimulation during fetal life: (i) an enzymatic 
deficit in the biochemical sequence that results in the 
synthesis of testosterone; (ii) a deficit of 5a-reductase, 
responsible for conversion of testosterone into dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT); (iii) an anomaly in the cytosome 
carrier protein that causes a failure of transport of DHT 
within the cell nucleus. 
True hermaphroditism. In this extremely rare form, the 
chromosome complement is generally 46,XX, but there 
is chromatinic material from chromosome Y. Even less 
common is true mosaicism (46,XX/46,XY) or male 
genotype. The true hermaphrodite has both testicular 
and ovarian tissue represented within the same gonad 
(ovotestis). The external genitalia are ambiguous or 
female. 
Mixed gonadal dysgenesis. Children suffering from this 
anomaly show a normally differentiated testis on one 
side and a dysgenetic gonad on the other. The karyotype 
of these patients is normally characterized by mosaicism 
(45,X0/46,XY); these patients may have the classic phenotype 
of Turner syndrome or have ambiguous genitalia. 
The most significant characteristic of these patients 
is the high incidence of neoplasias of the dysgenetic 
gonad (gonadoblastoma). The gonadic dysgeneses also 
include Turner syndrome (karyotype 45,X0 and variants), 
characterized by dysgenetic gonads and female 
phenotypic appearance, and Klinefelter syndrome (karyotype 
47,XXY) characterized by gonads with a testicular 
morphology that show tubular dygenesis. 
Pure gonadal dysgenesis. This can rarely be diagnosed 
during the neonatal period, the chromosome patrimony 
may be XY, XX, or X0, and normal female external genitalia 
and dysgenetic ovaries are present. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Accurate diagnosis of genital 
anomalies is difficult. In the case of sex reversal (i.e., 
the phenotypic sex is the opposite of the genetic sex), 
diagnosis may be simple, if the fetal karyotype is available. 
Ambiguous external genitalia are difficult to diagnose, 
because a micropenis with cryptorchidism cannot 
always be differentiated on ultrasound from clitoral 
hypertrophy with normal labia. A recent investigation 
has reported that in more than 40% of abnormal external 
genitalia, the prenatal ultrasound diagnosis was not 
made or false-positive results were generated.16 In the 
male, the most frequent anomaly detected on ultrasound 
is represented by micropenis, ventral curvature 
of the penis, retained testes, scrotum bifidum and 
hypospadias (Figures 8.32 and 8.33). In females, clitoral 
hypertrophy is the only finding. Sex reversal may 
be evident in both sexes. 
262 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 

• Association with other malformations. Facial clefts 
and CHD may be associated. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is relatively 
low. The most frequent chromosomal aberrations are: 
trisomy 13, triploidy, 13q- syndrome, Xp21 duplication, 
9p23 deletion, and 10q26 deletion. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. High. 
• Robinow syndrome:3 look for .ambiguous genitalia 
(micropenis in males or hypoplastic clitoris and labia 
minora in females) + short upper limbs and characteristic 
facies. 
• Opitz syndrome (OMIM 300000):3 look for . 
hypospadias + hypotelorism. 
• Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome (OMIM 270400):3 
look for .ambiguous genitalia + holoprosencephaly, 
cleft palate, and FGR. 
• Denis–Drash syndrome (OMIM 194080):3 look for . 
ambiguous genitalia + nephroblastoma, and 
diaphragmatic hernia (rare). 
Obstetric management. Should ambiguous genitalia be 
confidently detected in a fetus, the first tasks are to 
ascertain whether there are maternal signs of hyperandrogenism 
and to verify if there has been ingestion 
of progesterone or androgens during the 1st trimester. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 263 
Figure 8.32 (a) Ultrasound of the fetal genitalia, showing ambiguous genitalia: a small phallus (arrow) is seen between a heart-shaped scrotal sac 
(scrotum bifidum), which mimics labia. (b) 3D surface rendering of the same finding. (c) External genitalia at birth. (d) A bifid scrotum with hypospadias 
is evident in this scan. (e) The external genitalia at birth: the urethral orifice and the incompletely fused scrotum are demonstrated. 
a b c 
d e 
Figure 8.33 (a) 2D ultrasound of fetal micropenis. 
(b, c) 3D surface rendering. 
a b c 

Definition. This is a typically benign functional cyst 
within the fetal ovary, although rare cases of ovarian 
neoplasms have been reported. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Ovarian cysts represent the 
response of the fetal ovary to increased circulating hormonal 
levels, including maternal estrogens, placental 
human chorionic gonadotropin, and fetal gonadotropins. 
An increased incidence of fetal ovarian cysts has been 
reported in cases of maternal diabetes, Rhesus isoimmunization, 
and pre-eclampsia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The most common finding on 
ultrasound is the presence of a unilocular cyst (Figure 
8.34), sometimes with a daughter cyst inside, in the 
lower lateral abdomen of a female fetus during the 3rd 
trimester of pregnancy. Bilateral ovarian cysts are exceptional. 
In rarer circumstances, the cyst is ‘complex’: 
it has a hemorrhagic echogenicity, which is usually 
secondary to torsion (Figure 8.34a). In this case, the ultrasound 
appearance varies according to the time elapsed 
from the hemorrhage: diffusely echogenic with acute hemorrhage, 
fluid–fluid level seen with repeated bleeds, or a 
clot separated from serum; sometimes, apparent septations 
due to fibrin strands can be seen.17 Polyhydramnios 
may develop in 10% of cases. It has been suggested that 
this is due to partial bowel obstruction secondary to 
compression by a large cyst. 
• Differential diagnosis. Urachal, mesenteric, and 
enteric duplication cysts are indistinguishable from an 
ovarian cyst. Recognition of a daughter cyst seems to 
be exclusive to ovarian cysts. However, it is important 
to consider the fetal gender (ovarian cysts can 
obviously be ruled out in a male fetus), confirm the 
presence of an unremarkable normal urinary tract (a 
number of cystic abdominal masses are related to the 
urinary tract), confirm the normal appearance of the 
gastrointestinal tract (a characteristic of enteric cysts is 
the ‘gut signature’), and look for cyst complications 
(torsion and hemorrhage). 
• Prognostic indicators. Torsion is the most common 
complication of ovarian cysts. The risk of torsion is 
increased if the cyst is larger than 5 cm.18 
• Association with other malformations. An association 
with fetal hypothyroidism has been described. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. This is very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. This is very low. 
264 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
A complete family history should be obtained. In addition, 
fetal karyotyping should be performed to determine 
the genetic sex. The amniotic fluid should also be 
analyzed for the presence of 7-dehydrocholesterol, 
which, if elevated, is suggestive of Smith–Lemli–Opitz 
syndrome. Amniocytes should be saved as a source of 
DNA for mutational analysis of the 21-hydroxylase 
gene. Treatment of the fetus/neonate with ambiguous 
genitalia should be performed in the setting of a multidisciplinary 
team (genetics, neonatal endocrinology, 
neonatology, pediatric urology, etc.). Delivery in a tertiary 
center is recommended. 
Postnatal treatment. The major considerations in the 
treatment of a newborn with ambiguous genitalia are 
determination of the sex of rearing and gender identity, 
planning for surgery if necessary, and provision of 
genetic counseling. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life It is important 
that the parents resolve any uncertainty about the sex 
of rearing of the child as soon as possible. Properly 
timed hormonal and surgical intervention should occur 
prior to and during puberty. However, several groups 
of adult patients currently advocate that genitalia 
should be left ambiguous permanently. 
OVARIAN CYST 
Incidence. Most common intra-abdominal cysts in the female fetus. 
Diagnosis. Presence of abdominal anechoic or complex cyst in a female fetus, almost always in the 3rd trimester 
of gestation. Presence of an abdominal cyst containing ‘daughter cyst’ is the best diagnostic clue. 
Risk of chromosomal anomalies. Very low. 
Risk of non-chromosomal syndromes. Very low. 
Outcome. Very good, unless ovarian torsion occur in the neonatal period. Most ovarian cysts regress 
spontaneously after birth. 

Obstetric management. In the extremely rare circumstance 
in which an ovarian cyst is large enough to 
distend the fetal abdomen, it may cause dystocia. In 
this case, elective cesarean section may be considered. 
In the case of complicated cyst, delivery should take 
place in a tertiary referral center with a pediatric 
surgery unit. 
Postnatal therapy. After delivery, the neonate should 
undergo an ultrasound scan to confirm the antenatal 
diagnosis. Most uncomplicated ovarian cysts regress 
spontaneously a few weeks after birth. A surgical 
approach is suggested for complex cysts or cysts larger 
than 5 cm. Surgery should aim to preserve ovarian 
parenchyma (fenestration with ovarian preservation), 
although oophorectomy may be necessary in the case 
of hemorrhagic infarction due to torsion. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival and 
quality of life are unaffected. 
URINARY TRACT ANOMALIES 265 
1. Moore KL, Persaud TVN. The Developing Human. Clinically 
Oriented Embryology, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 
1998: 305. 
2. Corteville JE, Gray DL, Crane JP. Congenital hydronephrosis: 
correlation of fetal ultrasonographic findings with infant outcome. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1991; 165: 384–8. 
3. Van Allen MI. Urinary tract. In: Stevenson RE, Hall JG, 
Goodman RM, eds. Human Malformations and Related 
Anomalies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1993: 502–62. 
4. Gruskin D, Kanil E, Rimoin D. Congenital disorders of the urinary 
tract. In: Rimoin D, Connor JM, Pyeritz RE, Korf BR, eds. 
Emery and Rimoin’s Principles and Practice of Medical Genetics, 
4th edn. Edinburgh. Churchill-Livingstone. 2002: 1659–743. 
5. Winyard P, Chitty L. Dysplastic and polycystic kidneys: 
diagnosis, associations and management. Prenat Diagn 2001; 
21: 924–35. 
6. Roume J, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of genetic renal disease: 
breaking the code. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 
10–18. 
7. Brun M, Maugey-Laulom B, Eurin D. Prenatal sonographic patterns 
in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease: a multicenter 
study. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 55–61. 
8. Nicolini U, Vaughan JL, Fisk NM, et al. Cystic lesions of the 
fetal kidney: diagnosis and prediction of outcome. J Pediatr Surg 
1992; 27: 1451–5. 
9. Sherer DM. Is fetal hydronephrosis overdiagnosed? Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 601–6. 
10. Siemens DR, Prouse KA, MacNeily AE, et al. Antenatal 
hydronephrosis thresholds of renal pelvic diameter to predict 
insignificant post-natal pelviectasia. Tech Urol 1998; 4: 198–201. 
11. Persutte WH, Hussey M, Chyu J, et al. Stricking findings 
concerning the variability in the measurement of the fetal renal 
collecting system. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 15: 186–90. 
12. Mouriquand PDE, Whitten M, Pracros JP. Pathophysiology, 
diagnosis and management of prenatal upper tract dilatation. 
Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 942–51. 
13. Liao AW, Sebire NJ, Geerts L, et al. Megacystis at 10–14 weeks 
of gestation: chromosomal defects and outcome according to 
bladder length. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 21: 338–41. 
14. Lee EH, Shim JY. New sonographic finding for the prenatal 
diagnosis of bladder exstrophy: a case report. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2003; 21: 498–500. 
15. Simpson JL. Disorders of the gonads, genital tract and genitalia. In: 
Emery AEH, Rimoin, DL eds. Principle and Practice of Medical 
Genetics, 4th edn. London Churchill Livingstone 2002: 2315–51. 
16. Cheikhelard A, Luton D, Philippe-Chomette P, et al. How accurate 
is the prenatal diagnosis of abnormal genitalia? J Urol 2000; 
164: 984–7. 
17. D’Addario V, Volpe P, Kurjak A, et al. Ultrasonic diagnosis and 
perinatal management of complicated and uncomplicated fetal 
ovarian cysts: a collaborative study. J Perinat Med 1990; 18: 
375–81. 
18. Dolgin SE. Ovarian masses in the newborn. Semin Pediatr Surg 
2000; 9: 121–7. 
REFERENCES 
Figure 8.34 Ovarian cyst. 
(a) Hemorrhagic ovarian cyst: 
coronal view of the fetal 
abdomen showing a complex 
cystic mass (arrows) with an 
echogenic component. (b) Coronal 
scan of the fetal abdomen 
and pelvis in a 29-week female 
fetus, showing a unilocular and 
completely anechoic cyst just 
above the bladder; color Doppler 
demonstrates both perivesical 
arteries around the bladder. 
a b 

Ultrasound assessment of the fetal musculoskeletal 
apparatus requires a global approach to the fetal body, 
given that skeletal dysplasias and neuromuscular diseases 
involve more or all anatomic regions simultaneously, 
because of the ubiquitous distribution of bones 
and muscles. The only exceptions are reduction defects 
of the limbs, congenital or acquired (amniotic band 
syndrome), which are regional by definition. Therefore, 
unlike other systems, assessment of the fetal musculoskeletal 
apparatus requires a multistep total-body ultrasound 
approach, which should include assessment of the 
following: 
• limbs: long bones and extremities 
• spine and thorax 
• fetal head: calvarium, central nervous system (CNS), 
and splanchnocranium 
• bone mineralization 
• any joint contractures and joint dislocations 
Each of these five points should be addressed with 
separate views at different degrees of magnification, 
which makes the evaluation of the musculoskeletal 
apparatus rather time-consuming and challenging. In the 
following sections, the diagnostic approach to the various 
anomalies of bones and muscles will be dealt with 
the help of different diagnostic flowcharts, based on the 
main abnormal ultrasound finding, with the intention of 
making the very difficult and challenging issue of differential 
ultrasound diagnosis easier. 
Timing of examination. The ultrasound appearance of 
the bones changes significantly during gestation, due to 
progressive mineralization. It is common knowledge that 
in the 3rd trimester, the posterior fossa as well as the 
thoracic content are hardly evaluable due to conspicuous 
mineralization of the calvarium and ribs, respectively. 
It should also be noted that suspicion of lethal skeletal 
dysplasias is often raised as early as 12–14 weeks, due 
to severe and early-onset micromelia, rather than at 
midtrimester, as is the case for most other anomalies. 
Two-dimensional (2D) ultrasound approach and scanning 
planes (views). In this subsection, we adopt the 
multistep assessment procedure described above. The 
standard views for suspecting or diagnosing abnormalities 
of the various skeletal regions are described below. 
Long bones and extremities. To assess the anatomy of 
the limbs, two types of views should be sought: (i) 
regional views, aiming at visualization of the three components 
(rhizomelic, mesomelic, and acromelic), to 
ascertain whether the anomaly involves the whole limb 
or predominantly a part of it – this is generally carried 
out with low-magnification sagittal ultrasound views of 
the whole limb (Figure 9.1); (ii) focal, higher-magnification 
views, to study in detail the anomaly of the affected 
segment, in order to characterize possible focal defects 
and/or anomalies of the extremities (Figure 9.2). The orientation 
of the various planes needed to carry out this 
task will depend on the spatial position of the limb at the 
time of the ultrasound examination. 
Spine and thorax. The spine is electively evaluated using 
the midsagittal view, possibly performed with an anterior 
spine, in order to assess the vertebral bodies and the cutanoeus 
contour, taking care to reduce the pressure on the 
transducer to leave some amniotic fluid between the 
proximal uterine wall and the spine, which greatly 
enhances the acoustic window (Figure 9.3). This sagittal 
view allows display of neural tube defects (see Chapter 2), 
as well as possible fusions of vertebral bodies. It also 
allows the suspicion of scoliosis to be raised, if the axis 
of the spine cannot be displayed from head to breech 
on a single plane; if this is suspected, a coronal view of 
the spine allows one to evaluate the degree of scoliosis 
Chapter 9 
Skeletal dysplasias and muscular 
anomalies: a diagnostic algorithm 
NORMAL ANATOMY OF THE FETAL MUSCULOSKELETAL SYSTEM: 
ULTRASOUND APPROACH, SCANNING PLANES, AND DIAGNOSTIC POTENTIAL 
267 

(Figure 9.4). Also, the midsagittal view of the spine 
allows one to identify possible focal or general mineralization 
defects of the vertebrae. Parasagittal views at the 
level of the outer thoracic walls are used to display, on 
2D ultrasound, gross mineralization or developmental 
anomalies of the ribs, as well as fractures. To exclude 
thoracic hypoplasia, the dimensions of the thorax should 
be assessed on the 4-chamber view (cardiothoracic ratio 
and thoracic circumference: see Chapter 6) and on 
the midsagittal view with ventral approach (anteroposterior 
diameter of the thorax, dip at thoraco-abdominal 
junction: Chapter 6). 
Cranium (calvarium and splanchnocranium). The classic 
axial transthalamic view (Figure 9.5) is employed to 
detect possible deformations of the calvarial contour 
possibly due to early synostoses, such as in cloverleaf 
skull (thanatophoric dysplasia) – although this anomaly 
is best displayed with a coronal approach, since the most 
significant deformation of the skull occurs below the 
transthalamic plane. The assessment of the fetal facial 
profile, performed on the midsagittal view, is needed 
to detect micrognathia, which is a frequent finding in 
skeletal dysplasias (Chapter 3). 
268 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.2 (a) High-magnification view of a single bone segment. 
As an example, the thigh is displayed. The image shows the cutaneous 
contour, up to the gluteal region, the muscles of the thigh, 
and the shaft of the femur. The mineralization, shape, and contour 
of the bone should be assessed. The epiphyses are also visible 
(arrows) as hypopechoic round structures with hyperechoic outline 
at both ends of the long bone. (b) Hand, high-magnification: 
the five rays are visible, with all digits extended (c) Foot, highmagnification: 
the toe (arrow) and the other digits are visible. The 
calcaneous and metatarsus are also visible. 
Figure 9.3 Views for the assessment of the spine. (a) 
Longitudinal view: the regular aspects of all the neural arches, 
together with the regular cutaneous contour, are evident. By confirming 
the integrity of the cutaneous contour on this view, it is 
possible to exclude open spina bifida; in front of the sacrum, the 
bladder (Bl) is visible. (b) Axial view: the three ossification nuclei 
of a throracic vertebra are shown. The arrowheads demonstrate 
the cutaneous contour. Laterally, the scapulae are visible (arrows). 
Figure 9.1 Low-magnification sagittal view of the limbs. (a) Upper 
limb, flexed: the image shows the rhizomelic segment (humerus), the 
mesomelic segment (ulna and radius), and the acromelic segment 
(hand). (b) Lower limb, abdudcted: the rhizomelic, mesomelic, and 
acromelic segments on the same axis (femur, tibia and fibula, and 
foot). 
a
b
b
a 
c 
a
b 

Calvarial mineralization. The degree of mineralization 
is best appreciated on the trans thalamic axial view 
(Figure 9.5). Also, in the case of hypomineralization, 
minor pressure exerted with the transducer can produce 
deformation of the skull, which is very soft (see below). An 
important hint to enable recognition of the presence of calvarial 
hypomineralization is the appearance of the brain: if 
the ossification of the calvarium is deficient, then the ultrasound 
waves are less absorbed by it and display the details 
of the CNS much better. The usual impression, just before 
recognizing the bone ossification defect, is: ‘see how nicely 
this brain shows up!’ (see further on in this chapter). 
Joint contractures. The display of the fetal body at low 
magnification is the best way to recognize possible joint 
contractures. Alternatively, when an advanced gestational 
age makes this approach impossible, separate sagittal 
views of the upper and lower limbs should be sought. 
When affected by pathologic contractures, the lower 
limbs often appear hyperextended and with crossed legs 
(scissors-like), due to the fact that the femoral extensor 
muscles (quadriceps) are stronger than the flexors 
(biceps). The reverse occurs for the upper limbs, where 
the flexor muscles (biceps) are stronger than the extensors 
(triceps): this is why, in the case of contractures, the 
upper limbs often appear flexed with the clenched hands 
lying on the thorax (Chapter 10). An alternative view in 
which it is possible to detect contractures of the upper 
limbs is the axial view of the thorax (4-chamber view). 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 269 
Figure 9.4 Hemivertebra. (a, 
b) 21 weeks of gestation: (a) 
coronal view of the spine 
showing the hemispondilus 
(arrows); (b) corresponding 
sagittal view, demonstrating 
the rare anterior hemispondilus 
(c, d) 16 weeks of gestation: (c) 
coronal view of the thoracic 
spine demonstrating the lateral 
hemispondilus (arrowhead); 
(d) another coronal view, 
showing the distortion of the 
spine (arrows). 
Figure 9.5 Axial transthalamic view (21 weeks of gestation). This 
view is also employed to assess the cranial suture on 2D ultrasound. 
At midtrimester, both the coronal and parieto-occipital sutures can 
be identified as small sonolucent gaps along the calvarial surface 
(arrows).
a c 
b d 

270 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Abnormal shapes of the skull (Figure 9.6). These 
are mainly related to synostoses. The most evident 
is the so-called ‘cloverleaf skull’, which is typical of 
thanatophoric dysplasia type II; this is due to very 
premature closure of the lambdoid, coronal, and sagittal 
sutures. As already mentioned, the best view in 
which to appreciate the cloverleaf deformation is the 
coronal view of the head, since the parietal bones are 
the most severely affected. Acrocephaly or turricephaly 
(Figure 9.6a) is the presence of a pointed head 
(increased craniocaudal diameter), caused by premature 
closure of all sutures. Brachycephaly (Figure 9.6b) 
is characterized by a reduced occipitofrontal diameter, 
caused by premature closure of the two coronal 
sutures. Scaphocephaly (Figure 9.6c) is characterized 
by an increased occipitofrontal diameter, due to premature 
closure of the sagittal suture. Plagiocephaly, 
which is usually not detected in utero, denotes an asymmetric 
shape of the skull, caused by unilateral premature 
closure of the coronal and lambdoid sutures. 
Trigonocephaly indicates a triangular shape of the 
uppermost part of the skull, and is due to closure of 
the metopic suture. Acrocephaly is typical of Apert 
syndrome (Chapter 10). 
Anomalies of the spine. Platyspondyly, i.e., flattened vertebral 
bodies with reduced distance between the endplates, 
which is associated with some skeletal dysplasias 
(thanatophoric dysplasia and ostheogenesis imperfecta 
type II) is not easily detectable by ultrasound. Therefore, 
we will not describe it in detail here. 
Anomalies of the limbs. The first issue to consider is the 
harmonic proportion among the three segments of the 
limb: rhizomelic (femur/humerus), mesomelic (tibia and 
fibula/ulna and radius), and acromelic (foot/hand). If 
only one of the three segments is affected, the condition 
is termed rhizomelia, mesomelia, or acromelia, respectively. 
If, on the contrary, the whole length of the limb is 
abnormal, the condition is named micromelia. 
NOMENCLATURE OF BONE DEFECTS 
Figure 9.6 Abnormal shape of the skull. (a) In Apert syndrome, the coronal suture is already sealed at 23 weeks of gestation (arrows), 
causing deformation of the skull (compare with Figure 9.5). (b) In trisomy 18, one of the common findings (especially early in gestation) is 
a strawberry-shaped skull (arrowheads); a concurrent large choroid plexus cyst is also evident here (arrows). (c) Scaphocephaly (in this case 
at 32 weeks of gestation) is due to early closure of the sagittal suture, and is characterized by an increased occipitofrontal diameter. (d) In 
thanatophoric dysplasia type II, early abnormal closure of the coronal, lambdoid, and sagittal sutures leads to the classic cloverleaf skull; 
however, in type I also, there is an abnormal shape of the skull, due to abnormal incomplete closure of the same sutures. 
c d 
a b 

Anomalies of the extremities. Pathologic contractures of the 
ankle and the wrist are associated with clubfoot (talipes) 
and ulnar deviation of the hand, respectively. In clubfoot, 
the axis of the foot is no longer that of the lower leg: the 
foot is drawn up and bent inwards (varus), and therefore, 
on the sagittal view of the leg, the sole is visible too. In the 
rarer equinus variant, the axis is the same as that of the 
leg, but the foot is in fixed, abnormal hyperextension, 
with the sole facing backwards. In ulnar deviation of the 
hands, the hand appears abnormally and fixedly extrarotated 
on the ulnar side, with overlapping fingers. 
Micrognathia. Micrognathia, which is described 
extensively in Chapter 3, can be found in a number of 
skeletal dysplasias described later in this chapter (and see 
Table 9.5). 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 271 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by micromelia (Figures 
9.7a and 9.8) Micromelia denotes severe hypoplasia of 
the three segments of the limb, and, in most cases, affects 
all limbs at the same time. This extreme hypoplasia of 
the long bones is a feature of lethal dysplasias. In general, 
all three bone segments are highly hypoplastic and 
the shafts of the long bones appear very small and 
curved. A flowchart assisting in the differential diagnosis 
of the most common skeletal dysplasias characterized by 
micromelia is shown in Table 9.1, while skeletal dysplasias 
characterized prevalently by rhizomelia are 
shown in Table 9.2. Figure 9.8 shows the same information 
as Table 9.1, with ultrasound images. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by thoracic hypoplasia 
(Figures 9.7b,c and 9.9). The ultrasound diagnosis of 
thoracic hypoplasia, if severe, does not offer particular 
difficulties, provided that, when assessing the 4-chamber 
view, the operator bears this anomaly in mind. As 
already pointed out, the first impression is always that 
of a very enlarged but anatomically normal heart. 
However, if the suspicion of a possible skeletal dysplasia 
has already been raised, then the diagnosis is straightforward 
and it becomes easy to pick up the evident disproportion 
between a normal-sized heart and a hypoplastic 
thorax (Figure 9.7b). To provide an objective impression 
of thoracic hypoplasia, the thoracic circumference and 
area and the cardiothoracic ratio should be checked 
against the appropriate normal ranges for gestational 
age, using charts published in the literature1,2 (see the 
Appendix). However, it should be underlined that the 
cardiothoracic ratio is abnormal (> 95th centile) in both 
cardiomegaly and thoracic hypoplasia (Chapter 6), 
whereas by using the simple graphs of thoracic circumference 
or area versus gestational age, the diagnosis of 
thoracic hypoplasia is straightforward. In this regard, 
care should be taken in checking the effective gestational 
age of the index pregnancy, considering the difficulties 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS 
Table 9.1 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe micromelia (see also 
Figure 9.8) 
Index sign . Severe micromelia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous fractures + hypomineralization . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Severe ubiquitous hypomineralizationa . Hypophosphatasia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia + congenital heart . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
disease + polydactyly ± hypomineralization 
a: clavicle-sparing hypomineralization 
Table 9.2 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by rhizomelia of variable severity 
Index sign . Rhizomelia 
Additional signs . Frontal bossing ± mild macrocrania . Achondroplasia 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia ± polydactyly/renal . Asphyxiating thoracic 
anomalies distrophy 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Postural deformities + ‘hitch-hiker’s . Diastrophic dysplasia 
thumb’ + micrognathia 

related to the fact that, in skeletal dysplasias, most biometric 
measures are indeed below the normal range. It is 
useful to remember that, except for some very rare anomalies 
such as Neu–Laxova syndrome (Chapter 10), the 
transverse cerebellar diameter is not generally affected 
and its biometry gives a reliable estimate of the effective 
gestational age. Other findings possibly indicative of 
severe thoracic hypoplasia can be searched for on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal trunk obtained with a 
ventral approach. On this view, the recognition of a dip 
at the thoraco-abdominal junction (Figure 9.7c and 
Chapter 6) further supports the diagnosis of severe thoracic 
hypoplasia. On the same view, at higher magnification, 
it can be appreciated that the heart occupies the 
whole of the anteroposterior diameter of the thorax. 
Similarly to micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia, if severe, is 
a feature of lethal dysplasias (Table 9.3). In skeletal dysplasias 
associated with severe thoracic hypoplasia, the 
death is the result of the severe secondary pulmonary 
hypoplasia. It is worth underlining that, in the sub-type 
of thanatophoric dysplasia not associated with the 
cloverleaf skull (type I), the length of the long bones may 
be unaffected: if the severe thoracic hypoplasia is not 
recognised this lethal abnormality can be overlooked 
(see page 28–29 in this chapter)! 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by fractures. The ultrasound 
recognition of a fracture is straigthforward in 
some cases, but can prove difficult and tricky in others, 
especially early in gestation. The positive aspect is that, if 
fractures have been confidently recognized, the diagnosis 
is made, for there is virtually only one disease, and one 
subtype of disease, that is associated with fractures in the 
2nd trimester, namely osteogenesis imperfecta type II! 
Of the other three subtypes of osteogenesis imperfecta, 
only type III can sometimes be recognized in the 3rd 
trimester, on the grounds of bowed and short femurs 
and tibiae. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by hypomineralization 
(Figures 9.7d, 9.10, and 9.11). The ultrasound detection 
of hypomineralization is usually made on the axial 
transthalamic view of the fetal head (Figure 9.7d), or, 
alternatively, on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile. 
A peculiar feature, in the case of hypomineralization of 
the calvarium, is the perfect depiction of the fetal brain 
(‘see how nicely this brain shows up!’), due to the lack of 
ultrasound absorption by the underossified proximal 
parietal bone; and the usually bright rim of the calvarium 
is barely visible (Figures 9.7d and 9.10). An additional 
feature is the softness of the calvarium: it is 
possible to significantly deform the fetal head by applying 
moderate pressure with the transducer (Figure 9.10). 
Once the occurrence of hypomineralization has been 
established, the next step is evaluation of the involved 
regions: the selective involvement or, on the contrary, 
the selective sparing of a given region may contribute to 
the differential diagnosis. As an example, in hypophosphatasia, 
the hypomineralization involves all the bones 
except the clavicles. A flowchart assisting in the differential 
diagnosis of the most common skeletal dysplasias 
characterized by hypomineralization is shown in Figure 
9.11; and, see also Table 9.4. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by micrognathia 
(Figure 9.12 and Table 9.5). Since the diagnosis of 
micrognathia may help in the differential diagnosis of 
skeletal dysplasias, a flowchart reporting the most common 
skeletal dysplasias characterized by this feature is 
shown in Figure 9.12. 
Skeletal dysplasias characterized by hydrops (Table 9.6) 
Usually, lethal skeletal dysplasias, especially at 12–14 
weeks of gestation, can be associated with fetal hydrops 
or cystic hygroma. Non-immune fetal hydrops is 
described in detail in Chapter 4. The most common 
skeletal dysplasias characterized by this feature are listed 
in Table 9.6. 
272 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 9.3 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(see also figure 9.9) 
Index sign . Thoracic hypoplasia 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia ± polydactyly / renal . Thoracic asphyxiating dysplasia 
anomalies (Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralizationa . Hypophosphatasia 
Additional signs . Micromelia + polydactyly + congential . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
heart disease ± hypomineralization 
a Clavicle-sparing hypomineralization. 
Note that both ostheogenesis imperfecta type II and condroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis van Creveld) are not listed here because 
in these two disorders, the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is variable. 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 273 
Figure 9.7 Signs of lethal skeletal 
dysplasias. (a) Micromelia. (b) Severe 
thoracic dysplasia; note the predominance 
of the heart over the thorax, 
and the abnormal shape of the ribs. (c) 
Severe thoracic hypoplasia. On a lowmagnification 
sagittal view of the fetal 
body, a dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction (arrow) is a marker of severe 
thoracic hypoplasia. (d) Calvarial 
hypomineralization. Diffuse regional 
hypomineralization is a feature of some 
lethal skeletal dysplasias. Note the 
absence of the hyperechoic rim due to 
the normal mineralization of the skull 
and the evidence of the CNS structures 
(arrowheads), due to the unblocked 
penetration of ultrasound waves. 
Thanatophoric 
dysplasia type I 
Osteogenesis 
imperfecta 
type II 
Hypophosphatasia 
Achondrogenesis 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Cloverleaf 
skull 
Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Main finding 
Severe 
micromelia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Ubiquitous 
fractures 
Hypomineralization 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia Micrognathia 
Hypomineralization 
Thoracic hypoplasia 
Figure 9.8 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micromelia. 
d
b 
c
a 

274 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Thanatophoric 
dysplasia type I 
Achondrogenesis 
Hypophosphatasia 
Asphyxiaitng 
thoracic dysplasia 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Main finding 
Moderate 
rhizomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital heart 
disease 
Polydactyly Renal anomalies 
Cloverleaf 
skull 
Severe 
micromelia Micrognathia Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Hypomineralization 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Figure 9.9 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring severe thoracic hypoplasia. Note that both ostheogenesis imperfecta type II and 
condroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis van Creveld) are not listed here because in these two disorders the degree of thoracic hypoplasia in variable. 
Figure 9.10 Signs of calvarial 
hypomineralization. In the case 
of calvarial hypomineralization, 
the skull is soft and can easily be 
indented by applying moderate 
pressure with the transducer 
(arroweheads). (a) Sagittal view 
(15 weeks of gestation): note the 
deformation of the skull against 
the anterior placenta. (b) Axial 
view: vivid demonstration of CNS 
structure due to the hypomineralization 
of the calvarium. (c) In the 
same case, by applying moderate 
pressure with the transducer, it is 
possible to deform the parietal 
area (arrowheads). 
c 
a b 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 275 
Osteogenesis 
imperfecta 
type II 
Achondrogenesis 
Hypophosphatasia 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s)a 
Main finding 
Hypomineralization 
Polydactyly 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Ubiquitous 
fractures 
Micrognathia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Figure 9.11 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring hypomineralization. a: the presence/absence of hypomineralization in 
this group of syndromes varies in the 4 types. 
Table 9.4 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by diffuse hypomineralization 
Index sign . Hypomineralization 
Additional signs . Micromelia + fractures . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
Additional signs . Micromelia . Hypophosphatasiaa 
Additional signs . Micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia + congenital heart disease + . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s)b. 
polydactyly 
a Clavicle-sparing hypomineralization. 
b The presence/absence of hypomineralization in this group of syndromes varies in the 4 types. 

276 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.12 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micrognathia. 
Main finding 
Micrognathia 
Campomelic 
dysplasia 
Achondrogenesis 
Diastrophic 
dystrophy 
Fetal akynesia 
deformation 
sequence (FADS) 
Rhizomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Hypomineralization 
Bowed tibias 
(femurs) 
Rhizomelia Postural 
deformities 
Joint 
contractures 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Hitchhiker’s 
thumb 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Table 9.5 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring micrognathia 
Index sign Micrognathia 
Additional signs . Micromelia + hypomineralization + . Achondrogenesis 
thoracic hypoplasia 
Additional signs . Bowed tibias and femurs + hypoplastic . Campomelic dysplasia 
scapula 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia + joint contractures . Diastrophic dysplasia 
(thumba) 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous joint contractures + hydrops . FADSb 
a ‘Hitch-hiker’s thumb’. 
b Fetal akinesia deformation sequence. 
Table 9.6 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias characterized by early hydrops/hygroma 
Index sign Hydrops 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± hypomineralization . Achondrogenesis 
Additional signs . Micromelia ± cloverleaf skull . Thanatophoric dysplasia type II 
Additional signs . Micromelia + fractures + . Osteogenesis imperfecta type II 
hypomineralization 
Additional signs . Rhizomelia ± polydactyly / renal . Asphyxiating thoracic distrophy 
anomalies (Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Micromelia + congential heart disease + Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
polydactyly 

Objectives.3,4 The primary objectives of 3D assessment 
of the fetal skeleton are the following: 
• multiplanar imaging of skeletal structures, aiming at 
the demonstration of anomalies not readily recognizable 
on two-dimensional ultrasound 
• surface-rendering reconstructions, to highlight abnormal 
postures and joint contractures 
• surface-rendering reconstructions¸ performed mainly 
with the maximum mode, to better assess normal and 
abnormal bones, which are more difficult to explore 
with conventional 2D ultrasound, such as the ribs or 
the skull sutures (see chapter 1). 
It is important to underline that the coronal volume contrast 
imaging (VCI-C) mode, which allows a real-time 
representation of the coronal plane, coupled with the 
transparent maximum mode, makes the assessment of 
the skeleton much easier and more immediate than when 
using the conventional procedure of acquiring a volume 
and then postprocessing it. By using the VCI-C mode 
‘live’, it is possible to assess quickly and efficiently 
normal and abnormal fetal bones. 
Examination protocols. An introduction to 3D volume 
acquisition and processing is given in Chapter 1. We 
describe here the modalities with which 3D ultrasound 
is to be employed for the best assessment of the musculoskeletal 
system. As far as the rendering modes are 
concerned, the transparent maximum mode is the option 
of choice for assessment of the skeleton and sutures. As 
already mentioned, the use of the VCI-C mode reduces 
examination times and is the option of choice for assessment 
of the fetal skeleton. Once acquired, the volume 
may also be further postprocessed in order to improve 
even more the display of the region of interest. This 
is accomplished by adjusting the threshold and balance 
settings to obtain the best balance between the display 
of the bones and that of the overlying soft tissues. Two 
useful hints, for a better display of the skeleton, are to 
start the acquisition with a lower than normal gain 
setting on the 2D image and to use rather hard greyscale 
settings, such as those used in fetal echocardiography. 
Districts to explore 
Cranial sutures. One of most important advantages of 
3D ultrasound concerns the visualization of the cranial 
sutures with the transparent maximum mode. In particular, 
with a correct orthogonal approach to the suture 
to explore, it is possible to actually see the bony parts 
and the wide open sutures under normal and abnormal 
conditions5–7 (see Chapter 3 for details). 
Spine and ribs. The assessment of the ribcage also benefits 
from a 3D ultrasound approach: in addition to an 
overall assessment of its integrity, high-definition renderings 
of the cervical vertebrae and the occiput allow one 
to evaluate in detail possible anomalies of this tract of 
the spine, such as fusion of the vertebrae. However, it is 
in the assessment of the ribs that 3D ultrasound shows 
its advantages most clearly: the acquision of a volume 
including the whole of the thorax and its display with 
the transparent maximum mode make the detection of 
rib number and structural anomalies much easier than 
with 2D ultrasound. In particular, additional ribs, rib 
fractures, and/or deformities are easily detected using 
this technique (Figure 9.13). Also, 3D renderings of the 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 277 
Figure 9.13 Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering. (a) Upper spine and occipital bone. The image shows the cervicothoracic 
spine, the ribs, the scapulae (S), the clavicles (appearing as two oblique echoic bars just above the scapulae), and the occipital bone (Occ). 
(b) Lower spine and sacrum. The lower ribs, the lower spine (from the thoracic to the sacral vertebrae), and the iliac wings (sa) are clearly 
shown. (c) Thanatophoric dysplasia type I. As an example, a lateral sagittal view of the body demonstrates on the same image the 
extremely short ribs (arrowheads), and the short and thickened bones (like a French telephone receiver) of the upper limb (arrows). 
3D ULTRASOUND IN THE DIAGNOSIS OF SKELETAL DYSPLASIA 
AND RELATED CONDITIONS 
a b c 

278 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.15 Three-dimensional image rendering. 
(a) Surface rendering: clubfoot. This image shows 
a clubfoot in the early 3rd trimester. Note the 
abnormal axis of the foot and the normal aspect 
of the foot and calf muscles. (b) Volume contrast 
imaging (VCI) plus maximum-mode rendering 
of a normal hand. This image demonstrates the 
normal bony structure of the hand at 27 weeks of 
gestation. Note how this image modality is able 
to clearly depict the bones of the metacarpus and 
the digits. (c) Maximum-mode rendering of an 
abnormal foot. This image demonstrates an 
abnormality of the bony structure of the toe, 
which is abducted and larger than normal. In this 
case, it was an isolated anomaly. 
lower spine with the iliac bones are useful for the assessment 
of caudal anomalies of the spine and/or the neural 
tube, which are often associated in spinal dysraphisms 
(Figure 9.14). 
Long bones and extremities. The use of 3D ultrasound 
in the assessment of limb anomalies includes both 
surface-mode and maximum-mode renderings, in order 
to display the overall appearance of the limb or the bony 
parts only (Figure 9.15). The surface-rendered appearance 
of a limb defect, be it a transverse defect or a clubfoot, 
can also be used to improve the communication of 
the diagnosis to the parents. On the other hand, maximum-
mode renderings allow one to accurately define 
possible focal bony defects and/or abnormal shapes of 
the long bones (Figure 9.13c). 
Anomalies detectable by 3D ultrasound only. In the 
case of skeletal abnormalities, it is common experience 
that the employment of 3D ultrasound contributes to 
reducing the examination time and increases the diagnostic 
confidence of the sonographer by enhancing the 
display of normal and abnormal bones. However, in 
addition to these advantages, there are some pathologic 
conditions that can be reliably diagnosed only if 3D 
ultrasound is used. These include delayed or abnornal 
ossification of the cranial sutures, anomalies of rib 
number or aspect (additional ribs or fusion of the ribs) 
and fusion of vertebral bodies and hemivertebrae. It is 
useful to add here that a significant number of facial 
anomalies (e.g., facial cleftings) are also better characterized 
and/or displayed by 3D ultrasound (Chapter 3). 
Figure 9.14 Three-dimensional maximum-mode rendering of 
sacrum and iliac bones. With an adequate insonation angle, it is 
possible to demonstrate the sacral vertebrae and the iliac wings. 
c
a b 

Arthrogryposis and joint contractures (Table 9.7). 
Arthrogryposis is a condition characterized by fixed 
abnormal contractures of all muscles within a given 
anatomic area. It can be regional, affecting only the 
lower or upper limbs, or ubiquitous, affecting virtually 
all muscles, as in the fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS: Chapter 10). As already mentioned, if the 
contractures affect the upper limbs, these will probably 
appear flexed, lying on the lateral walls of the thorax, 
and with clenched hands. On the contrary, if the 
contractures involve the thighs, these will often lie 
extended and crossed, scissors-like, due to the fact that 
the quadriceps are more powerful than the femoral 
biceps. Although the anomalies of the neuromuscular 
transmission often involve all of the muscles at the same 
time, in some instances the disease is confined to the 
lower limbs: in these rarer cases, the knee joints may also 
appear flexed, abducted, and crossed. It is worth underlining 
that the time of onset of arthrogryposis is 
extremely variable, between 12 and 30 weeks.8 Severe 
joint contractures can be associated with a number of 
diseases and syndromes (Table 9.7), including both chromosomal 
(trisomy 18) and non-chromosomal anomalies. 
Ulnar deviation and clubfeet as syndromic indicators 
(Table 9.8). Both of these features may characterize some 
syndromes and osteomuscular disorders. It is worth 
underlining that in ulnar deviation, the wrist is fixedly 
and abnormally rotated towards the ulna; often, clenched 
hands and clynodactyly are associated because of the 
concurrent pathologic contraction of the digital flexor 
muscles of the forearm. In the case of clubfoot, the axis of 
the foot is no longer that of the lower leg, and therefore, 
on the sagittal view of the leg, the sole is also visible, with 
the foot drawn up and bent inward (Figure 9.15a). 
Polydactyly and ectrodactyly as syndromic indicators 
(Table 9.9 and 9.10 and Figures 9.16 and 9.17). Both 
of these conditions are frequently encountered in 
syndromes. Polydactyly is defined as postaxial if the sixth 
digit, which may or may not present a bony phalanx, is 
on the ulnar/fibular side after the fifth digit (Figure 9.18 
a–e). On the contrary, if the additional digit is located on 
the radial/tibial side, before the thumb/toe, which represents 
a much rarer finding, then it is defined as preaxial 
(Figure 9.18f). Care must be taken in the ultrasound diagnosis 
of suspected polydactyly: if the hand is insonated 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 279 
Table 9.7 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions possibly associated with arthrogryposis (joint 
contractures) 
Index sign . Arthrogryposis 
Lower limbs+ . Micrognathia + microphthalmia . Cerebro-oculofacio-skeletal 
syndrome 
Lower limbs+ . Congenital heart disease + exomphalos, etc . Trisomy 18 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Microcephaly + cataract + ACC a+ 
Cerebellar hypoplasia + syndactyly . Neu–Laxova syndrome 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Micrognathia ± hydrops . FADSb 
Upper + lower limbs+ . Micrognathia + pterygia + hydrops . Multiple pterygium syndrome 
a Agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
b Fetal akynesia deformation sequence. 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF JOINT CONTRACTURES, NEUROMUSCULAR 
DISEASES, AND ANOMALIES OF THE EXTREMITIES 
Table 9.8 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions possibly associated with clubfoot 
Index sign . Clubfoot 
Additional signs . Neural tube defects + banana signa . Lower spine neural tube defects 
Additional signs . Bowed tibias and femurs + micrognathia . Campomelic dysplasia 
Additional signs . Focal femoral hypoplasia + micrognathia . Femoral hypoplasia–unusual 
facies syndrome 
Additional signs . Ubiquitous arthrogriposis + pterygia . Multiple pterygium syndrome 
Additional signs . Arthrogryposis + micrognathia ± hydrops . FADSb 
a Distorted banana-shaped cerebellum. 
b Fetal akinesia deformation sequence. 

280 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table 9.9 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions characterized by polydactyly (see also Figure 9.16) 
Index sign . Polydactyly 
Additional signs . Micromelia + thoracic hypoplasia + . Short-rib polydactyly syndrome(s) 
congenital heart disease 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + micrognathia + . Trisomy 13 
multiple anomalies 
Additional signs . Thoracic hypoplasia + renal anomalies . Asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Additional signs . Polycystic kidney + cephalocele . Meckel–Gruber syndrome 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + acromesomelia . Chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome) 
Table 9.10 Ultrasound differential diagnosis of conditions characterized by ectrodactyly (see also Figure 9.17) 
Index sign . Ectrodactyly 
Additional signs . Phocomelia + cleft lip/palate . Roberts syndrome 
Additional signs . Aplasia radii + micrognathia + multiple . Trisomy 18 
anomalies 
Additional signs . Cleft lip/palate or malar hypoplasia . Ectrodactyly–Ectodermal 
dysplasia (EEC) 
Additional signs . Micrognathia + external ear anomalies . Nager syndrome 
Additional signs . None . Split-hand–split foot syndrome 
Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia (Ellis-Van 
Creveld syndrome) 
Trisomy 13 
Polydactyly 
Main finding 
Asphyxiating 
thoracic distrophy 
(Jeune syndrome) 
Meckel-Gruber 
syndrome 
Short-rib 
polydactyly 
syndrome(s) 
Acromesomelia 
Severe 
micromelia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Renal anomalies 
Moderate 
rhizomelia 
Thoracic 
hypoplasia 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Congenital 
heart disease 
Various 
malformations Micrognathia 
Cephalocele Polycystic kidney 
Figure 9.16 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring ectrodactyly. 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 281 
Roberts 
syndrome 
Trisomy 18 
Ectrodactylyectodermal 
dysplasia( EEC) 
Nager 
syndrome 
Ectrodactyly 
Main finding 
External ear 
anomalies 
Maxillary 
hypopalsia 
Micrognathia 
Cleft 
lip/palate 
Phocomelia 
Aplasia radii 
Various 
malformations Micrognathia 
Cleft 
lip/palate 
Figure 9.17 Differential diagnosis of skeletal dysplasias featuring polydactyly. 
Figure 9.18 Polydactyly. (a) 
Postaxial polydactyly of the 
hand (arrow) at 20 weeks 
of gestation. (b) Confirmation 
at autopsy. (c) Postaxial polydactyly 
of the hand, consisting 
of an edematous appendix 
(arrow): 3D surface-rendering 
at 22 weeks of gestation. (d) 
Confirmation at autopsy. (e) 
Postaxial polydactyly of the 
foot (arrow) at 21 weeks of 
gestation: autopsy. (f) A rare 
case of preaxial polydactyly 
of the foot, in a family with 
dominant inherited polydactyly 
(arrow). 
f 
e 
d 
c
a b 

with its ulnar side proximal to the transducer, should the 
additional digit be represented by a soft appendix only 
passively floating in the amniotic fluid, this may be hidden 
by the metacarpal bones, due to gravity (Figure 
9.18c). Hence, to exclude or confirm the presence of 
hexadactyly, the hand has to be imaged either with the 
digits upwards or with the its radial aspect proximal to 
the transducer: in these positions, soft appendices would 
also easily be spotted on the ulnar margin of the hand. 
Ectrodactyly is the absence of one or more digits, 
although the term is used almost synonymously with 
thumb aplasia, since this is the variant most commonly 
seen in the fetus. However, it should be underlined that 
the absence of more than one digit or their fusion (syndactyly) 
into two gross digits (lobster-claw anomaly) are 
highly indicative of very rare conditions such as Nager 
syndrome and ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia (EEC), 
respectively (Figure 9.19). 
282 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.19 Ectrodactyly – lobster claw anomaly. 
(a) On ultrasound, the hand consists of only two 
digits. (b) Confirmation at autopsy. (c) The foot 
also consists of only the toe and another large digit. 
(d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
c d
a b 

Premises. Skeletal dysplasias include a group of diseases 
sharing an extremely low risk of chromosomal abnormalities 
and a reduced risk of associated malformations. The 
required obstetric management is rather limited, owing to 
the fact that most of the skeletal dysplasias diagnosed in 
the fetus are lethal, and, if diagnosed within the legal time 
limit for termination of pregnancy (where this is allowed), 
most will result in termination. Furthermore, karyotyping 
should be performed only in the few cases in which a differential 
diagnosis with aneuploidies need be carried out, 
as in the case of diffuse joint contractures, which may be 
associated with trisomies 18 and 13 and the neuroarthrogryposes. 
(Table 9.7). The perinatal management is also 
rather limited, due to the fact that the non-lethal forms 
will need some respiratory assistance and physiokinesiotherapy 
in the long-term. This is why, in this section of the 
chapter, the discussion of the individual dysplasias will 
deal only with ultrasound diagnosis, differential diagnosis 
and a few notes on survival and quality of life for nonlethal 
conditions. It should also be noted that ‘Incidence’ 
in the summarizing box at the start of each section refers 
not to the overall frequency of the given dysplasia, but 
rather to its frequency within the group of skeletal 
dysplasias as a whole: in fact, the overall incidence of these 
anomalies is rather low. Only the most commonly 
detected skeletal dysplasias will be described in this chapter, 
in keeping with the practical approach of this book: in our 
opinion, it would be confusing for the reader to be confronted 
with 200 or more different diseases, over 100 of 
which will probably never be detected in the fetus. The 
reader in search of further details on skeletal dysplasias 
not described in this chapter (as well as any other congenital 
syndromic condition) may refer to the various 
Medline websites (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov), including the 
OMIM (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man) database. 
This chapter has also been structured in such a way as 
to overcome the difficulties that may be encountered 
by the operators in the differential diagnosis of skeletal 
dysplasias: these are listed in alphabetical order, to facilitate 
their retrieval, and several flowcharts supporting the 
differential diagnosis by the main ultrasound signs, have 
already been presented. Finally, it should be noted 
that polyhydramnios is an almost ubiquitous finding in 
skeletal dysplasias and neuroarthrogryposes. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 283 
MAJOR SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS 
Figure 9.20 Achondrogenesis (16 
weeks of gestation). (a) Micromelia. 
(b) Severe micromelia and hypomineralization 
of the sacrum (arrows). 
(c) Severe rib shortening (arrowheads). 
(d) Severe, lethal, thoracic 
hypoplasia. Note the heart occupying 
the whole of the thorax. (e) Calvarial 
hypomineralization. Note how the 
calvarium can be deformed by a moderate 
pressure applied with the transducer 
(arrowheads) Note also the 
significant micrognathia (arrow). (f) 
With a lateral approach, the usual 
skull hyperechoic contour is not visible 
and the brain shows up in detail. 
This is due to the severe hypomineralization 
of the skull. 
a c e 
b d f 
ACHONDROGENESIS 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severe micromelia, with barely visible and curved bones. Severe thoracic hypoplasia. Diffuse 
hypomineralization of variable degree. 
Outcome. Lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive (25%). De novo mutations with autosomal dominant 
inheritance. 

284 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ACHONDROPLASIA 
Incidence. Relatively frequent: 1/10 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Rhizomelia, mild late-onset macrocrania, and low nasal bridge. 
Outcome. Normal lifespan. No risk of mental retardation. Orthopedic and pulmonary long-term sequelae due to 
the relatively small thorax. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Heterozygotic: due to a de novo mutation, with very low recurrence risk. 
Autosomal dominant inheritance with high incidence if one or both parents are affected (50% and 75% recurrence 
rates respectively). 
Definition. There are two types of achondroplasia 
(OMIM 100800) defined according to their inheritance 
pattern: homozygotic and heterozygotic. The 
former type, which is almost invariably lethal (severe 
pulmonary hypoplasia) is by far the rarer variant, due 
to the fact that it occurs only if both parents are 
affected. The heterozygotic variant is the commoner 
one and is the one that is usually detected at birth and, 
in some cases, in utero. The incidence at birth is relatively 
high, considering the extremely low prevalence 
of other skeletal dysplasias, with 1 case per 10 000 
livebirths. 
Definition. There are different subtypes of achondrogenesis 
that differ in inheritance pattern, genetics, and 
phenotype; however, the classification is continuously 
evolving and is not completely clear. Two main subtypes 
have been recognized, differing in inheritance 
pattern (autosomal recessive for type I and autosomal 
dominant for type II) and in a few sonographic 
aspects (see below). In type I, or Parenti–Fraccaro 
type, the ribs tend to be thin, often with multiple fractures, 
and the cranium is disproportionately large due 
to marked edema of soft tissues; in fact, hydrops is 
frequently associated. Type II, or Langer–Saldino 
type, is characterized by virtual absence of ossification 
in the vertebral column, sacrum, and pubic 
bones. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation in the COL2A1 
gene coding for collagen type II has been found in some 
cases of type II. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is based 
on the recognition of micromelia (Figure 9.20a,b), 
thoracic hypoplasia (Figure 9.20c,d), hypomineralization 
(Figure 9.20e,f), and micrognathia (Figure 9.20e). In 
particular, the long bones appear barely visible and 
curved and the thorax extremely hypoplasic due to the 
underdeveloped ribs. The hypomineralization involves 
predominatly the spine, pelvis, and calvarium. Severe 
micrognathia is also regularly associated. If the condition 
is recognized at 12–14 weeks of gestation, which is 
likely, hydrops and diffuse subcutaneous edema (‘spaceman’s 
suit’) may also be seen. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes all lethal 
conditions characterized by micromelia plus thoracic 
hypoplasia plus hypomineralization (Figures 
9.8, 9.9, and 9.11), such as the lethal variant of 
osteogenesis imperfecta (type II), hypophosphatasia, 
and thanatophoric dysplasia. The constant occurrence 
of fractures in osteogenesis imperfecta type II, 
the lack of micrognathia in hypophosphatasia, and 
the only mild hypomineralization in thanatophoric 
dysplasia, which often also shows curved femurs, 
are the selective ultrasound findings that should contribute 
to reaching the correct final diagnosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Achondrogenesis 
is always lethal, due to the severity of the skeletal 
underdevelopment. The severe pulmonary hypoplasia 
secondary to the ribcage hypoplasia is likely to represent 
the actual determinant of death, should fetuses with 
achondrogenesis reach the neonatal period. 
Recurrence risk. Achondrogenesis can behave in an 
autosomal dominant or recessive manner. However, 
autosomal dominant forms are by definition due to 
de novo mutations, because of the lethality of the condition. 
Therefore, only the 25% risk associated with the 
recessive inheritance pattern should be considered. The 
real issue is that it is not always possible to define exactly 
the type of inheritance. 

Etiology and pathogenesis. The gene defect responsible for 
the disease has been identified in a de novo mutation of 
the gene for the fibroblast growth factor receptor 
(FGFR3), at chromosome 4p16.3. Ninety-seven percent 
of achodroplasic individuals show the same mutation, 
namely a guanine-to-adenine transition at nucleotide 
1138 of the complementary DNA. This mutation prevents 
binding of FGF to its receptor, which in turn impairs bone 
growth. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is difficult, 
since the rhizomelia is of late-onset, becoming evident 
only at 26–28 weeks of gestation. The femur and 
humerus are slightly–moderately shorter than normal, 
showing biometry in the 1st–5th centile range (Figure 
9.21a); in addition, the morphology of the affected long 
bones is normal, which makes the diagnosis even more 
difficult. In some cases, the involvement of the humerus 
is more severe than that of the femur. Additional criteria 
that, if present, may support the ultrasound diagnosis of 
achondroplasia are a tendency to macrocrania and a 
low nasal bridge. However, both of these features are 
difficult to diagnose (Figure 9.21b). To overcome this 
inconvenience, some authors have proposed the use of 
the HC/FL (head circumference/femur length) or 
BPD/FL (biparietal diameter/femur length) ratios, which 
should become abnormal earlier than the measurement 
of the single parameters, due to the fact that the biometric 
parameters nominator and denominator should deviate 
in opposite directions, i.e., towards or above the 95th 
centile for the cranial biometric variables, or towards or 
below the 5th centile for the femur length (see the 
Appendix). In addition, a ‘trident’ position of the hands 
(Figure 9.21: inset) has been described among the possible 
ultrasound features of achondroplasia. As is evident, 
most of the aforementioned ultrasound features are very 
difficult to spot and confirm with the exception of moderate 
rhizomelia. These diagnostic difficulties, together 
with the late onset of most sonographically detectable 
signs, are responsible for the very low prenatal detection 
rate of achondroplasia. To reach a definite diagnosis of 
achondroplasia should short or borderline femur length 
and a tendency to macrocrania be detected in the 2nd 
trimester, a search for the gene mutation responsible for 
most cases of achondroplasia in fetal blood or amniocytes 
can be requested, although, in most cases of short 
femur this procedure will result only in the exclusion of 
achondroplasia as a likely cause of the femur growth 
deficit. However, in pregnancies at risk for achondroplasia, 
such as those in which one of the parents is affected, 
this search may be done on the chorionic villi, so that the 
diagnosis of achondroplasia can be confirmed or 
excluded at the end of the 1st trimester, and this possibility 
should be mentioned to couples with one affected 
individual. 
• Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis 
should include the other conditions that are possibly 
characterized by a borderline or short femur. The 
first, and the easiest to rule out, is trisomy 21: a simple 
karyotype can serve this purpose. In addition, the 
same cells may be used to extract the DNA needed for 
the diagnosis of achondroplasia. The other most 
important condition to rule out is early-onset atypical 
fetal growth restriction (FGR), the onset of which 
may rarely be characterized by selective underdevelopment 
of the long bones. The other skeletal dysplasias 
that may enter in the differential diagnosis, 
due to the presence of moderate rhizomelia (at least 
in the 2nd trimester), are campomelic dysplasia, 
which is often characterized by micrognathia, and, 
always by bowed bones, chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(Ellis–Van Creveld Syndrome), which is associated 
with significant thoracic hypoplasia, polydactyly, and 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 285 
Figure 9.21 Achondroplasia (24 weeks of gestation). (a) 
Moderately short femur. Compare the menstrual age (23 weeks 
and 3 days, arrow) with the dates corresponding to the length of 
the femur (19 weeks and 5 days). (b) Midsagittal view of the fetal 
profile, showing the tendency to macrocrania and the low nasal 
bridge (arrow). The inset shows the so-called ‘trident hand’, which 
is another typical feature of achondroplasia. 
b
a 

congenital heart disease (50% of cases); and the 
non-lethal variants of osteogenesis imperfecta (types 
I, III and IV), which may feature late-onset fractures 
and bowing of long bones. 
• Note. When assessing fetal growth and biometry one 
should use nomograms customized at least for the ethnic 
origin of the studied population: the charts for 
head, abdomen, and long-bone biometry usually available 
in most ultrasound systems are those developed 
many years ago by American or British authors.9–12 If 
these curves are used to assess the biometry of fetuses 
of Asian couples, or, to a lesser extent, those of Latin 
origin, the number of cases featuring long-bone biometry 
below the 5th centile would be higher than 
expected, due to the significant differences in height of 
the two populations. Care should be taken to use biometric 
charts developed from fetal populations of the 
same ethnic origin, or, if these are not available, from 
the most closely similar populations, to limit falsepositive 
diagnoses of short femur.13 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The life expectancy 
is virtually normal, as is the quality of life. The only difficulties 
that most achondroplasic individuals may 
encounter are related to architectural barriers, because of 
their short stature, and to respiratory limitations related to 
the small thorax. The only other significant problem concerns 
the stenotic vertebral canal, which is responsible in 
some cases for peripheral neurologic deficits. 
Recurrence risk. Achondroplasia, in the heterozygotic 
variant, is always due to a de novo mutation. Hence, the 
recurrence risk is definitely low. On the contrary, the 
recurrence risk reaches 50% if one parent is affected and 
is as high as 75% if both parents are affected, being as 
this disorder is inherited as a dominant trait. 
286 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ASPHYXIATING THORACIC DYSTROPHY (JEUNE SYNDROME) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Thoracic hypoplasia. Moderate rhizomelia. Renal anomalies. 
Outcome. Lethal in 60% of cases due to pulmonary hypoplasia. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive. 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. The name underlines the main feature of the 
disorder, namely the extremely small thorax. The real 
incidence of the disease (OMIM 208500) is not known, 
although it is a rare disorder. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A locus has been mapped to 
15q13. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The main ultrasound finding that 
leads to the diagnosis is the extremely severe thoracic 
hypoplasia (Figure 9.22a, c, d). The additional findings, 
such as moderate rhizomelia and renal anomalies, are not 
always easy to recognize on ultrasound (Figure 9.22b). It 
should be noted that this condition may escape prenatal 
diagnosis, especially in non-lethal cases; in fact, the long 
bones may be only moderately affected (moderate rhizomelia) 
and the thoracic hypoplasia is not always severe. 
• Differential diagnosis. This should take into consideration 
chondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis–van Creveld 
syndrome), because of the mild to moderate degree of 
limb shortening. However, chondroectodermal dysplasia 
is also characterized by frequent cardiac defects 
(although these are often represented by simple atrial 
septal defects) and by polydactyly (mainly of the 
hands), which is absent in Jeune syndrome. In addition, 
the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is higher in the latter 
disorder than in chondroectodermal dysplasia. To a 
lesser extent, the differential diagnosis may include the 
other skeletal dysplasias with severe thoracic dysplasia, 
such as achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, 
hypophosphatasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. 
However, all of these disorders are also characterized 
by severe micromelia, which is absent in asphyxiating 
thoracic dystrophy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The neonatal 
mortality rate is 60% with the cause of death being 
severe secondary pulmonary hypoplasia. Surviving 
neonates will have short stature, renal and (above all) 
cardiovascular problems, always related to the degree of 
thoracic hypoplasia. Intelligence is normal. 
Recurrence risk. Asphyxiating thoracic dystrophy has an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% 
recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case of termination of 
pregnancy, a confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct counseling 
and for advising early ultrasound monitoring of 
the next pregnancy in referral centers. 

Definition. The term ‘campomelic’ (from Ancient Greek 
camptos = bowed) refers to the abnormal curvature of the 
long bones, which is the most peculiar anomaly in this disease. 
The incidence of campomelic dysplasia (OMIM 
114290) is low, with only 0.02 cases per 10 000 live births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The mutation responsible for 
the disease, which always occurs as a de novo mutation, 
has been identified in the SOX9 allele, which codes for 
the SRY-box 9 protein, expressed in the testis and the 
fetal skeleton. The body distribution of this protein 
explains both the bone abnormalities and the sex reversal 
(see below), which is typical of affected males. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis can 
sometimes be rather difficult because of the extreme 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 287 
Figure 9.22 Asphyxiating thoracic 
dystrophy – Jeune syndrome (20 weeks 
of gestation). (a) Coronal view of the thorax, 
showing severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrows), with the heart (H) squeezed into 
the center of the thorax. (b) Axial view 
of the abdomen, showing the horseshoe 
kidney (arrowheads). (c) Axial view of the 
thorax, confirming severe hypoplasia: the 
heart is almost outside the ribcage due to 
the extremely reduced dimensions of 
the thorax. (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Note the severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrowheads). 
CAMPOMELIC DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. Very rare: 0.02/10 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Bowed tibias and, to a lesser extent, femurs. Scapular hypoplasia. Micrognathia. Sex 
reversal in male fetuses. 
Outcome. Lethal in most cases. Rare cases of long-term survival. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Almost always due to a de novo mutation, with very low recurrence risk. 
In the rare autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, the recurrence rate is 25%. 
a
b 
c
d 

phenotypic variability of the syndrome. The ultrasound 
features indicative of campomelic dysplasia are bowing 
of variable degree of the tibias, femurs, and humeri 
(Figures 9.23a–c,e), micrognathia, inconstantly (Figure 
9.23d), sex reversal in male fetuses, and scapular 
hypoplasia (which is difficult to detect in utero). In particular, 
bowing involves the tibia and, to a lesser extent, 
the femur; the fibula can be hypoplastic, or sometimes 
completely absent. Also, the humerus and the ulna may 
be bowed, but in a significantly smaller number of cases. 
Besides, it should be noted that the long bones are 
bowed in the sagittal plane: therefore, if the bone shaft is 
visualized with a lateral approach, severe bowing may 
not show up. Talipes and micrognathia are often associated, 
while congenital heart disease is found in only onethird 
of cases. Care should be taken in diagnosing sex 
reversal in male fetuses, since this may consist of a bifid 
scrotum with a micropenis only, or may feature real 
ambiguous or female-like genitalia. 
• Differential diagnosis. This involves mainly the 
non-lethal forms of osteogenesis imperfecta (types I, 
III and IV). In fact, in the small number of cases of 
non-lethal osteogenesis imperfecta variants that are 
diagnosed in utero, the most common abnormal 
finding is late-onset bowing of long bones; and this is 
similar to what occurs in campomelic dysplasia. 
The detection of calvarium hypomineralization (in 
the osteogenesis imperfecta variants) may help in the 
differential diagnosis: however, this is an all but 
inconstant finding, and, in the non-lethal variants, of 
extremely variable degree as well. Much more rarely, 
campomelic dysplasia should be differentiated from 
incomplete variants of hypophosphatasia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Campomelic 
dysplasia is almost always lethal, because of the severity 
of the ubiquitous laryngotracheomalacia. In very 
rare instances, survival until adolescence has been 
reported. 
Recurrence risk. Since it is almost always due to a de 
novo mutation, the recurrence risk is insignificant except 
for the very rare cases in which an autosomal recessive 
inheritance pattern has been found, with a consequent 
25% recurrence risk. 
288 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
CHONDROECTODERMAL DYSPLASIA (ELLIS–VAN CREVELD SYNDROME) 
Incidence. Very rare: 1/60 000 live births. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Acromesomelia and moderately severe thoracic hypoplasia. Post-axial polydactyly of hands 
and, rarely, of feet. Congenital heart disease (atrial septal defect). 
Outcome. Lethal in 50% of cases. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Figure 9.23 Campomelic dysplasia 
(22 weeks of gestation). 
(a) Anterior bowing of the tibia. 
(b) Concomitant bowing of the 
femur. (c) Low-magnification 
view of another case showing 
mild bowing of the femur. (d) 
3D surface rendering: moderate 
micrognathia (arrow). (e) 
3D maximum-mode rendering 
demonstrating the abnormal 
features of the femur (arrows). 
(f) Specimen after termination 
of pregnancy: note the moderate 
shortening of the limbs. 
e f 
c d 
a b 

Definition. The name chondroectodermal dysplasia 
(OMIM 225500) refers to the main features of the syndrome, 
the anomaly of the cartilagineous layer between 
the diaphysis and the epiphysis and the dysplasia of 
the ectodermal tissues (nails and teeth). This very rare 
condition (1/60 000 live births) is an autosomal recessive 
disease with variable phenotypic expression. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation in chromosome 
4p16 has been found; this is the same allele involved in 
achondroplasia. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The signs of the ectodermal dysplasia 
(nail dysplasia, hypodontia, and delayed eruption) 
are not recognizable by ultrasound. Ultrasound 
diagnosis of chondroectodermal dysplasia is based on 
detection of the following signs: mild to moderate 
acromesomelia; moderately severe thoracic hypoplasia 
with short ribs (Figures 9.24a, 9.25a); postaxial polydactyly, 
which involves the hands in virtually 100% of 
the cases and the feet in significant lower percentage of 
cases (10–25%) (Figure 9.24b and Figure 9.25b,c); and 
congenital heart disease, although the heart defect most 
frequently associated with chondroectodermal dysplasia, 
namely atrial septal defect, is difficult to diagnose in 
the fetus because of the patency of the foramen ovale 
(Figure 9.24a). 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly thoracic 
asphyxiating dystrophy (Jeune syndrome) and the 
group of short-rib polydactyly syndromes. In particular, 
condroectodermal dysplasia is characterized by 
thoracic hypoplasia of variable degree and polydactyly, 
whereas, in thoracic asphyxiating dystrophy, 
the degree of thoracic hypoplasia is significantly more 
pronounced and polydactyly is absent. Also short-rib 
polydactyly syndromes present more severe thoracic 
hypoplasia and, above all, micromelia, which is absent 
in thoracic asphyxiating dystrophy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia shows a 50% infant mortality rate, which is 
related to the severity of the thoracic hypoplasia and the 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 289 
Figure 9.24 Chondroectodermal 
dysplasia – Ellis–Van Creveld 
syndrome (20 weeks of gestation) 
(a) Moderate thoracic hypoplasia 
and atrioventricular septal defect. 
(b) Postaxial polydactyly of one 
hand (arrowhead). 
Figure 9.25 Chondroectodermal dysplasia – (Ellis–Van Creveld 
syndrome) (20 weeks of gestation): specimen after termination 
of pregnancy. (a) Moderate thoracic hypoplasia (arrowheads). (b) 
Postaxial polydactyly of feet (arrowhead). (c) Postaxial polydactyly 
of hands (arrowhead). 
a b 
c 
a
b 

consequent severe cardiopulmonary problems. Survivors 
have normal intelligence but short stature. The need to 
correct the cardiac septal defect does not affect survival 
or quality of life, if the respiratory problems related to 
the thoracic hypoplasia have been overcome. The signs 
of the ectodermal dysplasia are easier to approach, 
although dentition defects often require orthodontic 
procedures. 
Recurrence risk. The disease is inherited with an autosomal 
recessive pattern, which means that there is a 25% 
risk of recurrence after a pregnancy with an affected 
fetus/neonate. Therefore, in the case of termination of 
pregnancy, a confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct counseling 
and for advising early ultrasound monitoring of 
the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
290 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
DIASTROPHIC DYSPLASIA 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. ‘Hitch-hiker’s thumb, joint contractures, micrognathia. 
Outcome. Lethal in 25% of cases. In survivors, severe muscular and postural handicap due to the joint 
contractures and the kyphoscoliosis with spinal cord compression. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. This extremely rare skeletal dysplasia is 
defined as ‘diastrophic’ in relation to its main features: 
postural abnormalities and joint contractures. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The underlying genetic defect 
consists of a mutation in the DTDST gene, located on 
chromosome 5q32–33.1. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The key diagnostic finding on 
ultrasound, in addition to ubiquitous joint contractures, 
is the so-called ‘hitch-hikes thumb’: the first digit is fixed 
in extreme abduction because of the contractures of the 
extensor muscles, while the hand shows ulnar deviation 
and the other digits are clenched (Figure 9.26). Other 
signs detectable on ultrasound are severe rhizomelia, 
flexion contractures of the elbows, talipes equinovarus, 
and micrognathia (see Figures 10.18 and 10.28). 
• Differential diagnosis. This involves mainly the neuroarthrogryposes, 
in which the bone length is not 
affected. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Diastrophic dysplasia 
is associated with a 25% infant mortality rate, 
mainly related to severe respiratory obstruction. 
Survivors experience significant limitations in physical 
activity due to the severe kyphoscoliosis and the joint 
contractures. Kyphoscoliosis may also be responsible for 
symptomatic spinal cord compression. 
Recurrence risk. This disorder shows an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern with variable expression. 
This yields a 25% recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case 
of termination of pregnancy, confirmation of the ultrasound 
diagnosis by autopsy is of the utmost importance 
for correct counseling and for advising early ultrasound 
monitoring of the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
Figure 9.26 Dyastrophic dysplasia. The image shows the ‘hitchhiker’s 
thumb’ (arrowhead) typical of this disorder, which is due to 
contracture of the extensor of the thumb and the flexors of the 
other digits. 

Definition. This disorder is characterized by a defect in 
serum and tissue alkaline phosphatase. Only the most 
severe, lethal form (of the three recognized) can be 
detected in the fetus (OMIM 241500). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The basic defect concerns the 
tissue non-specific alkaline phosphatase (TNSALP) 
gene, which maps to chromosome 1p36.1–p34. Different 
mutations within the same locus have been 
described. The degree of malfunction of the bone isoform 
correlates with the severity of the phenotypic 
expression. The severity ranges from clinically inapparent 
cases diagnosed only on the basis of biochemical 
features to lethal cases detected in the fetus, the latter 
showing an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. This is based on the detection of 
severe micromelia, severe thoracic hypoplasia, diffuse 
hypomineralization involving virtually all of the bones 
with the exception of the clavicles (Figure 9.27), and 
hydrops and subcutaneous edema (‘spacesuit’) in the 
case of early (12–14 weeks) detection. 
• Differential diagnosis. Hypophosphatasia should be 
differentiated from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias 
presenting with micromelia and thoracic hypoplasia, 
namely achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, 
and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. It should be 
underlined that in some cases a final diagnosis cannot 
be reached on the basis of the ultrasound findings. In 
general, hypomineralization with clavicle sparing is 
typical of hypophosphatasia. Micrognathia, which is 
present in achondrogenesis, is absent in hypophosphatasia, 
while fractures are characteristic of osteogenesis 
imperfecta type II. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The most severe 
type of hypophosphatasia (the only type detectable in 
the fetus) is always lethal. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 291 
HYPOPHOSPHATASIA 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia, severe hypomineralization (clavicles spared). Hydrops and 
subcutaneous edema if detected at 12–14 weeks. 
Outcome. The forms detectable in utero are always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive: 25% recurrence risk. 
Figure 9.27 Hypophosphatasia (14 weeks of gestation). The 
transvaginal scan (10 MHz transducer) shows; (a) complete 
absence of calvarial mineralization (arrowheads); (b,c) multiplanar 
imaging of the fetal body demonstrating complete absence of 
mineralization involving virtually all districts with the significant 
exception of the clavicles, that are spared (arrows). In the sagittal 
plane (b), due to the transparent ribs, the moderately hyperechoic 
lung is also visible below the clavicle. On the coronal view 
(c), the complete absence of mineralization of the calvarium and 
the spine allows a neat unobscured demonstration of the spinal 
cord and the brain, with the two lateral ventricles and the 
choroid plexuses (Arrows: clavicles). 
b 
a 

Definition. Osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) comprises a 
spectrum of congenital disorders characterized by very 
fragile bones. Four types have been identified; of these 
types I and IV are not detectable in the fetus, since the 
fractures occur only after birth. Type III can sometimes 
be recognised in the 3rd trimester. The lethal OI type II is 
the only one that can be consistently detected in utero. 
The incidence of OI is relatively high, with 0.4 cases per 
10 000 live births, half of which are represented by type 
II (OMIM 166210). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. OI is due to a mutation in 
one of the two genes involved in the production of collagen 
type I (COLIA1 and COLIA2). Since this type of 
collagen is present in bones, tendons, tooth enamel, and 
sclera, the anomaly in collagen I is the cause of all 
expressions of the disease in the various subtypes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound findings described 
below refer to OI type II only. The main sonographic 
features of this disorder are diffuse hypomineralization 
292 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Recurrence risk. Hypophosphatasia has an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern, which determines the 
25% recurrence rate. Therefore, in the case of termination 
of pregnancy, confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis 
by autopsy is of the utmost importance for correct 
counseling and for advising early ultrasound monitoring 
of the next pregnancy in referral centers. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent: 0.4/10 000 live births, 50% of which are accounted for by type II. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Type II: ubiquitous and diffuse fractures, thoracic hypoplasia, hypomineralization of the 
calvarium. Type III: late onset bowing of long bones and fractures. Types I and IV are not diagnosable in the fetus. 
Outcome. Lethal in type II. Motor disability of various forms in type III. Recently, therapy with bisphosphonates 
and stem cell transplantation have given good results in the non-lethal forms. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. However, all cases are due to 
de novo mutations, and therefore the recurrence risk is very low, although some authors have reported a 6% risk. 
Figure 9.28 Osteogenesis 
imperfecta type II (lethal)(16 
weeks of gestation). (a) On 
transvaginal ultrasound, the 
complete hypomineralization 
of the calvarium is evident 
(arrowheads). (b) Axial view 
of the thorax: abnormal ribs 
with thoracic hypoplasia. (c) 
Fractured and bowed femur 
(arrow). (d) Fractured tibia, 
with an acute angle deformation 
(arrow). 
c d 
a b 
OSTEOGENESIS IMPERFECTA (OI) 

of the calvarium (Figure 9.28a); thoracic hypoplasia of 
variable degree (Figure 9.28b), sometimes associated 
with rib fractures; and diffuse and early fractures, causing 
severe micromelia (Figure 9.28c, d). In the type III 
variant, the ultrasound diagnosis is made in only a 
minority of cases during the late 2nd or early 3rd 
trimester, following the recognition of late-onset bowing 
of long bones and, rarely, of fractures. 
• Differential diagnosis. OI type II should be differentiated 
from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias 
presenting with micromelia and calvarial 
hypomineralization, namely, achondrogenesis, 
and hypophosphatasia. It should be underlined 
that in some cases a final diagnosis cannot be 
reached on the basis of the ultrasound findings. In 
general, hypomineralization with clavicle sparing 
is typical of hypophosphatasia. Micrognathia, 
which is present in achondrogenesis, is absent in 
hypophosphatasia, while fractures are characteristic 
of OI type II. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. OI type II is 
invariably lethal. OI type III shows motor disability of 
variable severity (kyphosis and fractures) and worsening 
with age, due to the extreme fragility of the bones. By 
adulthood, hearing loss (otosclerosis), a need for walking 
aids, and dentition problems are extremely frequent. 
Types I and IV, which cannot be detected in the fetus, are 
associated with a better prognosis. In the non-lethal variants, 
promising results have recently been obtained with 
oral bisphoposphonates (aledronate and pamidronate). 
These are synthetic pyrophosphate analogs that seem to 
increase bone mineral density while decreasing bone 
remodeling markers, pain, and fracture rate in infants and 
children with OI.14 Experimentally, transplantation of 
totipotent stem cells that may differentiate into osteocytes 
has been attempted with some success.15 
Recurrence risk. OI type II shows an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern. However, all cases are due to de novo 
mutations, and therefore the recrrence risk is very low, 
although some authors have reported a 6% risk. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 293 
SHORT-RIB POLYDACTYLY SYNDROMES (SRPS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. Four subtypes have been identified. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia with short ribs, polydactyly. In some cases, cardiac defects too. 
Regional hypomineralization, in some cases. 
Outcome. Always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive. 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. The short-rib polydactyly syndromes (SRPS) 
comprise basically four subtypes (Saldino–Noonan, 
Majewsky, Verma–Naumoff, and Beemer–Langer). All 
are characterized by micromelia, thoracic hypoplasia 
with short ribs, and postaxial polydactyly. Some feature 
other anomalies, including median cleft lip, congenital 
heart disease (transposition of the great arteries) and 
renal dysplasia. However, there is significant phenotypic 
overlap among the different subtypes and this has been 
controversially interpreted as being due to variable 
expression or to genetic heterogeneity. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The real incidence of these 
syndromes is not known, but they are very rare disorders. 
The genetic defect responsible for the SRPS is still 
unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound diagnosis is based 
on the detection of severe micromelia, severe thoracic 
hypoplasia with short ribs, and postaxial polydactyly 
(Figure 9.29). Other anomalies that may be detected by 
ultrasound in the various types include: congenital heart 
disease, median cleft lip, polycystic kindey/renal dysplasia, 
and anophthalmia. 
• Differential diagnosis. SRPS should be differentiated 
from the other lethal skeletal dysplasias presenting 
with micromelia and thoracic hypoplasia, namely 
achondrogenesis, thanatophoric dysplasia, hypophosphatasia, 
and osteogenesis imperfecta type II. 
However, postaxial polydactytly is present in SRPS 
only, and, at the same time, hypomineralization is only 
rarely present in some subtypes of SRPS. Another condition 
to be distinguished from SRPS is chondroectodermal 
dysplasia (Ellis–Van Creveld syndrome), which 
also features thoracic hypoplasia and postaxial polydactytly; 
however, in the latter disorder, thoracic 
hypoplasia is less pronounced and the limbs are less 
affected. The occurrence of median cleft lip identifies 
SRPS types II and IV (Majewsky and Beemer–Langer). 

Definition. This condition is termed ‘thanatophoric’ 
(death-bringing) to emphasize its lethality. Two subtypes 
of thanatophoric dysplasia (OMIM 187600) have been 
identified: type I, which is the most frequent, is characterized 
by curved femurs, whereas type II is characterized 
by straight femurs and the classic cloverleaf skull (see 
below). The reported incidence is 0.69/10 000 live births. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. An anomaly of the 
FGFR3 gene has been found in both subtypes of this 
disorder. In particular, all cases showing a 
Lys650Glu substitution are type II and show straight 
femurs and cloverleaf skull. All other types of mutations 
found in the same gene have bowed femurs and 
no cloverleaf skull (type I). The latter subtype is 
resposible for 80% of cases. 
Ultrasound diagnosis (Figure 9.30 and 9.31). The 
ultrasound signs that may lead to the diagnosis of 
thanatophoric dysplasia are short limbs associated 
294 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.29 Short-rib polydactyly 
syndrome (20 weeks of 
gestation). (a) Severe thoracic 
hypoplasia. (b) Postaxial polydactyly 
of one hand (arrow). 
(c) Confirmation of polydactyly 
at autopsy. (d) Specimen after 
termination of pregnancy, showing 
severe thoracic hypoplasia 
(arrowheads). Note also the 
dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. SRPS are invariably 
lethal. 
Recurrence risk. All SRPS have an autosomal recessive 
inheritance pattern, which determines the 25% recurrence 
rate. Therefore, in the case of termination of pregnancy, 
confirmation of the ultrasound diagnosis by autopsy is of 
the utmost importance for correct counseling and for 
advising early ultrasound monitoring of the next pregnancy 
in referral centers. 
Incidence. Relatively frequent. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Severe limb shortening (femurs in particular). Lethal thoracic (and secondary pulmonary) 
hypoplasia. Type I: bowed femurs; type II: cloverleaf skull and straight femurs. 
Outcome. Always lethal. 
Inheritance pattern and recurrence risk. Both types are due to de novo mutations. Therefore, the recurrence risk is 
very low. 
d 
c 
a
b 
THANATOPHORIC DYSPLASIA 

SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 295 
Figure 9.30 Thanatophoric dysplasia 
(22 weeks of gestation). (a) 3D maximummode 
rendering of the upper limb. The 
involvement of the three segments is evident. 
Note the ‘French telephone receiver’ 
aspect of the humerus. (b) Confirmation of 
the micromelia at autopsy. (c) Maximummode 
rendering of the lower limb. The 
thickening and shortening of the long 
bones is evident, together with the redundancy 
of the soft tissues. (d) Confirmation 
of the micromelia at autopsy. (e) Lowmagnification 
midsagittal view of the fetal 
body showing the severe thoracic hypoplasia 
with a dip at the thoraco-abdominal 
junction (arrowheads). 
Figure 9.31 Thanatophoric dysplasia (22 
weeks of gestation). (a) Axial transthalamic 
view demonstrating the abnormal 
shape of the skull and the early closure of 
some sutures (arrowheads). (b) 3D surface 
rendering of the fetal head, demonstrating 
moderate macrocrania, frontal bossing, 
and a low nasal bridge. (c) Confirmation of 
the macrocrania at autopsy. (d) 3D maximum-
mode rendering of the fetal chest 
demonstrating severely hypoplastic ribs 
(arrows) and thorax. 
b 
c d e 
a
c d 
a b 

with severe thoracic hypoplasia. In particular, type I is 
characterized by bowed and extremely short femurs and 
humeri with metaphyseal cupping (Figure 9.30a–d). 
This unusual aspect, also evident on ultrasound, has 
been noted as resembling the shape of a French telephone 
receiver. The ribs are very short and, on the midsagittal 
low-magnification view of the fetal trunk, a dip 
typical of severe thoracic hypoplasia can be seen at the 
level of the thoraco-abdominal junction (Figure 9.30e). 
The head is large, with frontal bossing and a low nasal 
bridge (Figure 9.31 a–c); no major synostoses are present 
in type I thanatophoric dysplasia. On the contrary, 
in type II, there is a classic cloverleaf skull, recognizable 
on a coronal view of the fetal head, which is due to synostosis 
of the lambdoid, coronal, and sagittal sutures, 
responsible for the temporal bossing. Characteristically, 
in these rarer cases, the sonographer reaches the diagnosis 
through the impossibility of obtaining the classic 
axial transthalamic view for measurement of the biparietal 
diameter. The femurs are short, although less so 
than in type I, and, above all, they tend to be straighter. 
Severe polyhydramnios is constantly associated. 
• Differential diagnosis. This includes the other skeletal 
dysplasias characterized by micromelia and 
severe thoracic hypoplasia, namely achondrogenesis, 
hypophosphatasia, and osteogenesis imperfecta type 
II. In achondrogenesis, additional findings are 
micrognathia and severe hypomineralization, which 
are absent in thanatophoric dysplasia. Hypophosphatasia 
is characterized, in addition to micromelia 
and thoracic hypoplasia, by ubiquitous hypomineralization. 
Fractures are only seen in the lethal type II 
osteogenesis imperfecta. With regard to type II 
thanatophoric dysplasia, the cloverleaf skull can 
also be present in very rare syndromes such as 
Pfeiffer syndrome (different skeletal anomalies) and 
Crouzon syndrome (no limb shortening). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Thanatophoric 
dysplasia is always lethal, due to the severe pulmonary 
and thoracic hypoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Both types are due to de novo mutations. 
Therefore, the recurrence risk is trivial. 
296 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
ULTRASOUND DIAGNOSIS OF REDUCTION DEFECTS OF THE LIMBS 
In this section, the ultrasound diagnosis of focal and 
transverse defects of the limbs is described. According to 
the EUROCAT definition,16 an intercalary reduction 
defect is represented by a usually severe underdevelopment 
of one mesomelic bone segment only, whereas a terminal 
transverse reduction defect is complete absence of 
the terminal part of one limb (upper or lower). It is generally 
accepted that the latter type of defect can be congenital 
or acquired in utero. If congenital, it is the result of a 
vascular insult during organogenesis; in the very rare 
acquired forms, it is the result of amputation due to an 
amniotic band. Assessment of the reduction defects of 
the limbs is quite straightforward, since the differential 
diagnosis is limited to a small number of conditions. It 
should be noted that non-syndromic isolated defects of 
the limbs can involve all limbs at all levels. However, 
there are some types of defects that carry a higher syndromic 
risk. These include aplasia radii and focal femoral 
hypoplasia. 
Aplasia radii. Aplasia/severe hypoplasia of the radius is 
commonly associated with ectrodactyly (absence of the 
thumb, which represents the terminal part of the radial 
ray). Ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward: the rhizomelic 
part of the upper limb is unremarkable, while 
the mesomelic component is highly abnormal: the radius 
Figure 9.32 Aplasia radii (29 
weeks of gestation). This is almost 
always associated with ectrodactyly 
(absence of the thumb), 
due to the severe hypoplasia/ 
aplasia of the radial ray. This also 
causes severe ulnar deviation of 
the hand. (a) 2D ultrasound. (b) 
3D maximum-mode demonstration 
with low threshold, demonstrating 
both the bony defect and 
the soft tissues. (c) 3D maximummode 
demonstration with high 
threshold, to highlight the bony 
defect. (d) Specimen after delivery 
(stillborn). 
a b c d 

can be completely absent or severely hypoplastic. The 
ulna can be normal or moderately hypoplastic. If radial 
aplasia is suspected, the hand should be carefully evaluated, 
since in virtually all cases the thumb is absent 
(Figure 9.32). The various disorders possibly associated 
with radial aplasia are listed in Table 9.11. 
Femoral hypoplasia–unusual-facies (femoral–facial) 
syndrome (FHUFS). Severe unilateral or bilateral focal 
hypoplasia of the femur(s), possibly associated with 
facial clefting and/or micrognathia, identifies FHUFS. 
Suspicion of this very rare syndrome should be raised 
whenever a focal defect of the femur is seen on ultrasound, 
especially if the pregnant woman has insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus. In fact, a relationship 
between maternal dysmetabolism and FHUFS has been 
described in the literature. FHUFS is described in detail 
in Chapter 10. 
Terminal transverse reduction defects. It has been hypothesized 
that the cause of these not infrequent defects might 
be an interruption of the blood supply to the developing 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 297 
Table 9.11 Differential diagnosis of syndromes characterized by aplasia radii 
Index sign . Aplasia radii ± ectrodactyly 
Additional signs . Congenital heart disease + multiple anomalies + . Trisomy 18 
micrognathia 
Additional signs . Abnormal thumb + congenital heart disease (30%) . TARa syndrome 
Additional signs . Syndactyly + congenital heart disease . Holt–Oram syndrome 
Additional signs . Phocomelia + cleft lip/palate + congenital . Roberts syndrome 
heart disease 
Additional signs . Micrognathia + external ear anomalies . Nager syndrome 
Additional signs . Vertebral + renal anomalies + tracheo-esophageal . VA(C)TER(L) 
fistula associationb 
a Thrombocytopenia with absent radius. 
b Vertebral anomalies, anal anomalies, cardiac defects, tracheo-esophageal fistula, renal anomalies, and limb anomalies. 
Figure 9.33 Limb reduction defects. (a) Terminal 
transverse reduction defect (acheiria): all digits and 
part of the metacarpus are completely absent. (b) 
Severe hypoplasia of the lower half of the calf and the 
foot (arrow). (c) Confirmation at autopsy: compare 
with the size of the normal contralateral limb and foot. 
b
a c 

limb bud during organogensis. However, if the defect 
involves more than one limb, then it has a syndromic context. 
We will briefly review this anomaly here because of 
its high functional significance and because its missed 
diagnosis at midtrimester screening ultrasound represents 
one of the most frequent sources of medicolegal litigation. 
The defect can involve the hand/foot only (Figure 9.33), or 
a variable part of the mesomelic segment (Figure 9.34). In 
general, if the hand is partially absent, some hypoplastic 
digits are present on the terminal part of the wrist or 
metacarpus. An important part of the prognostic evaluation 
concerns the presence of the opposing digit, represented 
by the thumb; its absence significantly increases the 
functional invalidity of the hand. 
Anomalies of the feet 
Classic talipes. This is one of the minor anomalies most 
commonly encountered at birth. It comprises a spectrum 
of lesions characterized by contracture of variable severity 
of the ankle joint, possibly associated with tendon 
abnormalities: the two most common entities are talipes 
varus and talipes equinus. Talipes can occur as an isolated 
anomaly or can represent the effect of severe disorders 
of neurologic (spinal bifida), neuromuscular (FADS), 
or enviromental (rupture of membranes, uterine hypoplasia, 
or twinning) origin. It is bilateral in roughly half of 
the cases. On ultrasound, the diagnosis is made when, on 
the sagittal view of the lower leg and calf, the sole, which 
in normal conditions is on another axis, is displayed 
(Figure 9.35). It is important to underscore that talipes 
can also develop, as already mentioned, as a result of 
enviromental factors such as prolonged olygohydramnios 
from early rupture of membranes, uterine hypoplasia, 
and fetal crowding from multiple pregnancies. Therefore, 
in a significant percentage of cases, this anomaly may be 
298 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 9.35 Talipes (clubfoot). (a) 3D maximum-mode rendering 
of a clubfoot in a fetus affected with myotonic dystrophy (21 
weeks of gestation). Note the severe hypoplasia of the calf muscles. 
(b) 3D surface rendering of the same case. Note the thin aspect of 
the calf, also in comparison with (c) isolated clubfoot (talipes 
varus) at 30 weeks of gestation (note the normal development of 
the calf and foot muscles). 
Figure 9.34 Terminal transverse 
reduction defect of the 
upper limb (22 weeks of gestation). 
Sometimes, the absent 
part of the limb involves the 
hand and part of the forearm 
(arrowheads), as in this case. 
(a) 2D ultrasound. (b) 3D surface 
rendering of the soft tissues. 
(c) 3D maximum-mode demonstration 
of the bony defect. 
(d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
b 
b c
a d 
c 
a 

overlooked in utero and be diagnosed only at birth. 
Postnatal treatment depends on the cause of the deformation. 
With isolated talipes, the most favorable cases benefit 
from manipulation and casting first, followed by 
maintenance with strapping and splinting. If, at the end 
of casting (6 weeks), the defect is still not corrected, this 
is an indication for surgery. In general, 50% of all talipes 
will be corrected at the end of casting at 6 weeks (90% of 
the mild form, 50% of the moderate form, and 10% of 
the severe form). If the defect is not corrected by the end 
of the casting period, surgery is needed: this consists 
mainly of posteromedial subtalar release with Z-lengthening 
of the Achilles tendon, with a success rate of 
60–85%. In surgically corrected cases, the outcome is 
variable, and the condition may relapse in up to one-third 
of the cases. However, in cases not associated with other 
major disorders, the outcome is generally good. 
Rockerbottom foot (congenital vertical talus). This is 
characterized by the following anomalies of the foot and 
ankle joint: calcaneus in equinus and valgus; hypoplasia 
and plantarflexion of the talus; abduction of the forefoot; 
and all dorsal tendons being tethered medial to the 
midline of the ankle. (Figure 9.36). Ultrasound diagnosis 
is relatively simple, relying on recognition of the anomaly 
of the plantar aspect of the foot, which is convex 
on a sagittal view of the lower leg. It is important 
to underline that this anomaly is very often associated 
with chromosomal aberrations, mainly trisomies 18 and 
13. However, the importance of diagnosis of this anomaly 
is limited by the ubiquitous occurrence of other more 
evident and severe malformations in trisomies 18 and 
13: it is highly unlikely that such chromosomal aberrations 
are disclosed only following the detection of 
rockerbottom feet. 
SKELETAL DYSPLASIAS AND MUSCULAR ANOMALIES: A DIAGNOSTIC ALGORITHM 299 
Figure 9.36 Rockerbottom foot. This deformation is typical of trisomy 
18 and of other muscular and chromosomal anomalies. It is 
characterized by severe anomalies of the muscles and tendons of the 
lower leg and foot. On ultrasound, the most typical feature is the 
prominent calcaneus. 
1. Paladini D, Chita SD, Allan LD. Prenatal measurement of cardiothoracic 
ratio in the evaluation of heart disease. Arch Dis Child 
1990; 65: 20–3. 
2. Chitkara U, Rosenberg J, Chervenak FA, et al. Prenatal 
sonographic asessment of fetal thorax: normal values. Am J 
Obstet Gynecol 1987; 156: 1069–74. 
3. Krakow D, Williams J 3rd, Poehl M, Rimoin DL, Platt LD. Use 
of three-dimensional ultrasound imaging in the diagnosis of prenatal-
onset skeletal dysplasias. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 
21: 467–72. 
4. Ruano R, Molho M, Roume J, Ville Y. Prenatal diagnosis of 
fetal skeletal dysplasias by combining two-dimensional and 
three-dimensional ultrasound and intrauterine three-dimensional 
helical computer tomography. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 
24: 134–40. 
5. Faro C, Benoit B, Wegrzyn P, Chaoui R, Nicolaides KH. Threedimensional 
sonographic description of the fetal frontal bones 
and metopic suture. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
618–21. 
6. Chaoui R, Levaillant M, Benoit B, et al. Three-dimensional sonographic 
description of abnormal metopic suture in second- and 
third-trimester fetuses. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2005; 26: 
761–4. 
7. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyn P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
8. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
with variable onset in three consecutive pregnancies. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2001; 17: 163–5. 
9. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of 
fetal size: 2. Head measurements. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1994; 
101: 35–43. 
10. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of 
fetal size: 3. Abdominal measurements. Br J Obstet Gynecol 
1994; 101: 125–31. 
11. Chitty LS, Altman DG, Henderson A, Campbell S. Charts of fetal 
size: 4. Femur length. Br J Obstet Gynecol 1994; 101: 132–5. 
12. Hadlock FP, Deter RL, Harris RB, Park SK. Fetal femur length 
as a predictor of menstrual age: sonographically measured. AJR 
Am J Roentgenol 1982; 138: 875–8. 
13. Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the 
Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and long 
bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 
14. Forin V, Arabi A, Guigonis V, et al. Benefits of pamidronate in 
children with osteogenesis imperfecta: an open prospective 
study. Joint Bone Spine 2005; 72: 313–18. 
15. Millington-Ward S, McMahon HP, Farrar GJ. Emerging therapeutic 
approaches for osteogenesis imperfecta. Trends Mol Med 
2005; 11: 299–305. 
16. EUROCAT (European Surveilance of Congenital Anomalies) 
Guide 3: For the Description and Classification of Congenital 
Limb Defects, 2nd edn, 2004, www.eurocat.ulster.ac.uk. 
REFERENCES 

In this chapter, a limited number of chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromic conditions will be described. 
There are two criteria used to define what disorders 
should appear in this section of the book: the first is that 
all syndromes described here should be reliably diagnosable 
by ultrasound, on the basis of a cluster of major and 
minor sonographic signs; the second is the availability of 
both sonographic and postmortem pictures needed to 
comprehensively describe the syndrome. This chapter 
does not claim to compete with more comprehensive 
textbooks and manuals of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis, 
fetal dysmorphology, or genetics, to which the reader 
may wish to refer for extensive treatment. The real aim 
of this chapter is to provide the reader with support in 
his or her daily practice by reviewing, with ample use of 
images, the most common chromosomal anomalies and 
some of the rare non-chromosomal syndromes that may 
be diagnosable by every professional involved in the field 
of prenatal ultrasound diagnosis of congenital anomalies 
with a little dedication and understanding. 
Chapter 10 
Chromosomal and 
non-chromosomal syndromes 
DEFINITION 
Definition. Down syndrome is named after John 
Langdon Down, the first scientist to describe the pattern 
of congenital anomalies characterizing individuals with 
trisomy 21. The overall incidence in an unselected 
population at 20 weeks is about 1/500. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Down syndrome is due to trisomy 
of chromosome 21; this is a free trisomy in 95% of 
the cases, while the remaining 5% are represented by 
robertsonian translocation and mosaicisms of variable 
degree. It is well established that the occurrence of the trisomy 
has a positive correlation with advancing maternal 
age, especially after 35 years of age. Molecular biologic 
assays have demonstrated that in 95% of cases, the 
trisomy is the result of a non-disjunction during maternal 
meiosis (meiosis I in 75–80% of cases). In the remaining 
5% of cases due to a paternal error, this occurs most 
frequently during meiosis II. 
Genetics. The genetic defect, namely the extra copy of 
chromosome 21, was discovered at the end of the 1950s. 
The first amniocentesis leading to a diagnosis of trisomy 
21 in a fetus was reported in 1968. Since then, the diagnosis 
of trisomy 21 has been made on chorionic villi, 
amniocytes, and peripheral lymphocytes through the 
G-banding technique. 
TRISOMY 21 – DOWN SYNDROME 
Incidence. Very high: 1/500 at 20 weeks of gestation. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 21 (95%); trisomy from robertsonian translocations or mosaicisms (5%). 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: gastrointestinal atresias; atrioventricular septal defect; ventricular septal 
defect; exomphalos. Minor anomalies: enlarged nuchal translucency/nuchal edema/fold; nasal bone hypoplasia; 
pyelectasis. 
Outcome. Mental retardation of variable degree. Overall survival reaches 20 years and depends on the associated 
anomalies. 
Recurrence risk. 1% empiric risk, as for all autosomal trisomies. 25% in case of parental robertsonian 
translocations. 
301 

Ultrasound diagnosis. From postnatal and prenatal data, 
it is evident that 50% of individuals with Down syndrome 
do not show any major/minor anomaly possibly 
detectable in utero. The remaining 50% show one or 
more than one of the major anomalies described below, 
involving mainly the cardiovascular (50%) and gastrointestinal 
(30%) systems. As a consequence, should any of 
the following anomalies be detected on ultrasound, 
karyotyping is mandatory: 
• Esophageal atresia is suspected on the axial view of 
the upper abdomen, where the gastric bubble cannot 
be visualized (Figure 10.1a). Polyhydramnios develops 
in the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester. 
• Duodenal atresia is suspected on the axial view of the 
upper abdomen, where the classic double-bubble sign 
is found. However, as already pointed out, this sign is 
fully appreciated after 23–24 weeks of gestation 
(Figure 10.1b). Also in this case, polyhydramnios 
develops in the late 2nd or early 3rd trimester. 
• Exomphalos, especially if of small dimensions and 
without the liver, may be associated with trisomy 21. 
The diagnosis is made on the axial or sagittal view of 
the fetal abdomen. At the level of the cord insertion, 
the exomphalos appears as a round, solid mass that 
deforms the anterior abdominal wall (Figure 10.1c); it 
may contain the right hepatic lobe and/or some ileal 
loops. The cord insertion is typically on the mass. 
• Atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD) is classically 
detected on the 4-chamber view of the fetal heart. A 
common atrioventricular valve is found, and the central 
crux of the heart is missing (Figure 10.1d). Note that 
only AVSD with balanced ventricles is associated 
with trisomy 21 (see Chapter 5). 
302 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.1 Down syndrome: major signs. Axial view of the upper abdomen. (a) Esophageal atresia: the stomach (ST?) cannot be seen. 
(b) Duodenal atresia: the typical double bubble (arrowhead) is evident. (c) Omphalocele: the mass departing from the anterior abdominal 
wall (Onf) can be seen. The arrows indicate the abdominal defect. (d) Complete, balanced AVSD: a common atrium (CA) and a single 
atrioventricular valve are seen (LV, left ventricle). (e) Inlet VSD: small defect of the septum below the atrioventricular plane (arrow). 
a
b
c 
d 
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 303 
• Ventricular septal defect is detected on the 4-chamber 
view of the fetal heart or on the left outflow tract 
view, according to the site of the defect. If it involves 
the inlet portion of the septum, the diagnosis is made 
in the former view, where the defect appears as a 
small interruption just below the atrioventricular 
plane (Figure 10.1e); if, on the contrary, the VSD 
involves the outlet portion of the septum, then this is 
best appreciated on the left outflow tract view as a 
discontinuity of the septo-aortic tract (see Chapter 5). 
In addition to the described major malformations there are 
a number of ‘minor’ signs, or soft markers which are associated 
with Down Syndrome. This term refers to the fact 
that these signs do not represent actual malformations, but 
only particular findings evident on ultrasound. The detection 
of any of these soft markers increases the risk of trisomy 
21. In this regard, it should be underlined that we do 
not believe that the description of all the signs that have 
been considered as soft markers for Down syndrome in the 
literature (a partial list of which is given in Table 10.1) may 
be of relevance here. In line with the practical approach of 
this book – from ultrasound sign to diagnosis – we have 
arbitrarily decided to include here only descriptions of the 
few such markers that greatly increase this risk and the significance 
of which is indisputable. 
• Nasal bone hypoplasia (2nd trimester) (Figure 
10.2a,b). This marker should be assessed on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile, where the reduced 
longitudinal diameter of the nasal bone can be easily 
appreciated and checked on nomograms for the normal 
population (Figure 10.2a). As a comparison, a 
normal fetus of the same gestational age as that of 
Figure 10.2a is shown in Figure 10.2b. This is the most 
recently described soft marker for the 2nd trimester,1 
which seems to have a detection rate comparable to 
that of the nuchal fold (described below). Two issues 
should be considered when measuring the nasal bone 
in the 2nd trimester: (i) the insonation angle between 
the transducer and the nasal bone must be as close as 
possible to 90°, otherwise the nasal bone plate may 
not show up properly (the images of Figure 10.2a and 
b have been rotated to better show the profile, but the 
original scanning plane was as mentioned), (ii) as with 
other proposed soft markers, the incidence of apparent 
nasal bone hypoplasia is much higher in Asian populations, 
which limits to some extent the usefulness of this 
marker in those populations. 
• Nuchal abnormalities (Figure 10.2c,d). We include 
in this paragraph both the early (12–14 weeks) 
anomalies, such as nuchal translucency (Figure 
10.2c), and those visible at a later stage, which 
include the nuchal fold (Figure 10.2d) and nuchal 
edema. As far as the nuchal fold is concerned, this 
was described for the first time in 1985;2 it is found 
in about 40% of fetuses with trisomy 21 at 19–22 
weeks of gestation. It should be measured on the 
modified axial view of the posterior fossa used for 
the assessment of cerebellar anatomy, positioning 
the calipers on the external echogenic rim of the skin 
and on the outer aspect of the occipital bone. The 
nuchal fold is normal if less than 6 mm.3 It should be 
underlined that an increased risk of Down syndrome 
remains if the nuchal fold partially regresses during 
the 3rd trimester. 
Differential diagnosis. This involves the other conditions 
in which one of the above-mentioned soft markers may 
be present, since the other autosomal trisomies are characterized 
by multiple congenital anomalies rather than 
soft markers only. 
• Cystic fibrosis: look for . hyperechogenic ileus + 
possible meconium peritonitis/ileal atresia. 
• Fetal toxoplasmosis: look for . hyperechogenic ileus + 
hydrocephalus/cerebral calcifications + maternal positive 
serology. 
• Achondroplasia: look for . short femur/humerus + 
moderate macrocrania + low nasal bridge. 
• Early fetal growth restriction (FGR): look for . short 
femur/humerus (hyperechogenic ileus) + abnormal 
growth + Doppler velocimetry abnormalities (umbilical 
artery and ductus venosus). 
• Familial short stature: look for . short femur/ 
humerus + parental short stature. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The risk of mental 
retardation is around 50%: in 45% of these cases, the IQ 
Table 10.1 Soft markers associated with Down 
syndrome (2nd trimester: 18–22 weeks of gestation) 
Biometric 
Short femur/humerus 
Observed/expected femur length ratio 
Observed/expected humerus length ratio 
Pyelectasis 
Wide iliac bone wings 
Borderline ventriculomegaly 
Morphologic 
Nuchal edema/folda 
Nasal bone hypoplasiaa 
Intracardiac foci 
Hypoplasia 2nd phalanx V digit 
Hyperechogenic ileus 
Sandal gap 
Macroglossia 
Small ears 
a These are the most sensitive (see text). 

is < 70, while only in 5% of the cases does the IQ 
remains within the normal range. Among long-term 
sequelae, Down syndrome individuals may experience 
high-airway obstruction, which in some circumstances 
may be so severe as to require tracheotomy. In addition, 
if brachysyndactyly is severe, this may limit the functionality 
of the hands. Cosmetic surgery has been used in 
some cases to remove the facial features typical of Down 
syndrome if these are particularly pronounced. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 
1%. However, if the syndrome is due to a parental balanced 
translocation, then the recurrence risk reaches 
25%, since it becomes an autosomal recessive condition. 
304 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
TRISOMY 18 – EDWARDS SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/6000 at birth. M/F ratio 0.65. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 18 (> 99%); rarely mosaicisms/structural anomalies involving 
chromosome 18. 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: congenital heart disease; CNS anomalies; micrognathia; urinary tract 
malformations; radial ray anomalies; cystic hygroma; esophageal atresia; early symmetric FGR. Minor anomalies: 
enlarged nuchal translucency/choroid plexus cysts, etc. 
Outcome. High intrauterine mortality. 5% survival at birth (30% of those diagnosed in utero survive until birth). 
Severe psychomotor delay and mental retardation. Mean postnatal survival is 1 week (90% mortality rate within 6 
months). 
Recurrence risk. 1% empiric risk, as for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.2 Down syndrome: minor signs (soft markers). (a) Nasal bone hypoplasia in the 2nd trimester (arrow). Compare with (b) 
normal-sized nasal bones in a normal fetus of the same gestational age (arrowhead). (c) Enlarged nuchal translucency (4 mm in this case). 
(d) Nuchal fold > 6 mm (7 mm in this case), to be measured on the transcerebellar plane. 
a
c 
b
d 

Definition. Edwards syndrome was first recognized and 
related to an extra copy of the chromosome 18 in 1960. 
More than 100 different malformations have been 
described in association with this trisomy. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Edwards syndrome is due to 
an extra copy of chromosome 18. In addition, rare cases 
of mosaicisms (with a normal second cellular line) showing 
extreme phenotypic variability in relation to the percentage 
of the trisomic line have been reported. As with 
Down syndrome, direct correlation with advancing 
maternal age has been shown for this autosomal trisomy. 
Genetics. The genetic defect in Edwards syndrome, the 
extra copy of chromosome 18, is now easily recognizable 
on chorionic villi, amniocytes, and peripheral leukocytes. 
Molecular biologic assays have demonstrated that 
in 90% of cases, the trisomy is the result of a nondisjunction 
during the maternal meiosis II. In the remaining 
10% of cases, due to a paternal error, this occurs 
always after fertilization. 
Ultrasound diagnosis.There is a wide spectrum of major 
anomalies that have been described in fetuses/neonates 
with trisomy 18.4 The following are the major anomalies 
most commonly encountered in fetuses with Edwards 
syndrome: 
• CNS anomalies: neural tube defects (NTDs), agenesis 
of the corpus callosum, and posterior fossa anomalies 
(Figure 10.3a). 
• Micrognathia of variable severity is associated in 
50–70% of cases. 
• Congenital heart disease: septation, conotruncal malformations 
(Figure 10.3b), and polyvalvular disease. 
• Abdominal wall anomalies: exomphalos (Figure 10.3c). 
• Urinary tract anomalies: cystic renal dysplasia (Figure 
10.3d) and horseshow kidney. 
• Cystic hygroma. 
• Skeletal anomalies: micrognathia, clenched hands with 
overlapping fingers, aplasia radii (Chapter 9: Figure 
9.32), and rockerbottom feet (Chapter 9: Figure 9.36). 
• Fetal growth restriction (FGR). 
Some of these anomalies, such as NTDs and cystic 
hygroma, are usually detected early in gestation, while 
congenital heart disease and cerebral anomalies 
(Dandy– Walker variant and agenesis of the corpus callosum) 
are more commonly recognized at the 
midtrimester scan. FGR is already evident in the 2nd 
trimester in over 50% of cases. Of the various soft 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 305 
Figure 10.3 Trisomy 18. (a) Agenesis of the corpus callosum. Note the radial pattern of the fibers and the absence of the pericallosal 
artery on power Doppler. (b) Congenital heart disease: malalignment ventricular septal defect with overriding aorta. Ao, aorta; LV, left 
ventricle; RV, right ventricle. (c) Bowel-containing omphalocele (arrowheads). Note that the risk of chromosomal anomalies is maximum 
for small lesions without the liver in the sac. (d) Hyperechoic kidney, with or without dysplasia. 
a b 
c d 

markers described in association with trisomy 18, we 
think it worthwhile listing only the following: 
• Nuchal abnomalities: enlarged nuchal translucency 
(Figure 10.2c). 
• Strawberry-shaped skull (Figure 10.4). 
• Choroid plexus cysts (Figure 10.4). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes other chromosomal 
anomalies characterized by multiple malformations and 
early FGR, as well as the group of neuroarthrogryposes: 
• Trisomy 13:5 look for . FGR + holoprosencephaly + 
microphthalmia + congenital heart disease + bilateral 
cleft lip/palate. 
• Triploidy:5 look for . FGR (very early) + posterior 
fossa anomalies + macrophthalmia + oligohydramnios. 
• Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS):5 look for 
.FGR + micrognathia + diffuse joint contractures. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Trisomy 18 is a 
lethal condition in most cases: of the relatively few liveborns, 
90% die within 6 months and less than 5% of 
cases reach 12 months of life. In the survivors, severe 
mental retardation is constantly associated. Significant 
hearing and sight impairment is frequent and growth is 
severely compromised. In addition to the major anomalies, 
another determinant of mortality and morbidity is 
the predisposition to infections. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 1% for 
all autosomal trisomies. 
306 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. 1/12 500 at birth. 
Etiology. Free trisomy of chromosome 13 (75%); trisomy from robertsonian translocations (25%). 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: congenital heart disease; CNS (holoprosencephaly, etc.) and craniofacial 
(microphthalmia, cleftings) anomalies; exomphalos; cystic renal dysplasia; postaxial polydactyly. Minor 
anomalies: enlarged nuchal translucency. 
Outcome. Extremely high intrauterine mortality rate, with 2.5% of prenatally diagnosed cases reaching term. 
Severe psychomotor delay. 3% survival rate at 6 months of life. 
Recurrence risk. This is empirically estimated at 1% for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.4 In trisomy 18, one of the additional signs, especially 
in the early 2nd trimester, is the so-called ‘strawberry-shaped 
skull’. This anomaly is due to a reduced occipitofrontal diameter 
and scalloped frontal bones (arrowheads). Note the concurrent 
presence of a soft marker typical of trisomy 18, namely a large 
choroid plexus cyst (arrow). 
TRISOMY 13 – PATAU SYNDROME 
Definition. Patau syndrome was described and related 
to an extra copy of chromosome 13 for the first time in 
1960. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Patau syndrome is due to 
an extra copy of chromosome 13. In addition, rare 
cases of mosaicisms (with a normal second cellular 
line) showing extreme phenotypic variability in relation 
to the percentage of the trisomic line have been 
reported. In these cases, the recognition of a pigmentary 
cutaneous mosaicism may lead to disclosure of 
the two cellular populations. As with Down and 
Edward syndromes, a positive correlation with 
advancing maternal age has been described for 
trisomy 13. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by G-banding 
of chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, 
and peripheral leukocytes. A free trisomy is responsible 
for 75% of cases, while in the remaining 25%, 
a robertsonian translocation, the most common of 
which is rob(13q14q), is found. This is why, should 
a trisomy 13 be identified in a fetus, the genetic 
assessment should include karyotyping of both parents. 
Molecular biologic assays have demonstrated 
that in 90% of cases, the trisomy is the result of a 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 307 
non-disjunction during the maternal meiosis II 
(absence of chyasms). 
Ultrasound diagnosis. There is a wide spectrum of 
major anomalies that can be associated with trisomy 
13. The following are those most commonly encountered 
in the fetus: 
• CNS anomalies (45–55%): holoprosencephaly 
(Figure 10.5a), agenesis of the corpus callosum, and 
cerebellar malformations. 
• Craniofacial anomalies (80%): bilateral cleft 
lip/palate (Figure 10.5b), micro/anophthalmia, and 
micrognathia. 
• Congenital heart disease (40–50%): septation defects 
and absent pulmonary venous return (Figure 10.3b). 
• Urinary tract anomalies (30–35%): cystic renal dysplasia 
(Figure 10.3d). 
• Skeletal anomalies (20–30%): postaxial polydactyly 
(Figure 10.5c,d). 
• Abdominal wall anomalies (30%): exomphalos 
(Figure 10.3c). 
• FGR (45–55%). 
Trisomy 13 is associated with an enlarged nuchal 
translucency at 12–14 weeks of gestation. 
Differential diagnosis. This includes mainly the following 
two conditions: 
• Trisomy 18:5 look for . FGR + CNS anomalies (not 
holoprosencephaly) + congenital heart disease + 
micrognathia + skeletal anomalies (rockerbottom feet 
on clenched hands with overlapping fingers not hexadactyly). 
• Meckel–Gruber syndrome:5 look for . polycystic 
kidney + cephalocele + microcephaly + polydactyly. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Trisomy 13 is a 
lethal condition in most cases, and 95% of the survivors 
die within 6 months. Very rare cases without severe malformations 
have survived for several years. However, 
severe psycomotor delay is constantly associated; most 
survivors are also blind, due to the frequent anophthalmia, 
and do not thrive. Epilepsy can also be associated. 
Recurrence risk. This is emphirically estimated at 1% 
for all autosomal trisomies. 
Figure 10.5 Trisomy 13. (a) Alobar holoprosencephaly: coronal view of the fetal head demonstrating a single cerebral ventricle (SV) 
and absence of the midline. (b) Bilateral cleft lip and palate: midsagittal view demonstrating additional tissue on the philtrum (arrow) 
and the cleft palate – the interruption of the bony palate is evident below the power Doppler signal in the nasal cavity. 
(c) Surface-rendered image of postaxial polydactyly (arrowhead). (d) Confirmation at autopsy. (e) Confirmation at autopsy of the 
bilateral cleft lip/palate.
a b 
c d e 

308 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Incidence. Relatively rare: 1/2500–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. Monosomy of chromosome X (X0). 
Ultrasound signs. Hydrops; cystic hygroma; left heart defects (hypoplastic left heart, aortic coarctation); short 
femur; renal anomalies (horseshoe kidney). 
Outcome. Mental retardation of variable degree complicates 50% of cases. 
Recurrence risk. Not modified in comparison with the normal population. 
Definition. This syndromic condition is named after HH 
Turner, who first described its clinical features in 1938. 
The incidence at birth is 1/2500–5000.6 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Turner syndrome is due to 
complete or partial chromosome X monosomy in all 
or some of the body cells. The missing chromosome is 
usually the paternal one. No apparent relationship with 
advancing maternal age has been described. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is based on simple G-banding 
of chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, and 
peripheral leukocytes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Major anomalies (Figure 10.6) 
are present in about 50% of cases detected in utero:6 
• Non-immune hydrops fetalis (NIHF): showing early 
onset and involving all districts (Figure 10.6a). 
• Cystic hygroma: evident on the sagittal and axial 
views of the fetal head (Figure 10.6b). The hygroma is 
usually large and predominantly septate. It can persist 
or disappear during the 2nd trimester. In the latter 
instance, the classic pterygium coli is found at birth. 
• Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: recognizable on the 
4-chamber view of the fetal heart (Figure 10.6c). 
Figure 10.6 Turner syndrome. (a) Diffuse hydrops: 4-chamber view showing bilateral hydrothorax (LL, left lung; RL, right lung) and severe 
subcutaneous edema (arrowheads) of the thorax. (b) Septate cystic hygroma (arrows). (c) Hypoplastic left heart syndrome: 4-chamber view 
showing severe hypoplasia of the left ventricle (arrowhead) and mitral atresia. RV, right ventricle. (d) Aortic coarctation: 3-vessel view showing 
severe hypoplasia of the aortic arch, which also shows reverse flow on color Doppler. Ao, aortic arch; D, arterial duct; Pa, pulmonary artery. 
a b 
c d 
MONOSOMY X – TURNER SYNDROME 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 309 
Incidence. Relatively rare: 1/2500–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. An extra set of chromosomes is present (69). 
Ultrasound signs. Early-onset and very severe asymmetric FGR; hypotonia; CNS anomalies; congenital heart 
disease; syndactyly; vacuolar placenta (molar changes). 
Outcome. Intrauterine demise in most cases. 
Recurrence risk. Not modified in comparison with the normal population. 
Definition. Triploidy is due to an extra set of chromosomes 
of maternal or paternal origin. The incidence at 
birth is 1/2500–5000, and there is no relationship with 
advancing maternal age. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. Of all triploidies, about twothirds 
are 69,XXY and one-third XXX (Table 10.2), 
whereas in very few cases the complement is 69,XYY. 
The overwhelming majority of triploidies undergo early 
spontaneous miscarriage. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis is feasible by G-banding of 
chromosomes from chorionic villi, amniocytes, and 
peripheral leukocytes. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Major anomalies are present in 
most cases of triploidy, but the malformative cluster 
differs according to the origin of the extra set of chromosomes: 
these differences are shown in Table 10.2. In 
addition, the recognition of these anomalies is often 
made more difficult by the frequent association of 
oligohydramnios. The most common anomalies 
detectable in triploidy are as follows: 
• FGR: very early onset and severe. Characteristically 
asymmetric and associated with conspicuous 
generalized hypotonia and oligoamnios (Figure 
10.7a). 
• CNS anomalies: agenesis of the corpus callosum, 
hydrocephaly, Dandy–Walker variant (Figure 10.7b), 
and holoprosencephaly. 
• Syndactyly (Figure 10.7c). 
• Craniofacial anomalies: Micrognathia, microphthalmia, 
and macrophthalmia (Figure 10.7d). 
• Congenital heart disease: VSD. 
• Renal anomalies: cystic renal dysplasia (Figure 10.7f). 
Differential diagnosis. This is virtually non-existent, 
owing to the early onset and the peculiar cluster of 
anomalies. In rare cases, triploidy should be differentiated 
from other chromosomal anomalies featuring 
multiorgan involvement, such as trisomies 13 
and 18. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The overwhelming 
majority of cases die by the 2nd trimester of pregnancy, 
and the rare cases reaching term survive for only 
a few hours after birth. 
Recurrence risk. This is not modified in comparison with 
the normal population. 
TRIPLOIDY 
• Aortic coarctation: directly recognizable on the upper 
mediastinal 3-vessel view (Figure 10.6d). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support the 
ultrasound suspect of Turner syndrome, are as follows: 
• Renal anomalies: frequently represented by a horseshoe 
kidney, which in some series is associated in 
40–50% of cases. 
• A short femur. 
Differential diagnosis. An early cystic hygroma, 
detected at the end of the 1st trimester, can also be due 
to trisomy 21 or be of non-chromosomal origin. For 
small, septate hygromas, the possibility of Noonan syndrome, 
which cannot be diagnosed in utero, should 
also be considered. Since in those cases in which the 
hygroma undergoes intrauterine regression, a pterygium 
is likely to remain, among the conditions to be 
differentiated from Turner syndrome is also the multiple 
pterygium syndrome. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Most fetuses with 
Turner syndrome die in utero, often in the 1st, or early 
2nd trimester. An additional group die later due to generalized 
hydrops. Hence, only a minority of Turner syndrome 
fetuses reach term of gestation. After birth, these 
females show short stature, pterygia, borderline mental 
retardation, and, later, amenorrhea from non-functioning 
streak gonads (primary hypogonadism). Survival is 
generally good, except for cases affected by hypoplastic 
left heart syndrome, which represents a life-threatening 
condition. Hearing problems are also present in a significant 
percentage of these women. 
Recurrence risk. This is not modified in comparison with 
the normal population. 

310 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
MICRODELETION 22q11.2 – DIGEORGE SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/4000–1/10 000 at birth (5–7% of neonates with congenital heart disease). 
Etiology. Microdeletion of variable extent in the locus 22q11. The deletion is recognizable in 15–20% of cases only 
on classic G-banded chromosomes; in most instances (80–85%), a FISH analysis is necessary. The phenotype can be 
due, much more rarely, to other defects such as monosomy 10p13 and deletion 18q21.33. 
Ultrasound signs. Major anomalies: conotruncal and aortic arch heart defects; thymus aplasia/hypoplasia; isolated 
cleft palate; bifid uvula. 
Outcome. Good survival. The most important determinants of survival are the type of heart defect and the 
association of T-cell immunodeficiency from thymus aplasia, associated in DiGeorge syndrome with parathyroid 
hypoplasia/aplasia (hypocalcemic tetany and seizures). 
Recurrence risk. 50% if one of the parents is affected (5–10% of all cases). Extremely low (<1%) in cases due to 
de novo deletions. 
Figure 10.7 Triploidy. (a) FGR (triploidy type II). Early, severe growth retardation with generalized muscular hypotonia: often, the 
fetal head and the abdomen are visible on the same plane. Note the disproportion between head and abdomen, demonstrating the 
asymmetric type of FGR, and the ubiquitous oligohydramnios. (b) Dandy–Walker variant (arrow), severe oligohydramnios, and molar 
placenta (triploidy type I). (c) Syndactyly: the single digits cannot be individually identified (compare with (h)). (d) Macrophthalmus: a 
large orbit, the outline of which is outside the facial profile (proophthalmus), is visible (compare with (g)). (e) Ovarian hyperstimulation 
due to high titers of ß human chorionic gonadotropin (triploidy type I). (f) Cystic renal dysplasia, with parenchymal hyperechogenicity. 
The macerated specimen, after termination of pregnancy, demonstrates the macrophthalmos (g) and the syndactyly (h). 
Table 10.2 Triploidy: breakdown by phenotype and origin of the extra set of chromosomes 
Type Provenence FGR Placenta Maternal hCG 
I Paternal Symmetric Molar changes High 
II Maternal Asymmetric Small Unchanged 
FGR, fetal growth restriction; hCG, human chorionic gonadotropin. 
a d 
b e 
c f 
g 
h 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 311 
Definition. The phenotype of the DiGeorge syndrome 
(OMIM 188400) was first described in 1965 
by Angelo DiGeorge. In the 1990s, it was found that 
more than 90% of individuals diagnosed with the 
DiGeorge syndrome have a deletion/microdeletion 
of the long arm of chromosome 22 (locus 22q11.2). 
The same genetic defect has been successively 
demonstrated also in other conditions featuring 
craniofacial and cardiac defects, such as velocardiofacial 
syndrome and the conotruncal anomaly face. 
This is why nowadays all of these phenotypes are 
considered as various expressions of the same 
genetic anomaly, namely 22q11 microdeletion. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The various phenotypes 
are due to microdeletions in the 22q11.2 locus. In 
over 80% of cases, a 3 Mb region between two 
repeated sequences (low copy repeats, LCRs) on 
chromosome 22 is deleted. The frequency of the 
defect is due to the fact that, because of the high 
homology, unequal crossing-over links occur during 
meiosis. The recent discovery of a rare microduplication 
22q11.2 syndrome seems to confirm this pathogenetic 
mechanism. As already mentioned, the term 
‘microdeletion 22q11.2 syndrome’ encompasses different 
clinical entities, including DiGeorge 
syndrome, the Sphrintzen (velocardio-facial) syndrome, 
and the Takao (conotruncal anomaly face) 
syndrome. In particular, the phenotypic expression 
of the 22q11.2 microdeletion is extremely variable; 
however, in most cases, cardiac conotruncal defects, 
thymus hypoplasia/aplasia, parathyroid hypoplasia/ 
aplasia, and anomalies of the palate are associated 
with minor craniofacial anomalies. All of these malformations 
involve anatomic structures developing 
from the third and the fourth pharyngeal arches. The 
underlying defect consists of an arrest in the development 
and migration of neural crest cells towards the 
pharyngeal arches.7 
Genetics. A deletion involving the locus q22.1 on 
chromosome 22 is present in over 90% of the cases. 
As already pointed out, this lesion is rarely so large 
as to show up on G-banded chromosomes; this happens 
in only 15–20% of cases. In most cases, to 
reveal the microdeletion, a fluorescence in-situ 
hybridization (FISH) analysis is needed. Several manufacturers 
have been producing kits for FISH diagnosis 
of the 22q11 microdeletion (Vysis, Oncor, etc.). 
These kits are based on DNA probes for the locus 
that is usually deleted in this condition, namely 
22q11.2. The commercial availability of these kits 
has allowed prenatal diagnosis of the 22q11 
microdeletion. As reported below, this test is now 
recommended in those fetuses in which a conotruncal 
anomaly at high risk of 22q11 microdeletion is 
found.8,9 In a very limited number of cases, the 22q11 
microdeletion syndrome may be due to other chromosomal 
defects, such as a 10p13 monosomy or an 
18q21.33 deletion. In these cases, also, it has been 
speculated that genes involved in the neural cell 
migration process may be deleted. Finally, it it interesting 
to note that some teratogens (e.g., retinoic acid 
derivatives) and maternal insulin-dependent diabetes 
may induce a DiGeorge-like phenotype. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. A significant number of the 
anomalies characterizing the DiGeorge syndrome and, in 
general, 22q11 microdeletion, can be diagnosed by 
ultrasound: 
• Congenital heart disease of the conotruncal type 
(including interruption of the aortic arch type B): 
present in most cases of 22q11 microdeletion 
(Figure 10.8a,b), and detectable on outflow 
views.8,9 
• Thymus hypoplasia/aplasia (Figure 10.8c; see also 
Chapter 6, Figure 6.26): always present in DiGeorge 
syndrome, and detectable on the axial 3-vessel view 
of the upper mediastinum.10 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of 22q11 microdeletion syndrome, 
are as follows: 
• Renal anomalies: often represented by uni/bilateral 
hydronephrosis. 
• Polyhydramnios. 
• FGR. 
Note that cleft palate, which usually involves the soft 
posterior palate, and minor facial dysmorphisms are not 
detectable in utero. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. The survival of 
individuals diagnosed with the 22q11 microdeletion 
depends on the phenotypic expression of the syndrome, 
on the severity of the associated conotruncal 
defect, and on the presence or absence of T-cell 
immunodeficiency due to thymus aplasia. Hence, if the 
phenotype is that of the classic DiGeorge syndrome, 
which also features primary hypoparathoyroidism, the 
prognosis is guarded. As far as the quality of life and 
the long-term prognosis are concerned, the first issue 
to be considered is the fact that mental retardation of 
variable severity affects roughly 30% of cases and that 
its occurrence cannot be predicted in the fetus. This 

312 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
APERT SYNDROME 
Incidence. Very rare: 1/70 000 at birth. 
Etiology. Mutation of the FGFR2 gene (98% of cases). 
Ultrasound signs. Turricephaly (due to synostoses) + brachy-syndactyly; frontal bossing; hypertelorism; congenital 
heart disease; vertebral and renal anomalies. 
Outcome. 50% risk of mental retardation. Motor disabilities due to the syndactyly, if particularly severe. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low. However, if one parent is affected, the transmission becomes autosomal 
dominant, with a 50% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Apert syndrome (OMIM 101200) is also 
defined as acrocephalosyndactyly, to underscore the two 
major features of the condition, namely the early closure 
of the coronal suture, which is responsible for the turricephaly, 
the hypertelorism and frontal bossing, and the 
brachysyndactyly of variable severity. In addition, other 
major anomalies, such as congenital heart disease, fusion 
of the cervical vertebrae, and renal anomalies, are often 
associated. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. One of two missense 
mutations of the gene coding for the fibroblast 
growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) is present in 98% 
of cases of Apert syndrome. It has been demonstrated 
that the pathogenetic mechanism involves an increase 
in the number of precursor cells entering the 
osteogenic pathway, induced by the FGFR2 mutations. 
This in turn leads ultimately to increased bone 
matrix formation and premature calvarial ossification 
in the fetus. 
Genetics. In families at risk, molecular diagnosis is feasible, 
through direct search for the above-mentioned mutations 
on DNA from chorionic villi. 
Figure 10.8 22q11 microdeletion. Cardiovascular anomalies commonly associated with this deletion include particular conotruncal 
anomalies and also thymus hypoplasia/aplasia. (a) Common arterial trunk, type I: left outflow tract view showing the main pulmonary 
artery (P) with the branches (arrows) departing from the common arterial trunk (T). (b) Right aortic arch: color Doppler image of the 
3-vessel view showing the aortic arch located on the right of the trachea (arrowhead). In the normal left-sided arch, this is located on the 
left of the trachea. Ao, aortic arch; Pa, ductal arch. (c) Thymus hypoplasia at 36 weeks of gestation in a fetus with tetralogy of Fallot: 
3-vessel view. Note the reduced volume of the thymus (T and arrows) in front of the great vessels. The arrowhead indicates the trachea; 
Pa, ductal arch; SVC, superior vena cava. 
a b c 
consists of borderline mental retardation (borderline 
IQ) in 50% of cases, mild mental retardation (IQ <70) 
in 45%, and moderate/severe learning disabilities in 
the remaining 5%.7 Hypocalcemic tetany and the 
consequent seizures may be avoided with careful 
supplementation. 

Ultrasound diagnosis. Most of the anomalies characterizing 
Apert syndrome may be diagnosed in the fetus. 
The major malformations, the recognition of which 
leads to the diagnosis in most instances, are as follows: 
• Facial anomalies (turricephaly, depressed nasal 
bridge¸ and mandibular prognatism): these can be 
detected on the midsagittal view of the facial profile 
(Figure 10.9; see also Chapter 3) and on the coronal 
view of the face. 
• Brachy-syndactyly of hands and feet: this is usually 
evident and may be severe (Figure 10.10a,b,d). 
• Craniosynostosis of the coronal suture: this can 
also be detected on two-dimensional (2D) imaging, 
by the indentation of the frontoparietal junction 
evident on the axial transthalamic view 
(Figure 10.10c). However, the use of 3D ultrasound 
with the transparent maximum mode makes 
diagnosis of the premature closure of the coronal 
suture straightforward.11 (Figure 10.9b; see also 
Chapter 3). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of Apert syndrome, are 
as follows: 
• Congenital heart disease (10% of cases) (Figure 
10.11a,b) – VSD in particular (Figure 10.11a). 
• Fusion of cervical vertebrae (C5–C6) (Figure 10.11c). 
• Renal anomalies (Figure 10.11d). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes all other clinical 
conditions characterized by cranial synostoses and due 
to the same missense mutations of the FBGR2 gene, such 
as Carpenter, Pfeiffer, and Crouzon syndromes (in some 
circumstances, it is impossible to reach a definite diagnosis 
by ultrasound): 
• Carpenter syndrome.5 look for . craniosynostosis + 
polysyndactyly + congenital heart disease (50%). 
• Pfeiffer syndrome (OMIM 101600):5 look for . 
craniosynostosis + hypertelorism + syndactyly. 
• Crouzon syndrome (OMIM 123500):5 look for . 
craniosynostosis + maxillary hypoplasia (nonsyndactyly). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Individuals 
with Apert syndrome face a 50% risk of mental 
retardation. Long-term sequelae also include respiratory 
problems due to obstruction of the high airways, 
which may be so severe as to require tracheotomy. 
Difficulties in the use of the hands may be associated 
if the syndactyly is severe. Cosmetic surgery is 
employed in cases characterized by major facial dysmorphisms. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases occur sporadically, being 
due to de novo mutations, and thus the recurrence 
rate is extremely low. However, if one parent is 
affected, the transmission shows an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, with a recurrence rate of 
50%. 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 313 
Figure 10.9 Apert syndrome: major signs. On the midsagittal view of the facial profile, the increased craniocaudal diameter of the skull 
(turricephaly), due to the closure of the coronal sutures, and the low nasal bridge are evident. (a) 2D imaging. (b) 3D maximum-mode 
image showing the sealed coronal suture (see Chapter 3 for suture abnormalities). (c) Three-dimensional surface-mode image showing the 
characteristic features of Apert syndrome: turricephaly, low nasal bridge, and tendency to macrophthalmia. (d) The specimen after termination 
of pregnancy. 
a b c d 

314 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.10 Apert syndrome: major signs. (a) 
3D maximum-mode image showing syndactyly 
of one hand. Note the abnormal metacarpal and 
phalangeal bones. This image is much more 
informative than the 2D one (b), in which only a 
few of the bones can be imaged, being in different 
planes (arrows). With the 3D technique, it is 
possible to display also thicker slices, and this 
leads to clearer evidence of the syndactyly. (c) 
The closure of the coronal suture can also be 
detected in some cases on the 2D axial transthalamic 
view: the indentation at the level of the 
coronal suture (arrowheads) and the absence of 
the normal sonolucent gap between the frontal 
and the parietal bones is seen. (d) Syndactyly of 
one foot on 2D ultrasound (arrows). 
Figure 10.11 Apert syndrome: additional 
signs. (a) Congenital heart disease: malalignment 
VSD wth an overiding aorta (Ao). RV, right ventricle. 
(b) Abnormal venous return: the ductus 
venosus is absent and the umbilical vein (arrow) 
drains directly into the right atrium (RA) via a 
collector coursing on the anterior surface of the 
liver. (c) Fusion of the cervical vertebrae: on the 
midsagittal view of the spine, the spinous 
processes are abnormal and fused (arrows). (d) 
Renal anomalies: on the coronal view of the 
abdomen, a horseshoe kidney is found (arrows); 
mild pyelectasia was associated. Bl, bladder. 
a b 
c 
d 
a c 
b d 

Definition. Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome (BWS) 
(OMIM 130650) is the most common congenital disorder 
characterized by neonatal overgrowth and gigantism. 
Its most common features are macroglossia (98%), 
pre/postnatal gigantism (>90th centile) (87%), abdominal 
wall defects (exomphalos and diastasis recti: 
77%), external ear anomalies (75%), and visceromegaly 
(62%). In 7% of cases, embryonal tumors may arise 
(Wilms’ tumor, hepatoblastoma, and adrenal carcinoma). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. BWS is due to genetic anomalies 
in chromosome 11p15. Several genes with a role in 
growth control are located in this region; their imbalance 
determines the overgrowth and the gigantism characteristic 
of BWS. There are three mechanisms that may cause 
BWS in sporadic cases: (i) chromosomal anomalies involving 
the 11p15 region (duplications, unbalanced translocations, 
and inversions) (2% of cases); (ii) single-gene 
mutations (so-called BWS genes), for example mutations 
of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor gene CDKN1C, 
loss of imprinting and overexpression of gene encoding 
insulin-like growth factor type 2, IGF-2, and methylation 
and silencing of the H19 gene (5%); (iii) uniparental disomy 
11p15 (20%). In some cases (2–3%), mutations of 
the NSD1 gene, mapping to 5q35, have been found; it 
seems that this gene controls the imprinting of the region 
11p15. Familial cases (15%) are transmitted with an autosomal 
dominant pattern with incomplete penetrance. 
Genetic heterogeneity has also been found in these cases: 
40% of them are due to mutations of the CDKN1C gene. 
Genetics. Prenatal diagnosis of BWS is feasible only in 
those cases in which the molecular defect is known. In 
this regard, some genotypic–phenotypic correlations 
should be considered: 
• paternal 11p15 duplication and risk of mental 
retardation 
• CDKN1C gene mutations and occurrence of 
exomphalos 
• uniparental disomy/defects of BWS genes and absence 
of exomphalos 
No correlations have been found with the tendency to 
develop embryonal tumors, although Wilms’ tumor has 
only been found in patients with uniparental disomy 
and/or BWS gene defects. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most anomalies characterizing 
BWS can be detected in the fetus.12 Major malformations, 
the recognition of which leads to the diagnosis in 
most instances, are as follows: 
• Exomphalos (Figure 10.12a), usually without the liver; 
in the case of a normal karyotype, this is the main sign 
that may lead to a prenatal diagnosis of BWS. 
• Visceromegaly. 
• Macroglossia.12 
• Gigantism (better appreciated in the 3rd trimester). 
Additional malformations that, if present, may support 
the ultrasound suspicion of BWS are as follows: 
• Polyhydramnios (usually in the 3rd trimester). 
• Renal anomalies (polycystic kidneys: Figure 10.12b). 
Differential diagnosis. This should include primarily 
Perlman and Zellweger syndromes; Down syndrome 
should also be differentiated from BWS (a normal karyotype 
rules out this possibility): 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 315 
BECKWITH–WIEDEMANN SYNDROME 
Incidence. 1/14 000. 
Etiology. Structural anomalies of chromosome 11p15 (duplications, inversions). Uniparental disomy (20%). 
Mutations of genes CDKN1C, IGF2 (LOI). Mutations of the gene NSD1 at 5q35. 
Ultrasound signs. Exomphalos; macroglossia; gigantism; polycystic kidneys; genital anomalies. 
Outcome. 21% perinatal mortality rate (preterm delivery and hypoglycemia are common); overgrowth during 
infancy, tendency to develop embryonal neoplasia (7%). If neonatal asphyxia due to macroglossia is prevented, 
the intelligence is normal. 
Recurrence risk. The empiric risk, in cases with no family history, is 1–2%. In the 15% of familial cases, the 
transmission is autosomal dominant with incomplete penetrance (50%). 

316 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Perlman syndrome (OMIM 267000): look for . 
visceromegaly + gigantism + diaphragmatic hernia + 
micrognathia. 
• Zellweger syndrome (OMIM 214100): look for . 
visceromegaly + micrognathia + cataract + talipes + 
macrosomia. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Fetal overgrowth 
and the risk of hypoglycemia may induce preterm delivery 
and perinatal complications, responsible for the 21% 
neonatal mortality rate. Overgrowth is associated 
with accelerated bone maturation, but this overgrowth is 
no longer evident in adulthood. The advantage of a prenatal 
diagnosis of BWS lies in the prevention of premature 
birth, hypoglycemic complications, and cerebral 
asphyxia due to macroglossia. At the same time, it 
allows one to determine an appropriate follow-up 
protocol aiming at early discovery of possible embryonal 
tumors, which arise in 7% of cases.13 As already 
mentioned, intelligence is normal. 
Figure 10.12 Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. (a) Omphalocele: the arrowheads point to the abdominal defect; only bowel loops have 
herniated. (b) Cystic renal dysplasia: note the hyperechogenicity of the cortex. 
CAT-EYE SYNDROME (CES) 
Incidence. Rare. 
Etiology. Presence of a marker extra-chromosome: invdup(22). 
Ultrasound signs. CHD (60%) (mainly abnormal pulmonary return), urogenital (70%), gastrointestinal, facial 
(pre-auricular tags in >80%) anomalies. 
Outcome. 20% infant mortality rate. Mild to moderate developmental delay in 60% of cases; severe in 5–8%. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low in cases with no family history. If one parent is affected, the recurrence risk 
becomes 50%, but the reproductive function of the affected individuals is severely compromised. 
Definition. Cat-eye syndrome (CES: OMIM 115470) is a 
rare disorder with variable expression characterized by 
five types of anomalies: (i) pre-auricular tags; (ii) anorectal 
malformations; (iii) urogenital malformations; (iv) 
ocular colobomas; and (v) congenital heart disease. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. CES is due to the presence of 
a supernumerary bisatellited chromosome, resulting 
from an inversion/duplication of the regions 22q11.1 
and 22q11.21 (invdup(22)). According to the break 
point, two types of CES have been identified (CES I and 
II). No correlation has been found between the subtype 
of CES and the phenotypic expression. 
Genetics. The original genetic defect was identified 
for the first time in 1965 and thoroughly described 
in 1981. Prenatal diagnosis of CES is feasible on 
fetal cells harvested with chorionic villus sampling, 
amniocentesis, on cordocentesis. A FISH analysis with 
probes specific for chromosome 22 is needed for the 
final diagnosis. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Only few of the numerous malformations 
characterizing CES are recognizable at 
midtrimester ultrasound. The major malformations, the 
recognition of which leads to the diagnosis in most cases, 
are as follows:14 
• Congenital heart disease (Figure 10.13) – in particular 
abnormal pulmonary venous return. It should 
be underlined that the prospective diagnosis of 
this anomaly requires a highly experienced fetal 
a b 

cardiologist, an optimal acoustic window and a 
favorable fetal lie. 
• Anorectal atresia: this is not always diagnosable 
prenatally. 
• Pre-auricular tags (Figure 10.14): these can be more 
easily recognized on 3D ultrasound (see also Chapter 3). 
• Urogenital anomalies. 
Differential diagnosis. The association of pre-auricular 
tags and abnormal pulmonary venous return is typical of 
CES. However, in most cases, the diagnosis is made as 
an incidental finding during karyotyping performed for 
other indications. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. CES has an infant 
mortality rate of 20%, mainly due to cardiac failure and 
recurrent infections. Mental retardation occurs in 50% 
of cases and is severe in 5–8%. In cases with no family 
history, the recurrence risk is extremely low. However, if 
one parent is affected, the risk becomes 50%, although 
the reproductive function of the affected individuals is 
severely compromised. 
FEMORAL HYPOPLASIA/UNUSUAL FACIES SYNDROME (FHUFS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. The syndrome is often associated with maternal insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. 
Ultrasound signs. Focal femural hypoplasia, uni- or bilateral, possibly associated with fibular hypoplasia. 
Micrognathia, cleft lip/palate, and mandibular asymmetry. 
Outcome. Normal survival and intelligence. Motor disabilities due to the femoral hypoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Sporadic. 
CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 317 
Figure 10.13 Cat-eye syndrome: partial abnormal pulmonary venous return. (a) Normal size of the coronary sinus (arrows). 
(b) Abnormal drainage of one pulmonary vein (arrows) into the coronary sinus, which is consequently dilated (arrowheads). Modified 
from reference 14. 
Figure 10.14 Cat-eye syndrome: 3D rendering of the lateral 
aspect of the fetal face, showing two pre-auricular tags (arrow). 
a b 

318 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The definition of FHUFS (OMIM 134780) 
is based upon two major signs: focal femoral hypoplasia 
and the unusual face, characterized by a small nose, 
possible cleft lip/palate, and micrognathia. FHUFS was 
described for the first time in 1975. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
However, a significant association with maternal insulindependent 
diabetes mellitus has been reported. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is not possible, since 
the involved gene(s) are unknown. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The two main features, both of 
which can be recognized on ultrasound, are: 
• Micrognathia: this is detected on the midsagittal view 
of the fetal profile (Figure 10.15a,b). 
• Focal femural hypoplasia: This is of variable degree, 
uni- or bilateral; sometimes it is associated with fibular 
hypoplasia (Figure 10.15c–e). 
Additional findings include the following: 
• Cleft lip/palate: inconstantly associated. 
• Mandibular asymmetry: very difficult to detect. 
If the femoral hypoplasia is found in association with 
one of the other features reported above, the diagnosis of 
FHUFS is virtually certain. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is rather 
limited, because of the rarity of the focal femoral 
hypoplasia. If no craniofacial anomalies are detected in 
association, the occurrence of a focal ischemic event during 
embryogenesis may be considered. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival and 
intelligence are normal. The only major disability is 
physical and is due to the femoral hypoplasia, which 
impairs ambulation. 
Incidence. Variable, according to diagnostic criteria. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Diffuse joint contractures with extended and crossed legs, flexed and adducted arms, talipes, 
and clenched hands with overlapping fingers; lethal thoracic hypoplasia; micrognathia. 
Outcome. Lethal in the majority of cases. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. Sporadic cases have also 
been described. 
FETAL AKYNESIA DEFORMATION SEQUENCE (FADS) 
Figure 10.15 Femoral hypoplasia/unusual facies syndrome. (a) 
Severe micrognathia (arrow). (b) Confirmation, at autopsy, showing 
also the long philtrum and the thin upper lips, which are typical 
features of this syndrome. (c) Focal femoral hypoplasia: 
(arrows). (d) The contralateral femur, showing normal length. (e) 
Confirmation at autopsy: the white bars indicate the size and 
position of the femurs. 
a
c
d 
b
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 319 
Definition. The fetal akinesia deformation sequence 
(FADS: OMIM 208150) includes a large group of syndromic 
conditions characterized by fixed joint contractures. 
The list of anomalies included in this group featuring 
joint contractures varies among the different textbooks 
and web resources. In our opinion, the easiest way to deal 
with this entity(ies) is the following. There is a first group 
of disorders strictly related to the occurrence of diffuse and 
total neuromuscular block. These share a very high perinatal 
mortality rate, mainly due to the lethal pulmonary 
hypoplasia induced by the ubiquitous thoracic hypoplasia. 
This group comprises the classic FADS (including also 
arthrogryposis multiplex congenita and Pena–Shokeir 
syndrome), Neu–Laxova syndrome (OMIM 256520), 
multiple pterygium syndrome (OMIM 253290), and 
cerebro-oculofacioskeletal (COFS syndrome – OMIM 
214150). A second group of conditions is characterized by 
joint contractures of variable severity and different etiologies. 
This larger group includes congenital myotonic dystrophy 
(OMIM 214150), restrictive dermopathy, Alpers 
syndrome (OMIM 203700), and Gaucher storage disease 
(OMIM 231000). In the acronym ‘FADS’, the term 
‘sequence’ is appropriate since, according to numerous 
authors, this sequence of events represents the common 
final pathway of completely differerent pathogenetic 
mechanisms rather than a single neuromuscular disease. In 
this section, FADS itself will be described in detail, while in 
the following sections, most of the other prenatally recognizable 
disorders mentioned above will be illustrated. 
However, the description of conditions characterized by 
joint contractures that may not be diagnosed in the fetus 
will not be described here. The reader may wish to consult 
more comprehensive textbooks and/or websites on neonatal 
genetic diseases in order to find additional information 
regarding these conditions (Gaucher storage disease, 
restrictive dermopathy, etc.). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The basic defect of FADS and 
related conditions is the presence of severe and progressive 
contractures involving virtually all muscles. To 
explain this event, several hypotheses have been made, 
variously involving a central neuromuscular anomaly (1st 
motorneuron), a malfunction of neuromuscular transmission, 
and a peripheral muscular defect. There is only one 
finding that has been repeatedly found in families with 
multiple reproductive failures due to recurrence of FADS, 
namely high maternal titers of autoantibodies directed 
against the muscular acetylcholine receptor, which are 
usually detected in patients with acquired myasthenia 
gravis. However, in these cases, the mothers were asymptomatic 
and the antibodies were directed against different 
domains of the receptor compared with the autoantibodies 
usually associated with myasthenia gravis.15 
Genetics. Since the gene(s) responsible for the disease are 
still unknown, prenatal molecular diagnosis is not possible. 
Deformation sequence (Figure 10.16). Regardless of the 
time of onset and of the underlying cause, the ubiquitous 
contractures of all muscles result in a particular position 
of the limbs, due to the different opposing forces. As far 
as posture is concerned (see also Chapter 9), the lower 
limbs are in fixed extension and crossed, since the quadriceps 
(extensors) are more powerful than the femoral 
biceps (flexors). Talipes are often associated. On the contrary, 
the upper limbs show flexion deformities and 
appear adducted on the thorax, because of the prevalence 
of the flexors (biceps) over the extensors (triceps). The 
hands often show ulnar deviation, and clenched and 
overlapping fingers. The contractures of the diaphragm 
and the intercostal muscles lead to frequently lethal thoracic 
hypoplasia. Finally, the impairment of the swallowing 
reflex and the contracture of the masseter are 
responsible for micrognathia (and polyhydramnios). 
Sometimes, the contractures may involve the lower limbs 
only, and in these cases the knees appear flexed. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. All of the above mentioned signs 
are detectable in the fetus. In this regard, it should be 
noted that the onset of the contracture is variable, from 
12 to 30 weeks of gestation, also in consecutive pregnancies 
of the same couple.16 The major signs, the recognition 
of which may lead to the diagnosis, are as follows 
(Figures 10.16–10.19): 
• Complete absence of active fetal movements (akinesia): 
this is due to complete motor paralysis. If the 
ultrasound examination is performed midway through 
the development of the akynesia, it is possible to spot 
en bloc movements of the limbs, which show no joint 
articulation. 
• Limb contractures: involving the arms and legs 
(Figures 10.17b,c and 10.18a–d). 
• Micrognathia: this is due to the block of the temporomandibular 
joint (Figures 10.17a and 10.18e,f). 
• Abnormal positioning of hands and feet: ulnar deviation, 
clenched and overlapping fingers and talipes 
(Figures 10.17b,c and 10.18a-d). 
• Thoracic hypoplasia: this is due to the fixed contractures 
of the diaphragm and the intercostal muscles. 
• Severe polyhydramnios: this is due to the absence of 
swallowing. 
Additional, inconstant, signs include the following: 
• Microstomia: this is due to the masseter contracture 
(Figure 10.19). 
• Cystic hygroma: this may be associated with FADS in 
some cases (Figures 10.16c and 10.17d). 
• Non-visualization of the gastric bubble: this is due to 
the absence of swallowing. 
Differential diagnosis. The first entity to be ruled out is 
trisomy 18, because contractures of the legs are relatively 
often present in this aneuploidy. The recognition of 

320 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.17 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). In this case (the same as in Figure 10.16c), the following anomalies can be 
seen: (a) micrognathia, due to the paralysis of the masseter (blocked temporomandibular joint); (b) arthrogryposis of the upper limbs, 
which appear flexed and adducted; (c) arthrogryposis of the lower limbs, with talipes; (d) cystic hygroma (arrows), which is inconstantly 
associated with FADS.
a b 
c d 
Figure 10.16 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). The specimens shown here demonstrate how joint contractures may variously 
affect the limbs. (a) 21-week-old fetus: predominant involvement of the lower limbs, which appear flexed and crossed, with talipes. 
Clinodactyly of the hands and low-set ears are also present. (b) 19-week-old fetus: classic FADS, with the lower limbs extended and 
crossed, scissors-like, while the upper limbs appear adducted and flexed. Talipes and ulnar deviation of the clenched hands are also evident. 
Note the severe hypoplasia of all muscles, defined as congenital amyoplasia, which is the result of the prolonged akynesia (corresponding 
to ultrasound shown in Figure 10.18). (c) Neonate dead just after birth: diffuse contractures, ulnar deviation of the hands, microstomia 
(small mouth), and cystic hygroma (arroowheads) are seen (this is the same case as in Figure 10.17). 
a b c 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 321 
major anomalies possibly associated with trisomy 18 
and, above all, fetal karyotyping may help rule out trisomy 
18. In addition, a differential diagnosis with the 
other neuroarthrogryposes should be carried out, 
although this procedure does not have an important 
prognostic role, since all of these disorders are almost 
invariably lethal, with the exception of a few cases of 
late-onset FADS. The features to consider in the differential 
diagnosis of the various neuroarthrogryposes are as 
follows: 
• Multiple pterygium syndrome:5 look for . arthrogryposis 
+ pterygia + edema + cystic hygroma. 
• Neu–Laxova syndrome:5 look for . arthrogryposis + 
microcephaly + hypertelorism + cataract + micrognathia + 
CNS anomalies + syndactyly + subcutaneous edema. 
• COFS syndrome:5,17 look for .arthrogryposis + anophthalmia/
microphthalmia + cataract + micrognathia + CNS 
anomalies + scoliosis. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Most FADS cases 
reach term, although preterm delivery may occur because of 
the severe associated polyhydramnios. However, after 
birth, death ensues in a few minutes to some hours due to 
the lethal pulmonary hypoplasia. The extremely rare lateonset 
cases, in which the pulmonary hypoplasia is not so 
severe as to be lethal, may survive the neonatal period. 
However, the quality of life is often extremely poor because 
of the severe contractures requiring multiple orthopedic surgical 
procedures to release the hypoplastic tendons and 
long-term physiotherapy. Significant respiratory complications 
can also occur. In a small subset of these cases, the outcome 
may be fair, after surgery and physiotherapy. 
Figure 10.18 Fetal Akynesia Deformation 
Sequence (FADS). Two cases of FADS at 21 (a,b) 
and 19 weeks (c-f) of gestation. (a) arthogryposis of 
the lower extremities, with the legs fixed in extension 
and abnormal feet; (b) confirmation at 
autopsy; (c) in this case, the legs appear extended 
and crossed, scissor-like. Note also the dislocation 
of the knee (arrow); (d) confirmation at autopsy. e) 
severe, early onset micrognathia (arrowhead), due 
to the block of the temporomandibular joint, from 
paralysis of the masseter; (f) confirmation at 
autopsy. 
a
b 
c e 
d f 
Figure 10.19 Fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS). In 
some cases, the neuromuscular block of the masseter and of the 
orbicular muscles impairs the normal development of the mouth, 
eventually leading to a smaller than normal mouth (microstomia). 
(a) On the oblique view of the lips, the small size of the mouth is 
evident. Note the concurrent polyhydramnios, which is constantly 
associated and is due to lack of swallowing. (b) Confirmation at 
autopsy following birth. This is the same case as in Figure 10.16(c) 
and 10.17. 
a
b 

322 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Recurrence risk. FADS is mainly transmitted with an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which implies 
a 25% recurrence risk. Rarer X-linked and sporadic 
cases have also been described. 
Incidence. Extremely rare: 1/200 000 at birth. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Laryngeal atresia; cleft lip/palate; congenital heart disease; microphthalmia; bilateral renal 
agenesis; syndactyly. 
Outcome. Lethal. A few reports of survivors after EXIT procedure. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance, with 25% recurrence risk. Sporadic cases have also been 
described. 
Definition. Fraser syndrome (OMIM 219000), which 
shows an extremely variable phenotypic expression, is 
named after the author who first described the cluster of 
anomalies in 1962. The malformations that characterize 
Fraser syndrome are: laryngeal atresia, cleft lip/palate, 
congenital heart disease, microphthalmia, bilateral renal 
agenesis, and syndactyly. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. In a few families with Fraser 
syndrome, a missense mutation of the FRAS1 gene, 
at chromosome 4q21, has been described. This gene 
encodes a putative extracellular matrix (ECM) protein. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. In the fetus, the malformation 
that in most cases leads to the suspicion or diagnosis 
of Fraser syndrome is laryngeal/tracheal atresia, due to 
the frequent association of bilateral renal agenesis and 
consequently of severe oligohydramnios, which makes 
the assessment of fetal anatomy very difficult.18 Major 
anomalies, the recognition of which may lead to the 
diagnosis of Fraser syndrome, are as follows: 
• Laryngeal atresia: this can be diagnosed on the axial 
and coronal views of the fetal thorax (Figure 10.20; 
see also Chapter 6: Figures 6.5 and 6.21). Both lungs 
are severely enlarged and hyperechoic; the heart is 
squeezed into the center of the thorax. Inconstantly, 
a bronchogram (dilatation of the trachea and 
bronchi by the entrapped fluid) is seen. 
• Bilateral renal agenesis: this is responsible for the 
frequently associated severe oligohydramnios. 
• Congenital heart disease: this is constantly associated. 
• Microphthalmia: this is detected on the axial view of 
the orbits. 
Additional anomalies, the detection of which is hampered 
by the severe oligohydramnios, are as follows: 
Figure 10.20 Fraser syndrome: laryngeal atresia. (a) On the axial 
view of the thorax, the severely enlarged and hyperechoic lungs 
(arrowheads) are visible. The heart (H) is squeezed into the mediastinum 
by compression from the lungs. Behind the heart, the trachea 
(Tr) can be seen: the whole bronchial tree is dilated due 
to the fluid trapped below the atretic larynx (bronchogram). (b) 
Power Doppler examination demonstrating that the hollow structure 
behind the heart is not of cardiovascular origin. It should 
be noted that, for a diagnosis of Fraser syndrome, other major 
anomalies should be present (see text). 
a
b 
FRASER SYNDROME 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 323 
• Syndactyly. 
• Cleft lip/palate. 
Differential diagnosis. This is virtually non-existent, due 
to the peculiarity and the rarity of the malformations, 
especially laryngeal atresia. It should be pointed out that 
laryngeal atresia is not always present, but this is the 
only anomaly that may lead to the diagnosis in the fetus, 
because of the difficulties in recognizing the other craniofacial 
and/or skeletal signs due to the constant oligohydramnios 
(renal agenesis). The differential diagnosis of 
laryngeal atresia is described in Chapter 6. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Fraser syndrome 
is almost always lethal, due to the bilateral renal agenesis 
and laryngeal atresia. There are a few descriptions of 
survivors following an EXIT procedure (ex utero intrapartum 
treatment: see Chapters 3 and 6). In these cases, 
the microphthalmia and syndactyly, if severe, represent 
the main problems. 
Recurrence risk. Fraser syndrome is transmitted with an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, which implies a 
25% recurrence risk. However, a few sporadic cases 
have been described. 
GOLDENHAR SYNDROME (OAVS – OCULO-AURICULO-VERTEBRAL SPECTRUM) 
Incidence. 1/3000–5000 at birth. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Hemifacial microsomia; cleft lip/palate; external ear anomalies; vertebral anomalies. 
Outcome. Relatively good survival. Intelligence is normal in most cases. High cosmetic impact. 
Recurrence risk. The empiric recurrence risk, in the absence of a positive family history, has been set at 2%. 
Families with autosomal dominant and recessive inheritance patterns have been described (50% and 25% 
recurrence risk, respectively). 
Definition. Goldenhar syndrome – or more generally the 
oculo-auriculo-vertebral spectrum (OAVS) – (OMIM 
164210) represents a cluster of malformations due to 
abnormal development of the first and second branchial 
arches, associated in some cases with ocular and vertebral 
anomalies. The association of an epibulbar dermoid 
with vertebral anomalies specifically identifies Goldenhar 
syndrome within OAVS. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
Pathogenetically, a derangement in the development of 
the neural crest has been discovered in OAVS, which 
links this malformative cluster with the CHARGE 
(Coloboma, Heart defects, Atresia of choanae, Retarded 
growth, Genital anomalies) association. OAVS shows 
genetic heterogeneity, since linkage analysis has shown 
possible involvement of the chromosome 14q32 region 
in one family but not in others. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is still not available, 
because of the above-mentioned genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Most malformations characterizing 
OAVS can be recognized prenatally.19,20 Major 
anomalies, the recognition of which may lead to the 
diagnosis of Goldenhar syndrome, are as follows: 
• Cleft lip/palate (Figure 10.21a): this is detected on the 
axial and oblique views of the lips and palate and/or 
on 3D surface-rendered images of the fetal face. 
Figure 10.21 Goldenhar syndrome – oculo-auriculo-vertebral 
spectrum, (OAVS). (a) 3D surface-rendered image of the fetal face 
showing cleft lip/palate and hemifacial microsomia (note the 
hypoplastic orbit on the same side of the clefting). (b) Axial view of 
the orbits showing unilateral microphthalmia. (c) Pre-auricular 
tag. (d) Left superior vena cava (arrow) A, aorta; C, right superior 
vena cava; P, pulmonary artery. 
a c 
b d 

324 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
• Hemifacial microsomia (Figure 10.21a,b): this 
becomes evident on the coronal view of the face 
and/or 3D surface-rendered images of the fetal 
face. 
• Unilateral microphthalmia (Figure 10.21a,c): this is 
detected on the axial view of the orbits. 
• Unilateral external ear anomalies (Figure 10.21b): 
these are detected on the parasagittal view of 
the head, for the external ear or, more advantageously, 
3D surface-rendered images of the fetal 
face. 
• Vertebral anomalies: often involving the cervical and 
thoracic region, these are recognized on the sagittal 
view of the spine. 
Additional anomalies include the following: 
• Congenital heart disease (Figure 10.21d): these often 
involve the interventricular septum. 
• Urinary tract anomalies. 
• CNS anomalies: most often agenesis of the 
corpus callosum and cerebellar abnormalities (also 
hemihypoplasia.19 
Differential diagnosis. This includes the CHARGE 
association and Treacher–Collins syndrome: 
• Treacher–Collins syndrome: look for .cleft lip/palate + 
mandibular hypoplasia + external ear anomalies. 
• CHARGE association: look for . external ear anomalies 
+ ocular anomalies + congential heart disease + 
urinary tract anomalies + FGR. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is normal. 
The risk of mental retardation is relatively low, 
with 13% of affected individuals showing an IQ < 85. 
Usually, individuals with mental retardation also have 
microtia. Hearing loss may also be present, due to the 
involvement of the external ear. Cosmetic surgery is 
indicated in all cases to reduce the aesthetic impact of 
the hemifacial microsomia. 
HOLT–ORAM SYNDROME (HOS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Mutations in the TBX5 (T-box) gene at chromosome 12q24.1. Genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound signs. Anomalies of the thumb (absence, bifid, syndactyly) and/or of the upper limb (phocomelia, 
radial–ulnar anomalies), and congenital heart disease (mainly atrial/ventricular septal defects). 
Outcome. Depends on the degree of upper-limb involvement. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal dominant inheritance pattern, with 50% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Holt–Oram syndrome (OMIM 142900) was 
described by Holt and Oram in 1960. It is characterized 
by usually asymmetric anomalies of the upper limbs, 
ranging from absence of the thumbs to phocomelia and 
by septal cardiac defects (mainly atrial and interventricular 
septal defects). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the TBX5 
gene, at chromosome 12q24.1, has been found in 25% 
of affected families and 50% of sporadic cases. HOS 
shows anticipation, with increasing severity of the syndrome 
in succeeding generations. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is possible if the TBX5 
gene mutation has been identified in the affected family. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is based, in 
the cases at risk, on the recognition of upper-limb anomalies. 
As pointed out, these range from thumb absence to 
bifid thumb to three-phalangeal thumb to syndactyly 
with the index finger (Figure 10.22a). In 10–15% of 
cases, phocomelia can occur. Cardiac septal defects are 
commonly associated. However, only the occurrence of 
a ventricular septal defect may, if it is large enough, be 
recognized on ultrasound (Figure 10.22b). Atrial septal 
defects often escape prenatal diagnosis. 
Differential diagnosis. In families at risk, the diagnosis is 
usually straightforward,21 also early in gestation, due to 
the specific search for upper-limb anomalies. In the 
absence of a positive family history, the prospective diagnosis 
may be very difficult, unless both the cardiac and 
limb anomalies are at the more severe end of the spectrum 
(e.g., a large ventricular septal defect or a hypoplastic 
left heart plus phocomelia). On such occasions, it 
may be necessary to distinguish HOS from other syndromes 
possibly featuring phocomelia and congenital 
heart disease, such as Roberts syndrome: 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 325 
• Roberts syndrome (OMIM 268300):5 look for . 
phocomelia + congenital heart disease + cleft lip. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Survival is generally 
unaffected. The quality of life depends on the degree 
of limb involvement and on the residual function of the 
hands. Conduction defects may worsen with time and 
require pacemaker implantation. 
Recurrence risk. HOS has an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, which yields a 50% recurrence 
risk. 
Figure 10.22 Holt-Oram syndrome. (a) 3D maximum-mode rendering showing syndactyly of one hand (arrowheads). (b) 4-chamber 
view of the heart showing a ventricular septal defect (arrow) and a small left atrium (arrowhead). 
KLIPPEL–TRENAUNAY–WEBER SYNDROME (KTWS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. 
Ultrasound signs. Abnormal contour of one or more limbs due to large hemangiomas sometimes also involving the 
trunk. Hypertrophy and microcystic appearance of soft tissues. 
Outcome. Depends on the site and extent of the hemangiomas. These undergo significant regression after birth. 
Recurrence risk. Extremely low. Most cases are sporadic, although families with an autosomal dominant 
inheritance pattern, implying a 50% recurrence risk, have been described. 
Definition. KTWS (OMIM 149000) was described by 
Klippel and Trenaunay in 1900 and by Weber in 1907. 
It is characterized by multiple hemangiomas variously 
involving the limbs, the trunk and the internal organs 
(CNS, abdominal, etc.). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the VG5Q 
gene, at chromosome 5q13.3, has been found in a few 
cases. This mutation results in increased production of 
the protein coded by the malfunctioning gene, which is 
a potent angiogenic factor, found in endothelial cells, 
myocytes, and osteoblasts. 
Genetics. Prenatal genetic diagnosis is possible if 
the VG5Q mutation has been identified in the affected 
family. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. Ultrasound diagnosis is straightforward 
because of the uniqueness of the sonographic 
appearance of the hemangiomas. The only issue to consider 
is that, due to the rarity of KTWS, most sonographers 
have never seen such lesions on ultrasound and 
therefore may reach the diagnosis only if they recall it 
from textbooks. The ultrasound signs of KTWS are as 
follows: 
a b 

• Hemangiomas involving one or more limbs: these 
have an abnormal cutaneous contour and diffuse 
microcystic changes of the subcutaneous tissue, with 
some calcified spots (Figures 10.23a and 10.24a). 
• Soft tissues and bone hypertrophy, at the level of the 
affected limb: the degree of hypertrophy can be appreciated 
by comparing the cross-sectional views of the two 
limbs – the affected and the normal (Figure 10.23b). 
• Trunk involvment (less evident and less common): 
at this level, the hemangiomatosis can appear as 
regional thickening of the subcutaneous tissues, with 
or without a microcystic subcutaneous mass (Figures 
10.23c, 10.24b). When involving internal organs, the 
lesion shows the classic microcystic aspect. 
Like most conditions characterized by hyperplasia of 
mesenchyme-derivated tissues, KTWS changes during 
the course of gestation. The lesions tend to increase in size 
and extend to the trunk, with new hemangiomas possibly 
appearing at a later stage. If the number and/or extent of 
the lesions are significant, cardiac decompensation due 
to high-output failure may develop.21 However, as 
reported below, all lesions tend to significantly regress 
with time. 
Differential diagnosis. In most cases, the hemangioma is 
sonographically indistinguishable from a lymphangioma. 
However, the latter is frequently single and 
localized, whereas in KTWS the hemangiomas are multiple 
and/or massive, involving large areas of a limb. 
Another condition that should be differentiated 
from KTWS is Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome:5 both 
share hypertrophy/hyperplasia of bone and soft tissues. 
However, Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome is characterized 
also by exomphalos and macroglossia, both of 
which are absent in KTWS. Also, the Proteus syndrome 
(OMIM 176920) shows hemihypertrophy and macroglossia; 
in addition, the Proteus syndrome may show lymphangiomas. 
Thus, this is the single disorder that is most 
difficult to differentiate from KTWS. However, the multiple 
location of the hemangiomas and the absence of real 
hemihypertrophy may allow one to recognize KTWS. 
326 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.23 Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome at 19 weeks of gestation. (a) The thigh shows an irregular cutaneous outline, both on 
the anterior aspect (arrowhead) and posteriorly, at the popliteal region, where a conspicuous hemangioma (arrow) is visible. (b) Axial view 
of the lower limbs at the level of the middle part of the femur showing an evident discrepancy in size due to bone and soft tissue hypertrophy 
(arrowheads) and to hemangiomatosis (hypoechoic areas). (c) Arrowheads indicate the involvement of the gluteal region, which 
appears as a spongious aspect of the subcutaneous tissue. (d) Autopsy after termination of pregnancy showing diffuse hemangiomatosis 
(the letters relate to the sonographic findings in parts (a) and (b). 
a d 
b
c 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 327 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. As already 
pointed out, the hemangiomas of KTWS show a significant 
tendency to regress after birth. The size of the 
lesions may shrink dramatically in a few months. 
However, the final prognosis is highly variable and 
depends mainly on the size and the location of the 
hemangiomas: cerebral hemangiomas may induce 
seizures or epilepsy; they can bleed or may cause severe 
cerebral atrophy, which, though rare, is one of the 
most ominous sequelae. Thrombocytopenia can also be 
associated owing to the platelet sequestration within 
the hemangiomas. If the hemangiomas involve only 
superficial areas, such as the limbs or the trunk, to a 
certain extent, the prognosis is more favorable, and, in 
selected cases, resection or plastic surgery may be considered. 
Laser treatment may lead to improvement of 
the superficial hemangioma component of the affected 
areas. 
Recurrence risk. KTWS is generally a sporadic condition, 
but a few cases with autosomal dominant inheritance, 
with a 50% recurrence risk, have been described. 
Figure 10.24 Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber 
syndrome at 20 weeks of gestation. (a) Huge 
hemangioma of the axilla, appearing as a 
cystic mass (arrowheads, to be compared 
with the arrowheads on the specimen (c)). 
(b) Involvement of the lateral aspect of the 
fetal trunk (arrows, to be compared with the 
arrows on the specimen (c)). (c) Specimen 
after termination of pregnancy: note the various 
hemangiomas and the involvement of 
the right pelvic area. 
MECKEL–GRUBER SYNDROME 
Incidence. Frequent: 1/9000 live births. 
Etiology. The involved gene maps to chromosome 17q21–24, but there is genetic heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound signs. The phenotypic expression of the syndrome is variable, as a consequence of its genetic 
heterogeneity. The three signs that usually lead to the diagnosis, namely occipital cephalocele, cystic renal 
dysplasia, and postaxial polydactyly, are present in 60% of cases. Additional anomalies include CNS, craniofacial 
and gastrointestinal malformations. 
Outcome. Lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. Rare sporadic cases have 
been described. 
a
b 
c 

328 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. The original malformative cluster of Meckel– 
Gruber syndrome (OMIM 249000) was first described 
by Meckel in 1822, although the number of anomalies 
found in Meckel–Gruber syndrome is huge. The three 
classic signs (occipital cephalocele, cystic renal dysplasia, 
and postaxial polydactyly) is present in 60% of cases. 
Other malformations found in this syndrome involve the 
CNS (Dandy–Walker complex, cerebellar hypoplasia, 
and hydrocephaly), gastrointestinal tract (exomphalos, 
asplenia, splenomegaly, and imperforate anus), and the 
cardiovascular system (septal defects). 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A significant number of cases 
show mutations at chromosome 17q21–24, but the 
genetic heterogeneity is high, with other cases mapping 
to different loci. This leads to the variable clinical 
expression of the syndrome. 
Genetics. This is not available, due to the high genetic 
heterogeneity. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. There are three anomalies that lead 
to the diagnosis in most of the cases detected in utero: 
• Occipital cephalocele: the detection of this may 
be difficult due to the frequently associated severe 
oligohydramnios (Figure 10.25a, b). 
• Cystic renal dysplasia, with enlarged and hyperechoic 
kidneys: this is the sign that is most promptly 
detected, since the kidneys fill most of the fetal 
abdomen (Figure 10.25c, d). 
• Postaxial polydactyly: also in this case, recognition of 
the anomaly is hampered by the severe oligohydramnios. 
If the fetal lie is favorable, the bony phalanges 
may be recognized, and this may lead to a diagnosis 
Figure 10.25 Meckel-Gruber syndrome at 19 weeks of gestation. (a) Occipital encephalocele: axial transventricular view showing the 
large occipital bone defect through which the meninges and the cerebral parenchyma (arrowheads) have migrated. (b) Confirmation at 
autopsy. (c) Cystic renal dysplasia: low-magnification view of the fetus showing that the whole abdomen is occupied by the severely 
enlarged polycystic kidneys (arrowheads). Note also the severe thoracic hypoplasia. (d) Specimen of the polycystic kidney, showing the 
parenchymal cysts. (e) Polydactyly of one foot. (f) Postaxial polydactyly of one hand at autopsy. 
a
c 
b 
d e
f 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 329 
of polydactyly (Figure 10.25e, f). In a few cases, the 
extra digit may also be preaxial. 
In the rare cases in which a definite diagnosis is not 
reached due to concomitant severe oligohydramnios, 
unfavorable fetal lie, or maternal obesity, both a transvaginal 
approach and a diagnostic amnioinfusion may 
solve the problem. In families at risk (with a positive history), 
ultrasound diagnosis of Meckel–Gruber syndrome 
has been reported as early as the 12th–13th weeks of 
gestation. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis includes 
different conditions according to the sign considered. The 
most important one to address, since it may also occur in 
other syndromic disorders, is cystic renal dysplasia. The 
sonographic appearance of the kidney is often indistinguishable 
from that of classic autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease. The same enlarged and hyperechoic 
kidneys are also characteristic of other syndromes: 
a thorough description is given in Chapter 8. If multiple 
anomalies involving the CNS and the heart are found, 
one of the other conditions to be ruled out is trisomy 13, 
in which polydactyly, renal dysplasia, CNS and cardiac 
anomalies can be found. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. Meckel–Gruber 
syndrome is invariably lethal, due to the severe pulmonary 
hypoplasia induced by the oligohydramnios. 
Recurrence risk. Meckel–Gruber syndrome has an 
autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% 
recurrence risk, although rare sporadic cases have been 
described. Therefore, a correct diagnosis is of the utmost 
importance in order to allow early ultrasound assessment 
of any following pregnancy. 
MULTIPLE PTERYGIUM SYNDROME 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. It belongs to the neuroarthrogryposes (FADS). 
Ultrasound signs. Ubiquitous and severe joint contractures; multiple pterygia at elbows and knees; cystic hygroma. 
Outcome. Invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 
Definition. Different variants of this syndrome (OMIM 
253290) have been described according to the lethality 
and to the diffusion of the pterygia. The lethal form is 
included in the group of neuroarthrogryposes (FADS), 
together with Neu–Laxova syndrome, the COFS syndrome 
and classic FADS (or Pena–Shokeir syndrome). In 
multiple pterygium syndrome, the four limbs are flexed 
from the early weeks, and this leads to the development of 
the pterygia at the level of the main joints. Facial abnormalities 
(cleftings), cystic hygroma, early and severe FGR, 
and polyhydramnios complete the prenatal appearance. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. It 
is considered to be a neurogenic neuroarthrogryposis. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The sonographic features are 
striking: 
• Arthrogryposis: this involves all muscles, with 
flexed and adducted limbs, deformed extremities, 
and clinodactyly. 
• Multiple pterygia: these are difficult to recognize, 
due to the fixed adduction of all limbs (Figure 
10.26a). 
• Cystic hygroma-lymphangiomas: these are of early 
onset and severe (Figure 10.26b). 
• Craniofacial anomalies: these comprise mainly cleft 
lip/palate and micrognathia. 
• FGR: this is severe, symmetric, and of early onset. 
Differential diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is limited 
to the other neuroarthrogryposes and to cystic 
hygroma. The second issue is the most important one, 
due to the completely different recurrence risk shown by 
the two conditions: 25% for the autosomal recessive 
inherited multiple pterygium syndrome, compared with 
the 1% recurrence rate of cystic hygroma, if due to 
aneuploidy. 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. This syndrome is 
invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. There is an autosomal recessive inheritance 
pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 

330 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Neu–Laxova syndrome (OMIM 256520) is 
named after the two authors who first described the condition 
in 1971–72. This syndrome is included in the group of 
neuroarthrogryposes (FADS), together with the multiple 
pterygium syndrome, COFS syndrome, and classic FADS 
(or Pena–Shokeir syndrome). In addition to the diffuse and 
severe arthrogryposis, the following malformations are 
also present: severe CNS anomalies (extreme cerebellar 
hypoplasia, Dandy–Walker complex, agenesis of the corpus 
callosum); severe early-onset microcephaly; proptosis 
and corneal opacities; diffuse edema of the limbs and, 
especially, of the extremities, which appear severely distorted; 
early-onset symmetric FGR; and polyhydramnios. 
There are also two other abnormalities, which are not 
detected on ultrasound in most cases (at least in the 2nd 
trimester), namely lissencephaly and ichthyosis. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown. 
Neo–Laxova syndrome, like the multiple pterygium syndrome, 
is considered to be a neurogenic arthrogryposis. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The ultrasound appearance of 
Neu–Laxova syndrome is striking, with multiple severe 
anomalies present at the same time: 
• Microcephaly (severe and of early onset): This is 
detectable also subjectively by assessing the midsagittal 
view of the fetal profile, on which the severely slanting 
forehead, macrophthalmia, and micrognathia are evident 
at the same time (Figures 10.27a–c and 10.28). 
• CNS anomalies: these include extremely severe cerebellar 
hypoplasia (Figure 10.27b). 
• Micrognathia: this is subjectively detectable on the 
midsagittal view of the fetal profile, on which the 
severely slanting forehead, the macrophthalmia and 
micrognathia are evident at the same time (Figures 
10.27a,c and 10.28). 
• Arthrogryposis: this involves all of the muscles, with 
fixed and adducted limbs and distorted and edematous 
extremities (Figure 10.27d, f). 
• Edema of the extremities: this may give a false 
impression of ectrodactyly, due to the swelling of the 
digits (Figure 10.27E, F). 
• Proptosis and corneal opacities. these are recognized 
on the coronal view of the orbits and the face (Figure 
10.27g, h). 
• FGR: this is severe, symmetric, and of early onset. 
• Lissencephaly: this can be suspected on ultrasound 
only in the 3rd trimester, when gyri and sulci become 
evident. In the case of lissencephaly, the outer surface 
of the brain is smoother. 
Differential diagnosis. This is limited to the other neuroarthrogryposes. 
However, none of these is associated 
with so many and so severe anomalies at the same time. 
Figure 10.26 Multiple pterygium syndrome. 
(a) Lymphangioma of the knee (arrow), which, 
regressing, transforms into a pterygium. (b) 
Lymphangioma of the antero-lateral thoracic 
wall (arrow). 
NEU–LAXOVA SYNDROME 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. It belongs to the neuroarthrogryposes (FADS). 
Ultrasound signs. Microcephaly; CNS anomalies; macrophthalmia and proptosis; external ear anomalies; 
micrognathia; arthrogryposis; lymphedema of the limbs and extremities; ichthyosis; FGR. 
Outcome. Invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence risk. 
a b 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 331 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. This condition is 
invariably lethal. 
Recurrence risk. Neu–Laxova syndrome has an autosomal 
recessive inheritance pattern, with a 25% recurrence 
risk. 
Figure 10.27 Neu–Laxova syndrome. (a) Severe micrognathia 
(compare with (c)). (b) Severe cerebellar hypoplasia and microcephaly 
(compare with (c)). (c) Specimen after birth showing severe 
microcephaly (sloping forehead), facial soft tissue edema, and 
micrognathia. (d) Diffuse joint contractures, with abnormal posture 
of the heel (compare with (f)). (e) Edema of foot and toes (compare 
with (f)). (f) Specimen after birth showing arthrogryposis and the 
abnormal posture of the edematous feet. (g) Corneal opacity (arrowhead). 
(h) Confirmation at autopsy. 
Figure 10.28 Neu–Laxova syndrome. (a) 3D rendering of the 
fetal head and trunk demonstrating microcephaly, macrophthalmia, 
and arthrogryposis of the upper limbs, which appear 
adducted and with clenched hands. (b) Confirmation at autopsy. 
(c) 3D rendering of the fetal profile demonstrating microcephaly, 
low-set ears, and micrognathia. (d) Confirmation at autopsy. 
RUBINSTEIN–TAYBI SYNDROME (RSTS) 
Incidence. Extremely rare. 
Etiology. In 20% of cases, a mutation of the gene encoding CBP, a transcriptional coactivator, mapping to 
chromosome 16p13.3, has been found. 
Ultrasound signs. Wide and abducted thumbs and toes; CNS anomalies; beaked nose; small mouth. 
Outcome. Moderate risk of neonatal death. Survivors show moderate–severe mental retardation (mean IQ 51) and 
a tendency to develop neoplasias. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. In the 20% in which the above-mentioned mutation is found, the 
inheritance pattern becomes autosomal dominant (50% recurrence risk). 
a a 
b
d
e g h 
c 
f 
c 
b
d 

332 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Definition. Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome (RSTS: OMIM 
180849) is named after the two authors who independently 
described the condition in 1963. It is characterized 
by moderate–severe mental retardation, microcephaly 
and other CNS anomalies, and a peculiar facies with a 
beaked nose and a small mouth. However, the most typical 
feature of the syndrome, which can be recognized on 
ultrasound, is the presence of wide and abducted thumbs 
and toes. Inconstantly, clinodactyly and polydactyly can 
be associated. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. A mutation of the gene encoding 
the transcriptional coactivator CBP (CREB-binding 
protein, where CREB is C-AMP response-element-binding 
protein), mapping to chromosome 16p13.3, has been 
found in 20% of individuals affected with RSTS. 
According to the studies reporting this genetic anomaly, it 
seems that both a microdeletion and a mutation with gene 
amputation are sufficient to cause the syndrome. 
Genetics. Genetic diagnosis might be performed in cases 
with a mutation of the CBP gene, which account for 
20% of all RSTS. Hence, a positive result may confirm 
the diagnosis, but a negative one cannot exclude it. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. RSTS can be suspected on ultrasound 
if CNS anomalies are found in association with 
the above-mentioned abnormalities of the extremities: 
• Microcephaly: this may also be of late onset; it is 
detectable on the axial transthalamic view. 
• Other CNS anomalies: for example, cerebellar 
hypoplasia and agenesis of the corpus callosum. 
• Wide fontanelles: these may be seen on 3D ultrasound 
(see Chapter 2). 
• Micrognathia, of variable degree: this may be 
detected on the midsagittal view of the fetal profile 
(Figure 10.29a, b). 
• Wide and abducted thumbs and toes (Figure 
10.29c, d). 
• Beaked nose: this may be detected on the midsagittal 
view of the fetal profile (Figure 10.29a,b). 
• Polyhydramnios, of variable degree. 
Differential diagnosis. This is limited to diastrophic 
dysplasia, which is characterized by the typical ‘hitchhiker’s 
thumb’. However, in this disorder, the thumbs 
are of normal dimensions and there are other anomalies 
of the osteomuscular apparatus, that may help in reaching 
the correct diagnosis (Chapter 9). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. RSTS is not always 
lethal. If the neonate does not die within the first few 
weeks of life, the chances of reaching adulthood are high. 
With regard to the overall prognosis, this should take into 
account that RSTS individuals are subjected to failure to 
thrive, moderately severe mental retardation (with a mean 
IQ of 51), and a tendency to develop neoplasia. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. Those in which 
the CBP mutation is found show an autosomal dominant 
transmission pattern, with a 50% recurrence risk. 
Figure 10.29 Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome. (a) Midsagittal view 
of the facial profile showing a beaked nose (consider the outline of 
the soft tissue (arrowheads), not the nasal bones) and the micrognathia 
(arrow). (b) Confirmation at autopsy. (c) Feet, showing 
the enlarged and abducted toes. (d) Confirmation at autopsy, with 
the right toe abducted and the left toe enlarged. 
a b 
c d 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 333 
Definition. In 1972, this malformative cluster of various 
apparatus was defined as VATER–VACTER–VACTERL 
(OMIM 192350), according to the different anomalies 
present at the same time. The original acronym (VATER) 
included the following malformations: vertebral anomalies 
(fusion, hemivertebrae, and scoliosis), anal anomalies 
(anorectal atresia), tracheo-esophageal fistula, and 
renal anomalies (dysplasia, hydronephrosis, and ectopia). 
Then, the ‘C’ (for cardiac defects: VSD, tetralogy of 
Fallot, and transposition of the great arteries) and the ‘L’ 
(for limbs: aplasia radii, and polydactyly) were added if 
necessary. Caudal regression syndrome is characterized 
by agenesis of the sacrum and, in some cases, of the lower 
lumbar part of the spine as well. The extremely rare 
sirenomelia is the most severe form of causal regression 
syndrome, in which the two lower limbs are fused in a 
single abnormal limb. 
Etiology and pathogenesis. The etiology is unknown, but 
a significant association with maternal insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus has been found. 
Genetics. This is not available. 
Ultrasound diagnosis. The diagnosis is difficult, because 
of the wide spectrum of anomalies that can be present for 
each apparatus. The major anomalies most frequently 
recognized in the fetus are as follows: 
VA(C)TER(L) 
• Scoliosis or hemivertebrae: this is evident on the 
coronal view of the spine (Figure 10.30a). 
• Esophageal atresia: this can be recognized from the 
non-visualization of the gastric bubble associated 
with polyhydramnios. 
• Cardiac defects: these include various types of 
congenital heart defect. 
• Renal anomalies: these include agenesis, ectopia, hydronephrosis 
(Figure 10.30a: inset), and horseshoe kidney. 
• Limb anomalies: the most common of these is aplasia 
radii (see Chapter 9: Figure 9.32). 
Caudal regression syndrome (in addition to one or more 
of the above-mentioned anomalies) 
• Sacral agenesis: this is recognizable on the longitudinal 
view of the spine by the absence of lumbosacral 
ossification (Figure 10.30b–e). 
Sirenomelia (in addition to one or more of the abovementioned 
anomalies) 
• Single lower limb, resulting from fusion of the two 
legs: the two legs may still be evident but fused 
(Figure 10.31) or may be replaced by a single abnormal 
limb (Figure 10.32). 
Differential diagnosis. This includes, for the VA(C)TER(L) 
association, trisomies 13 and 18, because most of the 
malformations included in the VA(C)TER(L) spectrum 
may also be present in these autosomal trisomies. In particular, 
for aplasia radii the differential diagnosis includes 
Fanconi anemia, TAR (thrombocytopenia with absent 
radius) syndrome, and trisomy 18 (Chapter 9). 
Prognosis, survival, and quality of life. All cases associated 
with bilateral renal agenesis are lethal. Sirenomelia 
is almost always lethal. If the various anomalies can be 
surgically corrected, as is the case in a significant number 
of neonates, the survival rate is high, although with a 
low (but not absent) risk of mental retardation. 
Recurrence risk. VA(C)TER(L), caudal regression syndrome, 
and sirenomelia are all sporadic anomalies, and 
therefore their recurrence risk is extremely low. 
VATER (VACTERL) – CAUDAL REGRESSION – SIRENOMELIA 
Incidence. Rare. 
Etiology. Unknown. In some cases, maternal insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus is associated. 
Ultrasound signs. Vertebral anomalies; anal anomalies; cardiac defects; tracheo-esophageal fistula; renal anomalies; 
limb anomalies (aplasia radii). Caudal regression syndrome and sirenomelia represent extremely severe variants of 
the VA(C)TER(L). 
Outcome. Depends on the severity of the various anomalies. 
Recurrence risk. Most cases are sporadic. 

334 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Figure 10.30 VA(C)TER(L).(a) Severe 
scoliosis due to a hemivertebra and a 
complex and large defect of the caudal 
part of the spine involving the lumbar and 
sacral tracts. The inset shows bilateral 
renal dysplasia. (b) 3D maximum-mode 
rendering demonstrating the vertebral 
anomalies and the wide sacral defect 
(arrow). (c) The same image, but with surface-
mode rendering showing the cystic 
sacral lesion (arrow). (d, e) Confirmation 
at autopsy (compare with (b) and (c)). 
Figure 10.31 Sirenomelia. Ultrasound examination is difficult because of the constant severe oligohydramnios due to renal agenesis. In 
addition to this anomaly, the following malformations are found. (a) Fused lower limbs, with two sets of long bones but soft tissue fusion. 
In the inset, note the absence of the fibulas and the abnormal bone between the tibias (arrow). (b) On the axial view of the pelvis, it is 
possible to recognize a horseshoe kidney (arrows) and sacral agenesis (arrowheads): in fact, only the two iliac bones are visible above the 
kidney, with no sacral vertebral appearing between them. (c) Axial view of the feet fused at the heels. (d) Confirmation at autopsy: note the 
single lower limb resulting from the fusion of the soft tissues of the two legs. The inset shows the fused feet (compare with (c)). 
a
b 
a 
c 
d 
b 
c d 
e 

CHROMOSOMAL AND NON-CHROMOSOMAL SYNDROMES 335 
1. Lee W, DeVore GR, Comstock CH, et al. Nasal bone evaluation 
in fetuses with Down syndrome during the second and 
third trimesters of pregnancy. J Ultrasound Med 2003; 22: 
55–60. 
2. Benacerraf FR, Barss VA, Laboda LA. A sonographic sign for 
the detection in the second trimester of the fetus with Down 
syndrome. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1985; 151: 1078–80. 
3. Benaceraf B. The significance of the nuchal fold in the second 
trimester fetus. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 798–801. 
4. DeVore GR. Scond trimester ultrasonography may identify 
77% to 97% of fetuses with trisomy 18. J Ultrasound Med 
2000; 19: 565–76. 
5. Lyon Jones K. Smith’s Recognizable Patterns of Human 
Malformation, 6th edn. Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders, 2006. 
6. Surerus E, Huggon IC, Allan LD.Turner’s syndrome in fetal 
life. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2003; 22: 264–7. 
7. Goldmunts E. DiGeorge syndrome: new insights. Clin Perinatol 
2005; 32 :963–78, ix–x. 
8. Volpe P, Marasini M, Caruso G, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosiss of interruption of the aortic arch and its association 
with deletion of chromosome 22q11. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2002; 20: 327–31. 
9. Paladini D, Russo M, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of congenital heart disease in the Naples area 
during the years 1994–1999 – the experience of a joint 
fetal–pediatric cardiology unit. Prenat Diagn 2002; 22: 
545–52. 
10. Chaoui R, Kalache KD, Heling KS, et al. Absent or hypoplastic 
thymus on ultrasound: a marker for deletion 22q11.2 in 
fetal cardiac defects. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2002; 20: 
546–52. 
11. Faro C, Chaoui R, Wegrzyn P, et al. Metopic suture in fetuses 
with Apert syndrome at 22–27 weeks of gestation. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2006; 27: 28–33. 
12. Williams DH, Gauthier DW, Maizels M. Prenatal diagnosis 
of Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 
879–84. 
13. Rump P, Zeegers MPA, van Essen AJ. Tumor risk in 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome: a review and meta-analysis. 
Am J Med Genet 2005; 136A: 95–104. 
14. Volpe P, Buonadonna AL, Campobasso G, et al. Cat-eye syndrome 
in a fetus with increased nuchal translucency: threedimensional 
ultrasound and echocardiographic evaluation of the 
fetal phenotype. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 485–7. 
15. Brueton LA, Huson SM, Cox PM, et al. Asymptomatic maternal 
myasthenia as a cause of the Pena–Shokeir phenotype. Am 
J Med Genet 2000; 92: 1–6. 
16. Paladini D, Tartaglione A, Agangi A, et al. Pena–Shokeir phenotype 
in three consecutive pregnancies. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 2001; 17: 163–5. 
17. Paladini D, D’Armiento MR, Ardovino I, Martinelli P. Prenatal 
diagnosis of the cerebro-oculo-facio-skeletal (COFS) syndrome. 
Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2000; 16: 91–3. 
18. Maruotti GM, Paladini D, Agangi A, Martinelli P. Prospective 
prenatal diagnosis of Fraser syndrome variant in a family with 
negative history. Prenat Diagn 2004; 24: 69–70. 
19. Martinelli P, Maruotti GM, Agangi A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis 
of hemifacial microsomia and ipsilateral cerebellar hypoplasia 
in a fetus with oculoauricolovertebral spectrum. Ultrasound 
Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 199–201. 
20. Volpe P, Gentile M. Three-dimensional diagnosis of Goldenhar 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 2004; 24: 798–800. 
21. Brons JT, van Geijn HP, Wladimiroff JW, et al. Prenatal ultrasound 
diagnosis of the Holt–Oram syndrome. Prenat Diagn 
1988; 8: 175–81. 
22. Paladini D, Morra T, Teodoro A, et al. Prenatal diagnosis 
and hemodynamic evaluation of Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber 
syndrome. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1998; 11: 215–17. 
Figure 10.32 Sirenomelia. In addition to 
severe oligohydramnios, the following 
malformations are found. (a) Upper limb: 
only the ulna is visible, while there is complete 
radial aplasia (Ra?). (b) Single lower 
limb (no long bone possibly indicating the 
presence of the other limb was found on 
ultrasound), with a single mesomelic bone – 
aplasia of the fibula (Fi?). (c) Specimen 
after termination of pregnancy. Note the 
sirenomelia and the severe defects of the 
upper limbs (bilateral radial aplasia with 
ectrodactyly: arrow). 
REFERENCES 
a
b 
c 

NORMAL FETAL BIOMETRY 
Appendix 
Normal and special fetal biometry 
Table A.1 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: biparietal diameter (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 35.8 36.2 36.7 37.7 38.8 39.9 40.8 41.4 41.8 
18 38.4 38.9 39.6 40.7 42.0 43.3 44.5 45.2 45.6 
19 41.1 41.6 42.4 43.7 45.2 46.7 48.0 48.9 49.4 
20 43.7 44.2 45.2 46.7 48.3 50.0 51.5 52.4 53.0 
21 46.3 46.9 47.9 49.6 51.4 53.2 54.9 55.9 56.5 
22 48.9 49.6 50.6 52.4 54.4 56.4 58.2 59.2 59.9 
23 51.5 52.2 53.3 55.2 57.3 59.4 61.3 62.5 63.2 
24 54.0 54.8 56.0 58.0 60.2 62.4 64.4 65.6 66.4 
25 56.6 57.4 58.6 60.7 63.0 65.3 67.4 68.6 69.4 
26 59.1 59.9 61.2 63.4 65.7 68.1 70.2 71.5 72.3 
27 61.6 62.4 63.7 65.9 68.4 70.8 73.0 74.3 75.1 
28 64.0 64.9 66.2 68.5 70.9 73.4 75.6 76.9 77.8 
29 66.5 67.3 68.7 70.9 73.4 75.9 78.1 79.5 80.3 
30 68.9 69.7 71.1 73.3 75.8 78.2 80.5 81.9 82.7 
31 71.2 72.0 73.4 75.6 78.1 80.5 82.8 84.1 84.9 
32 73.5 74.3 75.7 77.9 80.3 82.7 84.9 86.2 87.1 
33 75.8 76.6 77.9 80.0 82.4 84.8 86.9 88.2 89.0 
34 78.0 78.8 80.0 82.1 84.4 86.7 88.8 90.0 90.8 
35 80.1 80.9 82.1 84.1 86.3 88.5 90.5 91.7 92.5 
36 82.2 83.0 84.1 86.0 88.1 90.2 92.1 93.3 94.0 
37 84.3 85.0 86.0 87.8 89.8 91.8 93.6 94.7 95.3 
38 86.3 86.9 87.9 89.6 91.4 93.2 94.9 95.9 96.5 
39 88.2 88.8 89.7 91.2 92.9 94.5 96.1 97.0 97.5 
40 90.0 90.5 91.4 92.7 94.2 95.7 97.1 97.9 98.4 
41 91.8 92.3 93.0 94.2 95.5 96.7 97.9 98.6 99.1 
42 93.5 93.9 94.5 95.5 96.6 97.6 98.6 99.2 99.6 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 
337 

338 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.2 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: head circumference (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 125.6 127.1 129.7 133.8 138.4 143.0 147.1 149.7 151.2 
18 138.0 139.7 142.3 146.7 151.5 156.4 160.7 163.4 165.1 
19 150.2 151.9 154.7 159.3 164.4 169.4 174.0 176.8 178.6 
20 162.0 163.9 166.8 171.6 176.9 182.2 187.0 189.9 191.7 
21 173.6 175.5 178.5 183.5 189.1 194.6 199.6 202.7 204.6 
22 184.7 186.7 189.9 195.1 200.9 206.6 211.9 215.1 217.0 
23 195.6 197.6 200.9 206.4 212.3 218.3 223.8 227.1 229.1 
24 206.0 208.1 211.6 217.2 223.4 229.6 235.3 238.7 240.8 
25 216.0 218.2 221.8 227.7 234.1 240.5 246.4 249.9 252.1 
26 225.7 227.9 231.6 237.7 244.3 251.0 257.0 260.7 263.0 
27 234.9 237.2 241.0 247.3 254.1 261.0 267.3 271.1 273.4 
28 243.6 246.0 250.0 256.4 263.5 270.6 277.0 281.0 283.4 
29 251.9 254.4 258.4 265.1 272.4 279.7 286.3 290.4 292.9 
30 259.7 262.3 266.4 273.3 280.8 288.3 295.1 299.3 301.9 
31 267.0 269.7 273.9 281.0 288.7 296.4 303.4 307.7 310.3 
32 273.8 276.5 280.9 288.1 296.1 304.0 311.2 315.6 318.3 
33 280.1 282.9 287.4 294.8 302.9 311.0 318.4 322.9 325.7 
34 285.8 288.7 293.3 300.8 309.2 317.5 325.1 329.7 332.6 
35 290.9 293.9 298.6 306.4 314.9 323.4 331.2 335.9 338.8 
36 295.5 298.5 303.3 311.3 320.0 328.7 336.7 341.5 344.5 
37 299.5 302.6 307.5 315.6 324.5 333.5 341.6 346.5 349.6 
38 302.8 306.0 311.0 319.3 328.4 337.5 345.8 350.9 354.0 
39 305.6 308.8 313.9 322.4 331.7 341.0 349.5 354.6 357.8 
40 307.7 310.9 316.2 324.8 334.3 343.8 352.4 357.7 360.9 
41 309.1 312.4 317.7 326.5 336.2 345.9 354.7 360.1 363.4 
42 309.8 313.2 318.6 327.6 337.5 347.3 356.3 361.7 365.1 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 339 
Table A.3 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: abdominal circumference (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 113.3 114.8 117.3 121.4 125.9 130.4 134.5 137.0 138.5 
18 122.0 123.8 126.7 131.6 137.0 142.3 147.2 150.1 152.0 
19 130.6 132.7 136.1 141.7 147.9 154.0 159.6 163.0 165.1 
20 139.3 141.7 145.5 151.8 158.7 165.6 171.9 175.7 178.1 
21 148.0 150.6 154.8 161.7 169.3 176.9 183.9 188.1 190.7 
22 156.7 159.5 164.1 171.6 179.8 188.1 195.6 200.2 203.0 
23 165.4 168.4 173.3 181.3 190.2 199.0 207.1 212.0 215.0 
24 174.0 177.2 182.4 191.0 200.4 209.7 218.3 223.5 226.7 
25 182.7 186.0 191.5 200.5 210.4 220.2 229.2 234.7 238.1 
26 191.2 194.8 200.5 209.9 220.2 230.5 239.9 245.6 249.1 
27 199.8 203.5 209.4 219.1 229.8 240.5 250.3 256.2 259.9 
28 208.3 212.1 218.2 228.2 239.3 250.3 260.4 266.5 270.3 
29 216.7 220.6 226.9 237.2 248.5 259.8 270.2 276.4 280.3 
30 225.1 229.1 235.5 246.0 257.5 269.1 279.6 286.0 290.0 
31 233.4 237.5 243.9 254.6 266.4 278.1 288.8 295.3 299.3 
32 241.7 245.7 252.3 263.1 275.0 286.8 297.6 304.2 308.3 
33 249.8 253.9 260.5 271.4 283.3 295.3 306.1 312.7 316.8 
34 257.9 262.0 268.6 279.5 291.4 303.4 314.3 320.9 325.0 
35 265.8 269.9 276.5 287.4 299.3 311.3 322.1 328.7 332.8 
36 273.7 277.7 284.3 295.1 307.0 318.8 329.6 336.2 340.2 
37 281.4 285.4 291.9 302.6 314.3 326.1 336.7 343.2 347.2 
38 289.0 293.0 299.4 309.9 321.4 333.0 343.5 349.9 353.8 
39 296.5 300.4 306.6 316.9 328.3 339.6 349.9 356.1 360.0 
40 303.9 307.6 313.7 323.8 334.8 345.8 355.9 362.0 365.8 
41 311.1 314.7 320.6 330.4 341.1 351.8 361.5 367.4 371.1 
42 318.1 321.7 327.4 336.7 347.0 357.3 366.7 372.4 375.9 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

340 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.4 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: femur length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 20.1 20.6 21.4 22.6 24.0 25.4 26.7 27.4 27.9 
18 23.2 23.6 24.4 25.6 27.0 28.3 29.6 30.3 30.8 
19 26.1 26.6 27.3 28.5 29.9 31.2 32.4 33.2 33.6 
20 28.9 29.4 30.1 31.4 32.7 34.0 35.2 36.0 36.4 
21 31.7 32.1 32.9 34.1 35.4 36.8 38.0 38.7 39.2 
22 34.3 34.8 35.5 36.8 38.1 39.4 40.7 41.4 41.9 
23 36.9 37.3 38.1 39.3 40.7 42.0 43.3 44.0 44.5 
24 39.3 39.8 40.6 41.8 43.2 44.6 45.8 46.6 47.1 
25 41.7 42.2 42.9 44.2 45.6 47.0 48.3 49.1 49.6 
26 43.9 44.4 45.2 46.5 48.0 49.4 50.7 51.5 52.0 
27 46.1 46.6 47.4 48.8 50.3 51.7 53.1 53.9 54.4 
28 48.1 48.6 49.5 50.9 52.4 54.0 55.4 56.3 56.8 
29 50.0 50.6 51.5 53.0 54.6 56.2 57.6 58.5 59.1 
30 51.9 52.5 53.4 54.9 56.6 58.3 59.8 60.7 61.3 
31 53.6 54.2 55.2 56.8 58.6 60.3 61.9 62.9 63.5 
32 55.3 55.9 56.9 58.6 60.5 62.3 64.0 65.0 65.6 
33 56.8 57.5 58.6 60.3 62.3 64.2 66.0 67.0 67.7 
34 58.3 59.0 60.1 62.0 64.0 66.0 67.9 69.0 69.7 
35 59.6 60.4 61.5 63.5 65.6 67.8 69.8 70.9 71.7 
36 60.9 61.6 62.9 65.0 67.2 69.5 71.6 72.8 73.6 
37 62.0 62.8 64.1 66.3 68.7 71.1 73.3 74.6 75.4 
38 63.0 63.9 65.3 67.6 70.1 72.7 75.0 76.4 77.2 
39 64.0 64.9 66.4 68.8 71.5 74.1 76.6 78.0 79.0 
40 64.8 65.8 67.4 69.9 72.7 75.6 78.1 79.7 80.6 
41 65.6 66.6 68.2 71.0 73.9 76.9 79.6 81.3 82.3 
42 66.2 67.3 69.0 71.9 75.0 78.2 81.0 82.8 83.8 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 341 
Table A.5 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: tibia length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 16.9 17.5 18.4 20.0 21.7 23.4 25.0 25.9 26.5 
18 19.7 20.3 21.2 22.7 24.3 26.0 27.5 28.4 28.9 
19 22.5 23.0 23.9 25.3 26.9 28.5 29.9 30.8 31.4 
20 25.1 25.7 26.5 27.9 29.4 31.0 32.4 33.2 33.7 
21 27.7 28.2 29.0 30.4 31.9 33.4 34.7 35.6 36.1 
22 30.2 30.7 31.5 32.8 34.3 35.7 37.1 37.9 38.4 
23 32.6 33.1 33.8 35.2 36.6 38.1 39.4 40.2 40.7 
24 34.8 35.3 36.1 37.4 38.9 40.3 41.6 42.4 42.9 
25 37.0 37.5 38.3 39.6 41.1 42.5 43.8 44.6 45.1 
26 39.1 39.6 40.4 41.7 43.2 44.6 46.0 46.8 47.3 
27 41.1 41.6 42.4 43.8 45.3 46.7 48.1 48.9 49.4 
28 43.0 43.5 44.4 45.8 47.3 48.8 50.1 51.0 51.5 
29 44.8 45.4 46.2 47.6 49.2 50.8 52.2 53.0 53.6 
30 46.6 47.1 48.0 49.5 51.1 52.7 54.1 55.0 55.6 
31 48.2 48.7 49.7 51.2 52.9 54.6 56.1 57.0 57.6 
32 49.7 50.3 51.3 52.9 54.6 56.4 58.0 58.9 59.5 
33 51.1 51.8 52.8 54.5 56.3 58.1 59.8 60.8 61.5 
34 52.5 53.1 54.2 56.0 57.9 59.9 61.6 62.7 63.4 
35 53.7 54.4 55.5 57.4 59.5 61.5 63.4 64.5 65.2 
36 54.8 55.6 56.8 58.8 60.9 63.1 65.1 66.3 67.0 
37 55.9 56.7 58.0 60.1 62.4 64.7 66.8 68.0 68.8 
38 56.9 57.7 59.0 61.3 63.7 66.2 68.4 69.7 70.6 
39 57.7 58.6 60.0 62.4 65.0 67.6 70.0 71.4 72.3 
40 58.5 59.4 61.0 63.5 66.2 69.0 71.5 73.0 74.0 
41 59.2 60.2 61.8 64.5 67.4 70.3 73.0 74.6 75.6 
42 59.7 60.8 62.5 65.4 68.5 71.6 74.4 76.2 77.2 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

342 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.6 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: humerus length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 20.1 20.6 21.3 22.6 23.9 25.2 26.5 27.2 27.7 
18 22.6 23.1 23.8 25.0 26.3 27.7 28.8 29.6 30.0 
19 25.1 25.5 26.2 27.4 28.7 30.0 31.2 31.9 32.4 
20 27.4 27.9 28.6 29.7 31.0 32.3 33.5 34.2 34.6 
21 29.7 30.1 30.8 32.0 33.3 34.6 35.7 36.5 36.9 
22 31.9 32.3 33.0 34.2 35.5 36.8 37.9 38.7 39.1 
23 34.0 34.4 35.1 36.3 37.6 38.9 40.1 40.8 41.3 
24 36.0 36.4 37.2 38.4 39.7 41.0 42.2 42.9 43.4 
25 37.9 38.4 39.1 40.3 41.7 43.0 44.2 45.0 45.4 
26 39.7 40.2 40.9 42.2 43.6 45.0 46.2 47.0 47.4 
27 41.4 41.9 42.7 44.0 45.4 46.8 48.1 48.9 49.4 
28 43.1 43.6 44.4 45.7 47.2 48.6 50.0 50.8 51.3 
29 44.6 45.1 45.9 47.3 48.8 50.4 51.7 52.6 53.1 
30 46.0 46.5 47.4 48.8 50.4 52.0 53.4 54.3 54.9 
31 47.3 47.9 48.8 50.3 51.9 53.6 55.1 56.0 56.5 
32 48.5 49.1 50.0 51.6 53.3 55.0 56.6 57.6 58.2 
33 49.6 50.2 51.2 52.8 54.6 56.4 58.1 59.1 59.7 
34 50.5 51.2 52.2 53.9 55.8 57.7 59.5 60.5 61.1 
35 51.3 52.0 53.1 54.9 56.9 58.9 60.7 61.8 62.5 
36 52.1 52.8 53.9 55.8 57.9 60.0 61.9 63.1 63.8 
37 52.6 53.4 54.6 56.6 58.8 61.0 63.0 64.3 65.0 
38 53.1 53.9 55.2 57.3 59.6 61.9 64.0 65.3 66.1 
39 53.4 54.2 55.6 57.8 60.3 62.7 64.9 66.3 67.1 
40 53.6 54.5 55.9 58.2 60.8 63.4 65.8 67.2 68.1 
41 53.6 54.5 56.1 58.5 61.2 64.0 66.4 67.9 68.9 
42 53.5 54.5 56.1 58.7 61.6 64.4 67.0 68.6 69.6 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 343 
Table A.7 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: ulna length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 19.9 20.3 20.9 21.9 22.9 24.0 25.0 25.6 26.0 
18 21.9 22.3 23.0 24.0 25.2 26.4 27.5 28.1 28.5 
19 23.9 24.3 25.0 26.2 27.4 28.7 29.8 30.5 31.0 
20 25.8 26.3 27.0 28.3 29.6 30.9 32.2 32.9 33.4 
21 27.7 28.2 29.0 30.3 31.7 33.1 34.4 35.2 35.7 
22 29.6 30.1 30.9 32.3 33.8 35.3 36.6 37.4 38.0 
23 31.4 32.0 32.8 34.2 35.8 37.3 38.8 39.6 40.2 
24 33.2 33.7 34.6 36.1 37.7 39.4 40.9 41.7 42.3 
25 34.9 35.5 36.4 38.0 39.7 41.3 42.9 43.8 44.4 
26 36.6 37.2 38.2 39.8 41.5 43.3 44.8 45.8 46.4 
27 38.2 38.8 39.8 41.5 43.3 45.1 46.8 47.8 48.4 
28 39.8 40.5 41.5 43.2 45.0 46.9 48.6 49.6 50.3 
29 41.4 42.0 43.1 44.8 46.7 48.7 50.4 51.5 52.1 
30 42.9 43.5 44.6 46.4 48.4 50.3 52.1 53.2 53.9 
31 44.3 45.0 46.1 48.0 50.0 52.0 53.8 54.9 55.6 
32 45.7 46.4 47.6 49.4 51.5 53.6 55.4 56.6 57.3 
33 47.1 47.8 49.0 50.9 53.0 55.1 57.0 58.1 58.8 
34 48.4 49.2 50.3 52.3 54.4 56.5 58.5 59.7 60.4 
35 49.7 50.5 51.7 53.6 55.8 57.9 59.9 61.1 61.9 
36 51.0 51.7 52.9 54.9 57.1 59.3 61.3 62.5 63.3 
37 52.2 52.9 54.1 56.2 58.4 60.6 62.6 63.8 64.6 
38 53.3 54.1 55.3 57.4 59.6 61.8 63.9 65.1 65.9 
39 54.4 55.2 56.4 58.5 60.8 63.0 65.1 66.3 67.1 
40 55.5 56.3 57.5 59.6 61.9 64.2 66.2 67.5 68.3 
41 56.5 57.3 58.5 60.6 62.9 65.2 67.3 68.6 69.4 
42 57.5 58.3 59.5 61.6 63.9 66.2 68.3 69.6 70.4 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

344 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.8 Nomograms (centiles) for the Italian population: radius length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 3rd 5th 10th 25th 50th 75th 90th 95th 97th 
17 17.2 17.5 18.0 18.9 19.8 20.7 21.5 22.0 22.3 
18 19.2 19.5 20.1 21.0 22.0 23.1 24.0 24.6 24.9 
19 21.1 21.4 22.1 23.1 24.3 25.4 26.4 27.1 27.5 
20 22.9 23.3 24.0 25.2 26.4 27.7 28.8 29.5 29.9 
21 24.7 25.1 25.9 27.1 28.5 29.8 31.1 31.8 32.3 
22 26.4 26.9 27.7 29.0 30.5 31.9 33.3 34.1 34.6 
23 28.1 28.6 29.4 30.9 32.4 34.0 35.4 36.2 36.8 
24 29.7 30.2 31.1 32.6 34.3 35.9 37.4 38.3 38.9 
25 31.2 31.8 32.8 34.3 36.1 37.8 39.4 40.3 40.9 
26 32.7 33.3 34.3 36.0 37.8 39.6 41.3 42.3 42.9 
27 34.1 34.8 35.8 37.6 39.4 41.3 43.1 44.1 44.8 
28 35.5 36.2 37.3 39.1 41.0 43.0 44.8 45.9 46.5 
29 36.8 37.5 38.7 40.5 42.5 44.6 46.4 47.5 48.2 
30 38.1 38.8 40.0 41.9 44.0 46.1 48.0 49.1 49.9 
31 39.3 40.0 41.2 43.2 45.3 47.5 49.5 50.6 51.4 
32 40.4 41.2 42.4 44.4 46.6 48.8 50.9 52.1 52.8 
33 41.5 42.3 43.6 45.6 47.9 50.1 52.2 53.4 54.2 
34 42.6 43.4 44.6 46.7 49.0 51.3 53.4 54.7 55.5 
35 43.5 44.3 45.6 47.8 50.1 52.5 54.6 55.9 56.7 
36 44.5 45.3 46.6 48.7 51.1 53.5 55.7 57.0 57.8 
37 45.3 46.1 47.5 49.7 52.1 54.5 56.7 58.0 58.8 
38 46.1 47.0 48.3 50.5 52.9 55.4 57.6 58.9 59.8 
39 46.9 47.7 49.1 51.3 53.7 56.2 58.4 59.8 60.6 
40 47.5 48.4 49.8 52.0 54.5 57.0 59.2 60.6 61.4 
41 48.2 49.0 50.4 52.7 55.1 57.6 59.9 61.3 62.1 
42 48.8 49.6 51.0 53.2 55.7 58.2 60.5 61.9 62.7 
a Paladini D, Rustico MA, Viora E, et al. Fetal size charts for the Italian population. Normative curves of head, abdomen and 
long bones. Prenat Diagn 2005; 25: 456–64. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 345 
Table A.9 HC/AC, HC/FL, and BPD/FL ratios (centiles) for the diagnosis of microcephalya 
HC/AC HC/FL BPD/FL 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
14 1.13 1.23 1.34 4.93 5.51 6.16 1.75 1.92 2.11 
15 1.12 1.22 1.33 4.73 5.29 5.92 1.66 1.82 2.00 
16 1.11 1.21 1.32 4.57 5.11 5.71 1.58 1.74 1.91 
17 1.10 1.20 1.31 4.43 4.95 5.54 1.52 1.67 1.83 
18 1.09 1.19 1.30 4.32 4.83 5.40 1.47 1.61 1.77 
19 1.08 1.18 1.29 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.42 1.56 1.71 
20 1.07 1.17 1.28 4.16 4.65 5.20 1.39 1.52 1.67 
21 1.06 1.17 1.27 4.11 4.59 5.13 1.36 1.49 1.64 
22 1.05 1.16 1.26 4.07 4.55 5.08 1.34 1.47 1.61 
23 1.04 1.15 1.25 4.04 4.52 5.05 1.32 1.45 1.59 
24 1.03 1.14 1.24 4.03 4.50 5.03 1.30 1.43 1.57 
25 1.02 1.13 1.23 4.02 4.50 5.03 1.29 1.42 1.56 
26 1.01 1.12 1.22 4.03 4.50 5.03 1.29 1.41 1.55 
27 1.00 1.11 1.21 4.04 4.51 5.04 1.28 1.41 1.54 
28 0.99 1.10 1.20 4.05 4.53 5.06 1.28 1.40 1.54 
29 0.98 1.09 1.19 4.07 4.55 5.09 1.28 1.40 1.54 
30 0.97 1.08 1.18 4.10 4.58 5.12 1.27 1.40 1.53 
31 0.96 1.07 1.17 4.12 4.61 5.15 1.27 1.40 1.53 
32 0.95 1.06 1.16 4.15 4.64 5.18 1.27 1.39 1.53 
33 0.94 1.05 1.16 4.17 4.67 5.22 1.27 1.39 1.52 
34 0.94 1.04 1.15 4.20 4.69 5.24 1.26 1.38 1.52 
35 0.93 1.03 1.14 4.21 4.71 5.27 1.25 1.37 1.51 
36 0.92 1.02 1.13 4.23 4.73 5.28 1.24 1.36 1.50 
37 0.91 1.01 1.12 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.23 1.35 1.48 
38 0.90 1.00 1.11 4.23 4.73 5.29 1.21 1.33 1.46 
39 0.89 0.99 1.10 4.22 4.71 5.27 1.19 1.30 1.43 
40 0.88 0.98 1.09 4.19 4.69 5.24 1.16 1.28 1.40 
HC, head circumference; AC, abdominal circumference; FL, femur length; BPD, biparietal diameter. 
a Modified from: Snijders RJM, Nicolaides KH. Fetal biometry at 14–40 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1994; 
4: 34–8. 
SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 

346 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.10 Nomograms (centiles): transverse 
cerebellar diameters (mm) for the diagnosis of 
cerebellar hypoplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 12 13 14 
15 13 14 16 
16 14 15 17 
17 15 17 18 
18 16 18 20 
19 17 19 21 
20 18 20 22 
21 20 22 24 
22 21 24 27 
23 22 24 27 
24 23 26 28 
25 25 27 30 
26 26 28 31 
27 27 30 33 
28 28 31 34 
29 30 33 36 
30 31 34 37 
31 32 35 39 
32 33 37 40 
33 35 38 42 
34 36 39 43 
35 37 41 45 
36 38 42 46 
37 39 43 47 
38 40 44 48 
39 41 45 49 
40 42 46 51 
a Modified from: Snijders RJ, Nicholaides KH. Fetal 
biometry at 14-40 weeks’ gestation. Ultrasound Obstet 
Gynecol 1994; 4: 34-48. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 347 
Table A.11 Nomograms (centiles) – cerebellar vermis: anteroposterior (AP) diameter, supero-inferior (SI) 
diameter, circumference, and area for the diagnosis of vermian hypoplasia, partial agenesisa 
Gestational AP diameter SI diameter Circumference Area 
age (weeks) (mm) (mm) (mm) (cm2) 
21–22 10.6 ± 1.4 11.1 ± 1.1 43.8 ± 3.3 0.9 ± 0.2 
23–24 12.9 ± 1.1 12.3 ± 1.4 47.5 ± 5.5 1.2 ± 0.2 
25–26 13.5 ± 2.1 13.6 ± 0.9 50.9 ± 4.4 1.4 ± 0.2 
27–28 16.3 ± 2.7 16.0 ± 1.6 58.9 ± 6.8 2.0 ± 0.5 
29–30 17.5 ± 2.2 17.7 ± 2.1 64.7 ± 6.5 2.3 ± 0.4 
31–32 19.0 ± 1.9 19.2 ± 1.1 70.7 ± 6.9 2.8 ± 0.4 
33–34 19.2 ± 1.9 21.2 ± 2.3 72.7 ± 8.3 3.0 ± 0.8 
35–36 21.4 ± 1.5 19.8 ± 1.0 77.6 ± 5.1 3.4 ± 0.3 
37–38 22.1 ± 3.8 23.0 ± 4.6 80.7 ± 9.9 3.9 ± 1.4 
39–40 25.7 ± 2.3 25.0 ± 2.6 86.7 ± 7.0 4.9 ± 0.7 
a Modified, from: Malinger G, Ginath S, Lerman-Sagie T, et al. The fetal cerebellar vermis: normal development as shown by 
transvaginal ultrasound. Prenat Diagn 2001; 21: 687–92. 
Table A.12 Nomograms (centiles) of bisocular (BOD), interocular (IOD), and ocular (OD) diameters (mm) for 
the diagnosis of hypertelorism, hypotelorism, and microphthalmiaa 
BOD IOD OD 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
11 5 13 20 — — — — — — 
12 8 15 23 4 9 13 1 3 6 
13 10 18 25 5 9 14 2 4 7 
14 13 20 28 5 10 14 3 5 8 
15 15 22 30 6 10 14 4 6 9 
16 17 25 32 6 10 15 5 7 9 
17 19 27 34 6 11 15 5 8 10 
18 22 29 37 7 11 16 6 9 11 
19 24 31 39 7 12 16 7 9 12 
20 26 33 41 8 12 17 8 10 13 
21 28 35 43 8 13 17 8 11 13 
22 30 37 44 9 13 18 9 12 14 
23 31 39 46 9 14 18 10 12 15 
24 33 41 48 10 14 19 10 13 15 
25 35 42 50 10 15 19 11 13 16 
26 36 44 51 11 15 20 12 14 16 
27 38 45 53 11 16 20 12 14 17 
28 39 47 54 12 16 21 13 15 17 
29 41 48 56 12 17 21 13 15 18 
30 42 50 57 13 17 22 14 16 18 
31 43 51 58 13 18 22 14 16 19 
32 45 52 60 14 18 23 14 17 19 
33 46 53 61 14 19 23 15 17 19 
34 47 54 62 15 19 24 15 17 20 
35 48 55 63 15 20 24 15 18 20 
36 49 56 64 16 20 25 16 18 20 
37 50 57 65 16 21 25 16 18 21 
38 50 58 65 17 21 26 16 18 21 
a Modified from: Romero R, Pilu G, Jeanty P, et al. Prenatal Diagnosis of CongenitaI Anomalies. Norwalk, CT: Appleton & 
Lange, 1988: 83. 

348 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.13 Nomograms (centiles) for external ear 
length (mm)a 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
15 7 8 10 
16 8 10 12 
17 9 11 13 
18 9 12 14 
19 11 13 16 
20 11 14 17 
21 12 15 18 
22 13 17 19 
23 14 18 22 
24 15 20 22 
25 16 21 24 
26 17 21 24 
27 19 22 28 
28 18 24 32 
29 19 25 28 
30 18 25 32 
31 21 27 31 
32 25 28 33 
33 21 29 33 
34 23 29 34 
35 23 31 35 
36 24 31 34 
37 27 32 36 
38 25 32 39 
39 26 33 37 
40 28 33 38 
a Modified from: Chitkara U, Lee L, EI-Sayed YV, et al. 
Ultrasonographic ear length measurement in normal 
second- and third trimester fetuses. Am J Obstet Gynecol 
2000; 183: 230–4. 
Table A.14 Nomograms (centiles) for nasal bone 
length (mm) for the diagnosis of nasal bone hypoplasia 
in Down syndromea 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 3.3 4.2 5.0 
16 3.1 5.2 7.3 
18 5.0 6.3 7.6 
20 5.7 7.6 9.5 
22 6.0 8.2 10.4 
24 6.8 9.4 12.0 
26 7.2 9.7 12.3 
28 7.8 10.7 13.6 
30 8.3 11.3 14.4 
32 8.0 11.6 15.2 
34 7.5 12.3 17.0 
a Modified from: Guis F, Ville Y, Vincent Y, et al. Ultrasound 
evaluation of the length of the fetal nasal bones throughout 
gestation. Ultrasound Obstet Gynecol 1995; 5: 304–7. 
Table A.15 Nomograms (centiles) for thoracic 
circumference (cm) for the diagnosis of thoracic 
hypoplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
16 6.4 9.1 11.9 
17 7.3 10.0 12.8 
18 8.2 11.0 13.7 
19 9.1 11.9 14.6 
20 10.0 12.8 15.5 
21 11.0 13.7 16.4 
22 11.9 14.6 17.3 
23 12.8 15.5 18.2 
24 13.7 16.4 19.1 
25 14.6 17.3 20.0 
26 15.5 18.2 21.0 
27 16.4 19.1 21.9 
28 17.3 20.0 22.8 
29 18.2 21.0 23.7 
30 19.1 21.9 24.6 
31 20.0 22.8 25.5 
32 20.9 23.7 26.4 
33 21.8 24.6 27.3 
34 22.8 25.5 28.2 
35 23.7 26.4 29.1 
36 24.6 27.3 30.0 
37 25.5 28.2 30.9 
38 26.4 29.1 31.9 
39 27.3 30.0 32.8 
40 28.2 30.9 33.7 
a Modified from: Chitkara U, Rosenberg J, Chervenak 
FA, et al. Prenatal sonographic assessment of the fetal 
thorax: normal values. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1987; 
156: 1069. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 349 
Table A.16 Nomograms (centiles) for the measurement 
of lung volume (cm3) by three-dimensional ultrasounda 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
14 0.3 3.9 11.6 
15 0.7 5.3 14.1 
16 1.2 6.8 16.9 
17 2.0 8.6 20.0 
18 2.9 10.6 23.3 
19 3.9 12.8 26.8 
20 5.1 15.2 30.7 
21 6.5 17.8 34.7 
22 8.1 20.7 39.0 
23 9.8 23.7 43.6 
24 11.7 26.4 48.4 
25 13.7 30.4 53.5 
26 16.0 34.0 58.9 
27 18.3 37.9 64.5 
28 20.9 42.0 70.3 
29 23.6 46.2 76.4 
30 26.5 50.7 82.7 
31 29.5 55.4 89.3 
32 32.8 60.3 96.2 
33 36.1 65.4 103.3 
34 39.7 70.7 110.7 
35 43.4 76.2 118.3 
36 47.3 82.0 126.2 
37 51.3 87.9 134.3 
38 55.5 94.0 142.7 
39 59.9 100.4 151.3 
40 64.4 107.0 160.2 
a Modified from: Lee A, Kratochwil A, Stumpflen I, et al. 
Fetal lung volume determination by three-dimensional ultrasonography. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1996; 175(3Pt 1): 588–92. 
Table A.17 Nomograms (centiles) for fetal stomach diameters: anteroposterior (AP), laterolateral (LL), and 
supero-inferior (SI)a 
AP diameter (mm) LL diameter (mm) SI diameter (mm) 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
13–15 3 4 5 4 6 8 6 9 12 
16–18 4 6 8 6 8 10 9 13 17 
19–21 6 8 10 7 9 11 11 16 21 
22–24 6 9 12 15 18 21 13 19 25 
25–27 5 10 15 14 19 24 13 23 33 
28–30 9 12 15 12 16 20 18 23 28 
31–33 11 14 17 12 16 20 19 28 37 
34–36 10 14 18 12 16 20 19 28 37 
37–39 12 16 20 16 20 24 23 32 41 
a Modified from: Goldstein I, Reece A, Yarkoni S, et al. Growth of the fetal stomach in normal pregnancies. Obstet Gynecol 
1987; 70: 641–4. 

350 ULTRASOUND OF CONGENITAL FETAL ANOMALIES 
Table A.18 Nomograms (centiles) for colon 
diameter (mm) for the diagnosis of bowel 
obstructiona 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
22 2 4 6 
24 3 5 7 
26 4 6 9 
28 4 7 10 
30 5 8 11 
32 6 9 12 
34 7 10 13 
36 8 12 16 
38 9 14 18 
40 10 16 20 
a Modified from: Harris RD, Nyberg DA, Mack LA, 
Weinberger E. Anorectal atresia: prenatal sonographic 
diagnosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 1987; 149: 395–400. 
Table A.19 Nomograms (centiles) for right liver 
lobe length (mm) for the diagnosis of 
hepatomegalya 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
13 10 13 16 
14 11 14 18 
15 13 16 19 
16 13 17 21 
17 14 19 23 
18 16 20 25 
19 18 22 28 
20 18 24 30 
21 20 26 32 
22 22 28 34 
23 23 29 36 
24 25 31 38 
25 26 33 41 
26 28 35 43 
27 29 37 45 
28 30 39 47 
29 32 40 50 
30 33 42 52 
31 34 43 53 
32 35 45 55 
33 36 46 56 
34 37 47 58 
35 38 48 60 
36 38 49 62 
37 39 50 63 
38 39 50 63 
39 40 51 64 
40 40 51 64 
a Modified from: Roberts AB, Mitchell JM, Pattison NS. 
Fetal liver length in normaI and isoimmunized pregnancies. 
Am J Obstet Gynecol 1989; 161: 42–6. 

NORMAL AND SPECIAL FETAL BIOMETRY 351 
Table A.20 Nomograms (centiles) for spleen 
length (mm) for the diagnosis of splenomegalya 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
18 7 14 21 
20 11 18 26 
22 15 22 29 
24 19 25 32 
26 20 27 34 
28 24 31 38 
30 27 34 41 
32 31 38 45 
34 35 43 50 
36 41 48 55 
38 47 54 62 
40 55 62 70 
a Modified from: Schmidt W, Yarkoni S, Jeanty P, et al. 
Sonographic measurement of the fetal spleen. Clinical 
implications. J Ultrasound Med 1985; 4: 667–9. 
Table A.21 Nomograms (centiles) for longitudinal 
diameter of the kidney (mm) for the diagnosis of 
renal hypoplasia/dysplasiaa 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 
20 16 21 29 
22 20 25 33 
24 24 29 36 
26 27 32 40 
28 30 35 42 
30 32 38 45 
32 34 40 47 
34 36 41 48 
36 37 42 50 
38 38 43 50 
a Modified from: Gloor JM, Breckle RJ, Gehrking WC, et 
al. Fetal renal growth evaluated by prenatal ultrasound 
examination. Mayo Clin Proc 1997; 72: 124–9. 
Table A.22 Nomograms (centiles) for kidney volume (cm3), calculated by three-dimensional ultrasound, for the 
diagnosis of renal hypoplasia/dysplasiaa 
Right Left 
Gestational 
age (weeks) 5th 50th 95th 5th 50th 95th 
20 0.3 1.5 2.7 0.6 1.8 3.0 
21 0.8 2.2 3.6 1.2 2.6 4.0 
22 1.4 3.0 4.6 1.7 3.3 4.9 
23 1.9 3.7 5.5 2.3 4.1 5.9 
24 2.4 4.5 6.5 2.8 4.8 6.9 
25 3.0 5.2 7.4 3.4 5.6 7.8 
26 3.5 5.9 8.4 4.0 6.5 9.0 
27 4.0 6.7 9.3 4.5 7.1 9.8 
28 4.5 7.4 10.3 5.0 7.9 10.8 
29 5.1 8.2 11.2 5.6 8.7 11.7 
30 5.6 8.9 12.2 6.1 9.4 12.7 
31 6.1 9.6 13.1 6.7 10.2 13.7 
32 6.7 10.4 14.1 7.2 10.9 14.6 
33 7.2 11.1 15.0 7.8 11.7 15.6 
34 7.7 11.9 16.0 8.3 12.5 16.6 
35 8.3 12.6 16.9 8.9 13.2 17.6 
36 8.8 13.3 17.9 9.4 14.0 18.5 
37 9.3 14.1 18.9 10.0 14.7 19.5 
38 9.8 14.8 19.8 10.5 15.5 20.5 
39 10.4 15.6 20.7 11.1 16.3 21.4 
40 10.9 16.3 21.7 11.8 17.2 21.7 
a Modified from: Yu C, Chang F, Ko H, Chen H. Fetal renal volume in normal gestation: a three-dimensional ultrasound 
study. Ultrasound Med Biol 2000; 26: 1253–6. 

3rd trimester examination 3–5 
abdominal acoustic windows, midtrimester anomaly scan 5 
abdominal anatomy 
12–14 wks examination 3 
cranial/abdominal views 207–8 
abdominal circumference, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 339 
abdominal cystic masses, differential diagnosis 212 
achondrogenesis 203, 271, 272, 275, 276, 283–4 
diagnosis/prognosis 283–4 
achondroplasia 271, 284–6 
diagnosis/prognosis 284–6 
acoustic window impairment, midtrimester anomaly scan, 
medicolegal implications 4–5 
acrania 52–3, 53 
acrocephalosyndactyly (Apert syndrome) 82, 270, 312–14 
acrocephaly 270 
acroturricephaly 14 
adenomatoid cystic malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
age for diagnosis of common anomalies 4 
agenesis of corpus callosum 26–31 
associated syndromes 30 
association with other malformations 28 
chromosomal anomalies 28–30 
definition 26 
complete 12 
diagnosis 11–12, 13, 26–8, 27, 28, 29 
differential diagnosis 28 
direct/indirect signs 27, 28 
interhemispheric cysts 29 
Edwards syndrome 305 
etiology and pathogenesis 26 
magnetic resonance image 30 
non-chromosomal syndromes 30 
obstetric management 30 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 30–1 
agyria (lissencephaly) 43–5, 44–5 
Aicardi syndrome 34 
algorithms 
bladder non-visualization 235 
calicopelvic dilatation 234 
differential diagnosis of CHD 122–3 
hyperechic kidneys 234 
alkaline phosphatase, hypophosphatasia 
271, 272, 291–2 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
anatomy and gestational age 1–10, 1 
3D ultrasound 5–8 
12–14 wks examination 1–3 
midtrimester anomaly scan 3–5 
anencephaly 52–3, 53, 52–3, 53 
12–14 wks examination 2 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
anophthalmia 78–80, 79 
anorectal anomalies 220–1 
aortic arch, longitudinal view 126, 126 
aortic arch anomalies 120–1, 120, 157–61 
coarctation 120–1, 120, 156–7 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
double arch 159 
interrupted arch 157–9 
long axis of left ventricle 121, 124 
right arch 159 
vascular ring 159–61 
aortic stenosis 154–5 
critical 121 
Apert syndrome 82, 270, 312–14 
aplasia radii 296–7, 333 
arachnoid cyst 51, 52 
retrocerebellar 37, 37 
arteries, transposition of great arteries 171–3 
arthrogryposis see joint contractures 
artifacts, lips and orbits 73 
asphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome) 
203, 271, 272, 276, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 286–7 
atrioventricular septal defect, Down 
syndrome 302 
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD: 
Potter type III) 246–8 
diagnosis 247, 247 
differential diagnosis 241, 247, 247 
non-chromosomal anomalies risk 241, 247 
autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD: 
Potter type I) 242–4 
association with other malformations 243, 243 
diagnosis 242–4, 243 
differential diagnosis 241, 242, 243 
non-chromosomal syndrome risk 241, 243–4 
Index 
353 
Index Page numbers in italics refer to figures and tables 

Bardet–Biedl syndrome 247 
Beckwith–Wiedemann syndrome 191, 222, 227, 247, 
260–1, 315–16 
etiology/diagnosis 315–16 
bilateral myocardial hypertrophy, 4-chamber 
view 120 
biometry see fetal biometry 
biparietal diameter, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 337 
bladder 
non-visualization 235 
posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
see also urinary tract 
bladder dilatation (megacystis) 2, 3, 254–6 
diagnosis 253, 254–6, 254–5 
differential diagnosis 256, 256 
megacystic microcolon intestinal hyperperistalsis (MMIH) 
syndrome 256 
prognosis 256–7 
prune belly syndrome 254, 255 
bladder/cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
diagnosis 258–9, 258–9 
Blake’s pouch cyst 34, 34 
bone defects, nomenclature 270–1 
bowel, diameter, fetal biometry 350 
brachio-otorenal syndrome 245 
brachycephaly 270 
brain anatomy views 11–18 
axial transcerebellar view 12–16, 15, 16 
ventricular anomalies evident 15, 16 
axial transthalamic view 12, 13 
ventricular anomalies evident 14 
axial transventricular view 11–12, 12 
ventricular anomalies evident 13 
midcoronal view 18, 18 
midsagittal view 16–17 
multiplanar analysis 17 
right and left parasagittal views 18 
three-dimensional US navigation 16 
timing and scanning planes 11–18 
brain insult, destructive lesions 47–51 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
intracranial hemorrhage 49–51, 51 
porencephaly 48–9, 49 
brain space-occupying lesions 51–2, 52 
aneurysm of vein of Galen 5, 5, 6, 13, 51, 201 
arachnoid cysts 51 
cerebral tumors 51 
calvaria, hypomineralization 273, 274 
camptomelic dysplasia 252, 276, 279 
diagnosis/prognosis 287–8 
cardiac, see also heart anomalies/CHD 
cardiac tumors 177–9 
cardiomegaly 187, 201–2 
atrioventricular valve insufficiency 187 
cardiomyopathies 179–81 
cardiothoracic ratio, cardiomegaly 187, 201–3 
Carpenter syndrome 313 
cat-eye syndrome 316–17 
cataract 79, 80–1, 81 
caudal regression syndrome 221, 238, 240, 333 
see also VA(C)TER(L) association 
cavo-atrial junction 
3-vessel view 120, 120 
absence of inferior vena cava 125, 126 
scanning planes 125, 125 
central and peripheral nervous system anomalies 11–61 
cephalocele 54–6, 54 
cerebellar malformations 31–40 
cystic posterior fossa 31–4 
Dandy–Walker malformation 2, 14, 15, 32–4 
Dandy–Walker variant 19, 35–6 
hypoplasia 
fetal biometry 346 
see also Neu–Laxova syndrome 
megacisterna magna 35, 35 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
vermis 14–15, 15–17 
cerebral diameter 272 
cerebral tumors 51, 51 
cerebral ventriculomegaly 18–22 
association with other malformations 21 
definition 18 
diagnosis 19–21 
differential diagnosis 21 
etiology and pathogenesis 18–19 
associated with cerebral destruction 19–20 
Chiari II malformation 19, 39 
chromosomal anomalies 21 
CNS malformations 19 
cytomegalovirus infection 19, 20 
isolated ventriculomegaly 20, 20 
non-chromosomal syndromes 21 
severe ventriculomegaly 20–1, 20 
exclusion of diagnosis 11 
hydrocephalus classification 21 
obstetric/postnatal management 22 
prognosis 22 
cerebro-oculofacioskeletal syndrome 79, 81, 238, 279, 
319, 321 
cerebrorenodigital syndrome 245, 248 
CHAOS (congenital high airway obstruction syndrome, 
laryngeal atresia) 97–8, 185–6 
Chiari II malformation, diagnosis 19, 19, 39 
chondrodysplasia punctata 81 
chondroectodermal dysplasia 141, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 288–90 
choroid plexus 12 
chromosomal syndromes 301–35 
cisterna magna 
megacisterna magna 15 
views 12, 15 
cleft lip/palate 73, 75–7, 76, 87–92, 88–92 
artifacts of lips 73 
associated syndromes 91 
diagnosis 92 
Goldenhar syndrome 323–4, 21, 79, 91, 96, 323–4 
median facial cleft syndrome 82 
cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
354 INDEX 

clubfoot 271, 278, 298–9 
differential diagnosis 279 
colon, diameter, fetal biometry 350 
colpocephaly see agenesis of corpus callosum 
congenital heart disease 131–81 
see also heart anomalies 
conotruncal anomaly syndrome 311 
contractures 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 202, 203, 
209, 211 
see also joint contractures 
corpus callosum see agenesis of corpus callosum 
cranial sutures 100–1, 100–1 
3D ultrasound 277 
related abnormalities 76 
cranial synostoses 313 
craniofacial abnormalities and 3D ultrasound 74–8 
cranial sutures and related abnormalities 76 
ear, surface rendering 75–6, 78 
fetal face, surface rendering 76–8 
lips and palate 74–5 
see also face and neck 
craniofacial anomalies by scanning view 67–73 
artifacts, lips and orbits 73 
assessment of splanchnocranium 65–6 
base of orbits/upper maxilla 68, 68 
craniofacial profile 69–70, 71, 72 
ear 70, 72 
face (coronal) 64, 66, 70, 72 
lips (oblique) 70, 73 
lower maxilla/upper alveolar ridge 68, 68 
mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone 68–9, 69 
orbits (lateral approach) 65, 67, 67 
orbits (ventral approach) 67–8, 67 
palate (coronal) 70, 72 
palate (oblique) 70, 73 
summary of most important 71 
thyroid 69, 70 
tongue/pharynx 68, 69 
craniofacial anomalies (major) 78–100 
anophthalmia/microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
cataract 79, 80–1, 81 
cleft lip/palate 73, 75–7, 76, 87–92, 88–92 
congenital high-airway obstruction syndrome 97–8, 98 
cranial sutures 100–1, 100–1 
external ear 72, 78, 95–7, 96–7 
hypertelorism 81–2, 82 
hypotelorism 82–3, 83 
micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
nose 84–7 
other tumours of neck 99–100, 99 
craniopharyngioma 52, 52 
cranium, scanning views 268–9 
Crouzon syndrome 21, 313 
cystic adenomatoid malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
cystic brain malformations see cystic posterior fossa 
cystic hygroma 103–6, 104–6 
12–14 wks examination 2–3, 2 
cystic masses, abdominal, differential diagnosis 212 
cystic posterior fossa 31–4 
anatomic features compared 32 
Dandy–Walker malformation 19, 32–4 
other cystic malformations 34–7 
Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
megacisterna magna 35, 35 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
see also posterior cranial fossa 
cytomegalovirus infection 
cerebral ventriculomegaly 19, 20 
hepatomegaly 223 
Dandy–Walker malformation 
association with other malformations 33 
chromosomal abnormalities 33 
definition 32–3 
diagnosis 14, 15, 19, 33, 33 
differential diagnosis 33 
false diagnosis 2 
etiology and pathogenesis 33 
non-chromosomal syndromes 34 
obstetric management 34 
postnatal treatment 34 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 34 
Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
cystic posterior fossa 35–6 
diagnosis 19, 32, 36, 36 
prognosis 36 
Denis–Drash syndrome 260, 263 
diaphragmatic hernia (CDH) 185–6, 187–92 
differential diagnosis 190 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
diastrophic dysplasia 271, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 290 
DiGeorge syndrome 310–12 
double-inlet single ventricle, 4-chamber view 119, 119 
Down syndrome 301–4 
differential diagnosis 302 
duodenal atresia 215–16 
Down syndrome 302 
ear see external ear 
Ebstein’s anomaly 128, 145–6 
ectrodactyly, syndromic indicators 279–80, 282 
ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia syndrome 91, 280 
Edwards syndrome 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
Elejade syndrome 247 
Ellis–van Creveld syndrome (chondroectodermal dysplasia) 
141, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 288–90 
esophageal atresia 213–14 
Down syndrome 302 
EUROCAT definitions, limb reduction defects 296 
exencephaly/anencephaly 52–3, 53 
EXIT procedure, in CHAOS 98 
exomphalos, Down syndrome 302 
external ear 72, 78, 95–7, 96–7 
anomalies 
cat-eye syndrome 317 
Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
INDEX 355 

anomalies by scanning view 70, 72 
normal (17-42 wks) fetal biometry 348 
surface rendering 75–6, 78 
eyes, anophthalmia/microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
face and neck, see also craniofacial anomalies 
face and neck, normal anatomy 63–6 
surface rendering 76–8 
timing of examination 63, 63–4 
US approach and scanning planes (views) 63–6 
axial views 64, 65, 67–70 
coronal views 64, 66, 70, 72 
oblique views 64, 73 
sagittal views 64, 72 
falx, holoprosencephaly 2 
feet 
anomalies 298–9 
clubfoot 271, 278–9, 298–9 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
femoral hypoplasia–unusual facies syndrome 279, 297, 
317–18 
femur length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 340 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 94, 202, 203, 
209, 211, 276, 279, 318–22 
definition 319 
fetal biometry 337–51 
cerebellar hypoplasia 346 
diameters 
bowel 350 
stomach 349 
hyper/hypotelorism 347 
liver, right lobe length 350 
lung volume 349 
microcephaly 345 
microphthalmia 347 
nasal bone hypoplasia 348 
normal (17-42 wks) 
abdominal circumference 339 
biparietal diameter 337 
external ear 348 
femur length 340 
head circumference 338 
humerus length 342 
radius length 344 
thoracic circumference 348 
tibia length 341 
ulna length 343 
renal hypoplasia 351 
splenomegaly 351 
vermian hypoplasia 347 
fetomaternal alloimmune thrombocytopenia 
(FMAIT) 50 
Fontan operation 147 
fontanelles 100–1, 100–1 
fractures, skeletal dysplasias 272 
Fraser syndrome 80, 91, 96, 238, 322–3 
frontonasal dysplasia 82, 91 
Fryns syndrome 91, 191 
fusion anomalies 239–40 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
gastric bubble 
double bubble 213, 215 
non-visualization 208–11, 213, 213 
flow chart 208–11, 211 
gastrointestinal tract 
anatomy, cranial/abdominal views 207–8 
anomalies 208–29 
anorectal anomalies 220–1 
by scanning view 208–12 
duodenal atresia 215–16 
esophageal atresia 213–14 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 202, 203, 
209, 211 
gastroschisis 210, 227–9 
hepatomegaly/splenomegaly 222–4 
meconium ileus 218–20 
non-visualization of gastric bubble 208–11, 211, 213 
omphalocele 209, 224–7 
small-bowel atresia 216–18 
tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
gastroschisis 210, 227–9 
genitalia, ambiguous 261–4, 263 
gestational age 1–10, 1 
midtrimester anomaly scan 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
age for diagnosis 4 
evolving (late onset) malformations 5, 5, 6 
three-dimensional US 5–8 
Glenn operation 147 
Goldenhar syndrome 21, 79, 91, 96, 323–4 
Gorlin syndrome 21 
Grote syndrome 25 
hands see limbs 
head, biparietal diameter, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 337 
head circumference, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 338 
heart 3D/4D fetal echocardiography–cardio-STIC 126–30 
4D echocardiography in diagnosis 127–8 
acquisition 126 
B-flow imaging 130 
glassbody mode 127, 128, 137 
inversion mode 127, 129 
modes of analysis 126–7, 127–30 
spatiotemporal image correlation (STIC) 126 
surface mode 127, 129 
tomographic US imaging (TUI) 8, 9, 17, 127 
uses 128–30 
heart anatomy investigation sequence 113–14 
atrioventricular connections 113–14 
atrioventricular valves 114 
situs 113 
timing of examination 114 
ventriculo-arterial connections 114 
ventriculo-arterial valves 114 
heart anomalies/CHD 131–81 
anomalous pulmonary venous connection 119, 119, 
131–2, 131 
aortic arch anomalies 120–1, 120, 124, 157–61 
aortic coarctation 5, 5, 6, 120–1, 120, 156–7 
aortic stenosis 121, 154–5 
356 INDEX 

atrial anomalies 117–18 
atrial septal defect 132–5 
atrial septal defect-type II 132–5, 133–4 
atrioventricular discordance 113 
atrioventricular septal defect 117–18, 140–3 
bilateral myocardial hypertrophy 120, 179–81 
cardiac tumors 177–9 
cardiomyopathies 179–81 
cavo-atrial junction 120, 120 
absence of inferior vena cava 125, 126 
persistence of left superior vena cava 120, 120 
common arterial trunk 121, 167–9 
corrected transposition of great arteries 173–4 
crossover anomalies 121, 122, 124 
differential diagnosis, algorithms 122, 123 
double atrioventricular inlet 113–14 
double ventriculoarterial outlet 114 
double-inlet single ventricle 119, 119 
double-outlet right ventricle 165–7 
Ebstein’s anomaly 128, 145–6 
heterotaxy syndromes 175–7 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 119, 152–4 
impaired contractility, unilateral and bilateral 119–20 
malalignment VSD 139–40 
pulmonary artery anomalies 121 
pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum 
(PAIVS) 149–52 
pulmonary atresia with ventricular septal defect 
(PAVSD) 169–71 
pulmonary stenosis 148–9 
pulmonary trunk anomalies 125, 125 
pulmonary valve, absence 163–4 
septal anomalies 118, 118, 121, 123, 124 
single atrioventricular inlet 114, 118–19, 119 
single ventriculoarterial outlet 114 
tetralogy of Fallot 161–3 
thymus anomalies 121, 121 
transposition of great arteries 171–3 
tricuspid atresia 146–8 
tricuspid dysplasia 143–4 
ventricular disproportion 119, 119 
ventricular septal defect 117–18, 123, 135–40 
ventriculoarterial discordance 114 
heart scanning planes 114–26 
3-vessel view 
normal 3-vessel view 120, 120 
related malformations 120–1 
4-chamber view 
normal 4-chamber view 115–17, 115–19 
related malformations 115–20 
cavo-atrial junction 
normal view 125, 125 
related malformations 125–6 
long axis of left ventricle 
normal view 121, 122, 124 
related malformations 121–4 
long/short axis of right ventricle 
normal 124, 124, 125 
related malformations 124–5 
longitudinal view of aortic arch 126, 126 
hemifacial microsomia, Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
hemimegalencephaly 42, 42 
hemispondylus 269 
hemorrhage 
intracranial 49–51, 51 
intraventricular 13 
Hensen’s node, neoplasms of 59 
hepatitis A 223 
hepatomegaly 222–4 
fetal biometry 350 
hermaphroditism 261–4 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
mixed gonadal dysgenesis 262 
pseudohermaphroditism 262 
high definition (HD) flow 8, 9 
high-airway obstruction syndrome 97–8, 98 
Hirschsprung’s disease 217 
holoprosencephaly 2, 22–6 
alobar 11, 23–5, 24 
associated anomalies 25, 82–6 
chromosomal anomalies 25 
definition/classification 22–3, 23 
diagnosis 23–5 
differential diagnosis 24–5 
etiology and pathogenesis 23, 25 
non-chromosomal syndromes 25–6 
obstetric management 26 
postnatal therapy 26 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 26 
syndromes 25–6 
holoprosencephaly–fetal akinesia syndrome 25 
Holt–Oram syndrome 297, 324–5 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
humerus length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 342 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
hydro-ureteronephrosis 252–3, 256–7 
diagnosis 252–3, 252–3 
differential diagnosis 253, 253 
prognosis 256–7 
hydrocephalus 18–22 
biventricular/triventricular 13 
classification 21 
associated with bony dysplasia 21 
functionally impaired CSF resorption 21 
hypersecretion 21 
etiology and pathogenesis 18–19 
hydronephrosis 249–52 
definition 250, 250 
diagnosis 251, 251 
prognosis 256–7 
hydrops fetalis 
non-immune 107–11, 108–10 
monosomy-X (Turner syndrome) 107–8, 308 
virus infections 109 
skeletal dysplasias 272, 276 
differential diagnosis 276 
hydrothorax 185, 199–200 
unilateral/bilateral 200 
hyper/hypotelorism 81–3, 82–3 
fetal biometry 347 
INDEX 357 

hypomineralization 14 
skeletal dysplasias 272 
differential diagnosis 275 
hypophosphatasia 271, 272 
diagnosis/prognosis 291–2 
hypoplastic left heart syndrome 119, 152–4 
intracranial hemorrhage 49–51, 51 
intraventricular hemorrhage 13 
Jaw Index, micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
jejunal atresia, evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
Jeune syndrome 203, 271, 272, 276, 280 
diagnosis/prognosis 286–7 
joint contractures 269 
differential diagnosis 279–82 
fetal akinesia deformation sequence (FADS) 94, 202, 203, 
209, 211, 276, 279, 318–22 
Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
Joubert syndrome 37–8, 38 
jugular lymphatic obstructive sequence (JLOS) 103, 104 
Kartagener syndrome 21 
kidney 
abnormal echogenicity and size 233, 234 
bright kidneys 241 
absent/agenesis 3, 233, 236–8 
ectopia, pelvic kidney 238–9 
fetal biometry, (renal hypo/dysplasia) 351 
horseshoe kidney 239–40 
normal anatomy 231–2, 232 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
autosomal dominant (ADPKD: Potter type III) 246–8 
autosomal recessive (ARPKD: Potter type I) 242–4 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter 
type II) 244–6 
obstructive cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) 248–9 
postnatal therapy 256–7 
renal hypo/dysplasia biometry 351 
tumors 260, 261 
see also renal-; urinary tract anomalies 
Klinefelter syndrome 262 
Klippel–Trenaunay–Weber syndrome 325–7 
laryngeal atresia 185–6 
Fraser syndrome 322–3 
late-onset malformations, diagnosis 5 
limb contractures see joint contractures 
limb–body wall complex 228–9 
limbs 
3D ultrasound 267 
anomalies 298–9 
clubfoot 271, 278–9, 298–9 
ectrodactyly–ectodermal dysplasia syndrome 91, 280 
polydactyly 
differential diagnosis 280, 281 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 327–9 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 
276, 293–4 
syndromic indicators 279–80, 281 
reduction defects 
EUROCAT definitions 296 
ultrasound diagnosis 296–9 
see also skeletal dysplasias 
scanning views 267 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
terminal transvse reduction defects 297–8 
lips 
artifacts 
by scanning view 73 
scanning view 73 
lips (oblique) 70, 73 
lips and palate 74–5 
multiplanar imaging 74, 74, 75 
surface rendering 74–5, 75, 76, 77 
lissencephaly 43–5, 44–5 
liver 
hepatomegaly 222–4 
right lobe length, fetal biometry 350 
lung volume, fetal biometry 349 
macrocrania 14 
magnetic resonance imaging, HASTE, agenesis of corpus callosum 
30 
mandible/lower alveolar ridge/mandibular bone 68–9, 69 
maternal obesity, acoustic window impairment 4 
maxilla/upper alveolar ridge 68, 68 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 21, 26, 34, 40, 80, 247, 
280, 327–9 
meconium ileus 218–20 
megacolon (Hirschsprung’s disease) 217 
megacystis 2, 3 
microcephaly 40–1 
associated anomalies 40 
chromosomal anomalies 40 
definition 40 
diagnosis 40, 41 
differential diagnosis 40 
etiology and pathogenesis 40 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
fetal biometry 345 
in Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
non-chromosomal syndromes 40–1 
obstetric management 41 
postnatal treatment 41 
prognosis, survival and quality of life 41 
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome 331–2 
views 12, 14 
microdeletion 22q11.2 (DiGeorge syndrome) 310–12 
micrognathia 93–5, 93–4 
differential diagnosis 276 
Jaw Index 93–5, 93–4 
in Neu–Laxova syndrome 330–1 
skeletal dysplasias 272 
micromelia 271, 273 
differential diagnosis 273 
microphthalmia 78–80, 79 
fetal biometry 347 
in Fraser syndrome 322–3 
in Goldenhar syndrome 323–4 
358 INDEX 

midtrimester anomaly scan 3–5 
abdominal acoustic windows 5 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
age for diagnosis of common anomalies 4 
evolving (late onset) malformations 5, 5, 6 
impaired acoustic window, fetal/maternal causes 4–5 
pretest information 4 
Miller–Dieker syndrome 21, 41, 45 
mineralization defects, hypophosphatasia 203 
molar tooth sign, Joubert syndrome 38 
monosomy-X (Turner syndrome) 308–9 
non-immune hydrops fetalis 107–8, 308 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter type II) 244–6 
diagnosis 244–5, 245 
multiplanar imaging, 3D ultrasound 6, 7 
multiple pterygium syndrome 104, 279, 319, 321, 329–30 
musculoskeletal system 267–9 
2D ultrasound 267–9 
timing of examination 267 
myeloceles 56 
myelomeningoceles 56 
Nager syndrome 96, 280, 297 
nasal bone hypoplasia 
Down syndrome 302 
fetal biometry 348 
neck, see also face and neck 
neck tumors 99–100 
neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (NAITP) 50 
nephroblastoma 261 
nervous system anomalies 11–61 
Neu–Laxova syndrome 21, 34, 45, 81, 82, 279, 319, 
321, 330–1 
neural tube defects 52–60, 279 
acrania/exencephaly/anencephaly 52–3, 53 
cephalocele 54–6, 54 
Edwards syndrome 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
hydranencephaly 47–8, 48 
sacrococcygeal teratoma 58–60, 59 
spina bifida 15, 56–8, 57 
spinal dysraphism 56 
neuroblast proliferation 39–40 
neuronal proliferation and migration anomalies 39–47 
hemimegalencephaly 42, 42 
lissencephaly 43–5, 44–5 
microcephaly 40–1 
schizencephaly 46–7, 46 
nomograms see fetal biometry 
non-immune hydrops fetalis 107–11, 108–10 
Noonan syndrome 104, 180 
Noonan-like phenotype 3 
nose 84–7 
abnormal nose 86–7 
nasal bone hypoplasia 
Down syndrome 302 
fetal biometry 348 
proboscis, arhinia, single nostril 71, 84–5, 84–6 
nuchal translucency 3, 105 
differential diagnosis 106 
Down syndrome 302 
obstructive cystic dysplasia (Potter type IV) 248–9 
diagnosis 248, 249 
differential diagnosis 241, 248 
oculo-auriculo-vertebral syndrome (Goldenhar syndrome ) 21, 
79, 91, 96, 323–4 
oligohydramnios 
acoustic window impairment 4–5 
investigations 257 
PROM causation 208 
omphalocele 209, 224–7, 258, 259 
12–14 wks examination 2 
Opitz syndrome 263 
orbits 
artifacts 
by scanning view 73 
scanning view 73 
lateral approach 65, 67, 67 
ventral approach 67–8, 67 
orbits/upper maxilla, by scanning view 68, 68 
orocraniodigital syndrome 240 
osteogenesis imperfecta 271, 275, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 292–3 
otocephaly 238, 240 
ovarian cyst 264–5 
diagnosis 264–5, 265 
palate (coronal) 70, 72 
Pallister–Killian syndrome 191 
Patau syndrome 280, 306–7 
pelvic kidney ectopia 238–9 
Pena–Shokeir syndrome 203, 319 
pentalogy of Cantrell 227 
peripheral (and central) nervous system anomalies 11–61 
Perlman syndrome 247, 315–16 
persistent Blake’s pouch 34, 34 
Pfeiffer syndrome 313 
plagiocephaly 270 
pleural effusion see hydrothorax 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
autosomal dominant (ADPKD: Potter type III) 246–8 
autosomal recessive (ARPKD: Potter type I) 242–4 
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK: Potter 
type II) 244–6 
see also kidney 
polydactyly 
differential diagnosis 280, 281 
Meckel–Gruber syndrome 327–9 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 
276, 293–4 
syndromic indicators 279–80, 281 
polyhydramnios, acoustic window impairment 4–5 
porencephaly 48–9, 49 
posterior cranial fossa 
cystic malformations 31–40 
see also cystic posterior fossa 
non-cystic malformations 37–9 
Chiari II malformation 19, 19, 39, 39 
Joubert syndrome 37–8, 38 
rhombencephalosynapsis 38, 38 
sagittal scans 16 
INDEX 359 

posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
pouch sign, tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
prune belly syndrome 254, 255 
pulmonary artery anomalies 121 
pulmonary atresia 
with intact ventricular septum (PAIVS) 149–52 
lung volume, fetal biometry 349 
with ventricular septal defect (PAVSD) 169–71 
pulmonary sequestration 195–9 
pulmonary stenosis 148–9 
pulmonary trunk anomalies 125, 125 
long/short axis of right ventricle 125, 125 
pulmonary valve, absence 163–4 
pulmonary venous connection, (total) anomalous 119, 119, 
131–2, 131 
radii 
aplasia 296–7, 333 
normal length (17-42 wks gestation) 344 
renal agenesis 3, 236–8 
artifacts 236, 237 
definition 236 
diagnosis 236–7, 236–7 
differential diagnosis 237–8 
etiology and pathogenesis 236 
Fraser syndrome 322–3 
renal ectopia 238–9, 239 
pelvic kidney 238–9, 239 
renal hypoplasia, fetal biometry 351 
renal tumors 260–1 
retrocerebellar arachnoid cyst 37, 37 
rhizomelia 271 
rhombencephalosynapsis 38, 38 
ribs, 3D ultrasound 277–8 
Roberts syndrome 280, 297, 325 
Robinow syndrome 263 
rockerbottom foot 299 
Rubinstein–Taybi syndrome 331–2 
sacrococcygeal teratoma 58–60, 59 
scaphocephaly 14, 270 
Schinzel–Giedion syndrome 252 
schizencephaly 46–7, 46 
Schprintzen syndrome 25, 311 
Seckel syndrome 41 
short rib–polydactyly syndrome 142, 203, 271, 272, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 293–4 
sirenomelia see VA(C)TER(L) association 
skeletal dysplasias 267–99 
3D ultrasound 277–8 
maximum mode rendering 277–8 
VCI-C mode 277–8 
differential diagnosis 271–6 
fractures 272 
hydrops 272 
hypomineralization 272, 14 
differential diagnosis 275 
major 283–99 
micromelia 271, 273 
and NIHF 108 
thoracic hypoplasia 187, 202–3, 271–2 
see also micrognathia 
skull defects, nomenclature 270–1 
small-bowel atresia 216–18 
Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome 41, 263 
spina bifida 56–8, 57 
axial transcerebellar view 15 
spine 
3D ultrasound 277–8 
dysraphism 56 
scanning views 267–8 
splenomegaly 222–4 
fetal biometry 351 
split hand–split foot syndrome 280 
Steinfield syndrome 25 
stomach, diameters, fetal biometry 349 
Takao (conotruncal anomaly) syndrome 311 
talipes (clubfoot) 271, 278, 298–9 
differential diagnosis 279 
talus (rockerbottom foot) 299 
TAR syndrome 297 
teratomas, neck 99–100 
terminal transvse reduction defects 297–8 
tetralogy of Fallot 161–3 
thanatophoric dysplasias 203, 270–2, 276 
diagnosis/prognosis 294–6 
thoracic anatomy 183–5 
normal fetal biometry 348 
timing and approach 
axial 4-chamber view 183 
axial mediastinal view 184 
right parasagittal view 184–5 
thoracic anomalies 183–205 
absent pulmonary valve syndrome 186–7 
adenomatoid cystic malformation of lung 185, 193–5 
diagnosis, differential diagnosis 185–7 
diaphragmatic hernia 185–6, 187–92 
dysplasia, asphyxiating (Jeune syndrome) 203, 271, 272, 
276, 280, 286–7 
hydrothorax 185–6, 199–201 
hypoplasia 187, 202–3, 271–2 
differential diagnosis 272, 274 
fetal biometry 348 
increased cardiothoracic ratio 202–3 
laryngeal atresia 185 
pulmonary sequestration 185–6, 195–9 
thymus hypoplasia/aplasia 203–4 
three-dimensional ultrasound 5–8 
B-flow 5–8 
inversion mode 8, 8 
multiplanar imaging 6, 7 
surface and maximum modes 6–7, 7 
volume acquisition procedure 6 
volume contrast imaging 7, 8 
volume quality 6, 7 
thymus anomalies 121, 121 
hypoplasia/aplasia 203–4 
thyroid, scanning view 69, 70 
tibia length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 341 
360 INDEX 

tomographic US imaging (TUI) 8, 9, 17, 127 
tongue/pharynx, by scanning view 68, 69 
Toriello–Carey syndrome 180 
total-body US 267 
tracheoesophageal fistula 213–14 
pouch sign 213–14 
transposition of great arteries 171–3 
corrected 173–4 
Treacher Collins syndrome 96 
tricuspid atresia 146–8 
tricuspid dysplasia 143–4 
trigonocephaly 270 
triploidy 309–10 
trisomy-13 (Patau syndrome) 280, 306–7 
trisomy-18 (Edwards syndrome) 279, 280, 297, 304–6 
trisomy-21 (Down syndrome) 301–4 
trunk and abdomen, 12–14 wks examination 3 
tuberous sclerosis 178, 248 
tumors 
brain 13, 51 
cardiac 177–9 
neck 99–100 
Turner syndrome 262, 308–9 
turricephaly 270, 312 
ulna length, normal (17-42 wks gestation) 343 
ulnar deviation, syndromic indicators 279 
urinary tract 
anomalies 236–65 
12–14 wks examination, megacystis 2, 3 
abnormal renal echogenicity 233–5, 234 
absent kidney 233 
ambiguous genitalia 261–4, 263 
bladder dilatation 254–6 
bladder non-visualization 235 
bladder/cloacal exstrophy 258–60 
fusion anomalies 239–40 
hydro-ureteronephrosis 252–3, 256–7 
hydronephrosis 249–52, 256–7 
obstetric management 256–7 
ovarian cyst 264–5 
polycystic kidney disease 241–9, 241 
posterior urethral valves 2, 254 
renal agenesis 236–8 
renal ectopia 238–9, 239 
renal tumors 260–1 
normal anatomy 231–3 
bladder 232, 233 
development 231, 232–3 
differential diagnosis 233–5 
kidney 231–2, 232 
scanning planes 231–3 
timing of examination 231 
ureters and urethra 232, 233 
VA(C)TER(L) association 214, 221, 238, 245, 248, 252, 297 
definition 333 
pathogenesis 333–5 
sirenomelia 221, 238 
vein of Galen aneurysm 51, 201 
evolving (late onset) 5, 5, 6 
diagnosis 13 
velocardiofacial syndrome 25, 311 
ventricular septal defect, Down syndrome 302 
ventriculomegaly see cerebral ventriculomegaly 
vermian hypoplasia, fetal biometry 347 
vermis 14–15, 15 
absence, false-positive image 14–15, 15 
anatomical landmarks 16 
anomalies 17 
cystic posterior fossa, Dandy–Walker variant 35–6 
volume acquisition procedure 6 
volume contrast imaging (VCI-C) 7, 8, 208, 209, 278 
Walker–Warburg syndrome 21, 34, 41, 45, 80, 81 
Wilms tumor 260 
Zellweger syndrome 222, 247, 315–16 
INDEX 361 

